# The Assumption of Moses

10.  these words: ‘(Be strong) and of a good courage so as to do with thy might all that has been com- I, 12 manded that thou mayst be blameless unto God.’ So saith the Lord of the world. For He hath created
13.  the world on behalf of His people. But He was not pleased to manifest this purpose of creation from the foundation of the world, in order that the Gentiles might thereby be convicted, yea to their own
14.  humiliation might by (their) arguments convict one another. Accordingly He designed and devised me, and He prepared me before the foundation of the world, that I should be the mediator of His
15.  covenant. And now I declare unto thee that the time of the years of my life is fulfilled and I am
16.  passing away to sleep with my fathers even in the presence of all the people. And receive thou this
17.  writing that thou mayst know how to preserve the books which I shall deliver unto thee: and thou shalt set these in order and anoint them with oil of cedar and put them away in earthen vessels in
18.  the place which He made from the beginning of the creation of the world, that His name should be called upon until the day of repentance in the visitation wherewith the Lord will visit them in } the consummation of the end of the days. 2:1 And nowthey shall go by means of thee into the land which He determined and promised to give to 2 their fathers, in the which thou shalt bless and give to them individually and confirm unto them their ae to. (Be strong) and of a good courage. Text = e¢ fromitte. Promitte is due to a corruption in the Hebrew WON for YON, while the e¢ betrays a word lost after verbum hoc = M0137. Probably PIN was omitted after M17. Clemen’s suggestion, ‘And promise’ has no support in the O.T. text. Moses exacted no promise from Joshua, while my restoration is upheld by Deut. xxxi. 7, &c. that thou mayst be... unto God. Text = est ideo, corrupt for sts Deo. Clemen renders ‘as is blameless, Therefore thus saith, &c.’, putting a full stop after est.” blameless unto God. Cf. Deut. xviii. 13, &c. inheritance in me and establish for them the kingdom, and thou shalt appoint them prefectures 3 according to the good pleasure of their Lord in judgement and righteousness. And it shall come to pass five years after they enter into the land, that thereafter they shall be ruled by chiefs and 4kings for eighteen years, and during nineteen years the ten tribes shall break away. And the twelve tribes shall go down and transfer the tabernacle of the testimony. Then the God of heaven will make the court of His tabernacle and the tower of His sanctuary, and the two holy tribes shall 5 be (there) established: but the ten tribes shall establish kingdoms for themselves according to their 7 own ordinances. And they shall offer sacrifices throughout twenty years: and seven shall entrench the walls, and I will protect nine, but four shall transgress the covenant of the Lord, and profane the 8 oath which the Lord made with them. ‘And they shall sacrifice their sons to strange gods, and they 9 shall set up idols in the sanctuary, to worship them. And in the house of the Lord they shall work impiety and engrave every form of beast, evex many abominations. I And in those days a king from the east shall come against them and his cavalry shall cover their 2land. And he shall burn their colony with fire together with the holy temple of the Lord, and he shall 3 carry away all the holy vessels. And he shall cast forth all the people, and he shall take them to the 4 land of his nativity, yea he shall take the two tribes with him. Then the two tribes shall call upon the 5 ten tribes, and shall march as a lioness on the dusty plains, being hungry and thirsty. And they shall cry aloud: ‘Righteous and holy is the Lord, for, inasmuch as ye have sinned, we too, in like manner, 6 have been carried away with you, together with our children.’ Then the ten tribes shall mourn on 7 hearing the reproaches of the two tribes, and they shall say: ‘What have we done unto you, 8 brethren? Has not this tribulation come on all the house of Israel?’ And all the tribes shall mourn, appoint. Text = dmittes seems corrupt. prefectures. Text = magisteria locorum, i.e. τοπαρχίας. Perhaps we should translate ‘local magistrates’. Cf. Deut. xvi. 18 ; 1 Chron, xxiii. 4. ᾿ς 9 crying unto heaven and saying : ‘God of Abraham God of Isaac and God of Jacob, remember Thy : covenant which Thou didst make with them, and the oath which Thou didst swear unto them by _ 10 Thyself, that their seed should never fail from the land which Thou hast given them,’ Then they 11 shall remember me, saying, in that day, tribe unto tribe and each man unto his neighbour : ‘ Is not this that which Moses did then declare unto us in prophecies, who suffered many things in Egypt 12 and in the Red Sea and in the wilderness during forty years: and assuredly called heaven and earth to witness against us, that we should not transgress His commandments, in the which he was 13 a mediator unto us? Behold these things have befallen us after his death according to his declaration, as he declared to us at that time, yea behold these have taken place even to our being carried away 14 captive into the country of the east.’ Who shall be also in bondage for about seventy and seven years. 4:1 Then there shall enter one who is over them, and he shall spread forth his hands, and kneel upon his 2 knees and pray on their behalf saying: ‘ Lord of all, King on the lofty throne, who rulest the world, and didst will that this people should be Thine elect people, then (indeed) Thou didst will that Thou shouldst be called their God, according to the covenant which Thou didst make with their fathers. 3 And yet they have gone in captivity in another land with their wives and their children, and 4 taroundy the gates of strange peoples and where there is great vanity. Regard and have compas- 5 sion on them, O Lord of heaven.’ Then God will remember them on account of the covenant which 6 He made with their fathers, and He will manifest His compassion in those times also. And He will put it into the mind of a king to have compassion on them, and he shall send them off to their land o΄ 4and country. Then some portions of the tribes shall go up and they shall come to their appointed _ 8 place, and they shall anew surround the place with walls. And the two tribes shall continue in their prescribed faith, sad and lamenting because they will not be able to offer sacrifices to the Lord of their g fathers. And the ten tribes shall increase and multiply among the Gentiles during the time of their captivity. δ: And when the times of chastisement draw nigh and vengeance arises through the kings who share 2,3 in their guilt and punish them, they themselves also shall be divided as to the truth. Wherefore it hath been said: ‘They shall turn aside from righteousness and approach iniquity, and they shall defile with pollutions the house of their worship,’ and [because] ‘they shall go a-whoring after 4 strange gods.’ For they shall not follow the truth of God, but some shall pollute the altar with the 5 (very) gifts which they offer to the Lord, who are not priests but slaves, sons of slaves. And many in those times shall have respect unto desirable persons and receive gifts, and pervert judge- 6 ment [on receiving presents]. And on this account the colony and the borders of their habitation shall be filled with lawless deeds and iniquities: those who wickedly depart from the Lord shall be judges: they shall be ready to judge for money as each may wish. ; 1 Then there shall be raised up unto them kings bearing rule, and they shall call themselves priests of 2 the Most High God: they shall assuredly work iniquity in the holy of holies. And an insolent king shall succeed them, who will not be of the race of the priests,a man bold and shameless, and he shall 3 judge them as they shall deserve. And he shall cut off their chief men with the sword, and shall 4 destroy ¢hem in secret places, so that no one may know where their bodies are. He shall slay the 5 old and the young, and he shall not spare. Then the fear of him shall be bitter unto them in their 6land. And he shall execute judgements on them as the Egyptians executed upon them, during 7 thirty and four years, and he shall punish them. And he shall beget children, (who) succeeding him _ 8 shall rule for shorter periods. Into their parts cohorts and a powerful king of the west shall come, 9 who shall conquer them: and he shall take them captive, and burn a part of their temple with fire, : (and) shall crucify some around their colony. _41_ And when this is done the times shall be ended, in a moment the (second) course shall be (ended), _ 2,3 the four hours shall come. They shall be forced.... And, in the time of these, destructive and 4 impious men shall rule, saying that they are just. And these shall stir up the poison of their minds, being treacherous men, self-pleasers, dissemblers in all their own affairs and lovers of banquets at δ: 6 every hour of the day, gluttons, gourmands.... Devourers of the goods of the (poor) saying that 7 they do so on the ground of their justice, but iz reality to destroy them, complainers, deceitful, concealing themselves lest they should be recognized, impious, filled with lawlessness and iniquity 8 from sunrise to sunset: saying: ‘We shall have feastings and luxury, eating and drinking, and we 9 shall esteem ourselves as princes.’ And though their hands and their minds touch unclean things, yet 10 their mouth shall speak great things, and they shall say furthermore : ‘Do not touch me lest thou shouldst pollute me in the place (where I stand’)... 81 And there shall come upon them a second visitation and wrath, such as has not befallen them from the beginning until that time, in which He will stir up against them the king of the kings of the earth and one.that ruleth with great power, who shall crucify those who confess to their circumcision : 2 and those who conceal (it) he shall torture and deliver them up to be bound and led into prison, 3 And their wives shall be given to the gods among the Gentiles, and their young sons shall be operated 4 on by the physicians in order to bring forward their foreskin. And others amongst them shall be punished by tortures and fire and sword, and they shall be forced to bear in public their idols, polluted 5 as they are like those who keep them. And they shall likewise be forced by those who torture them to enter their inmost sanctuary, and they shall be forced by goads to blaspheme with insolence the word, finally after these things the laws and what they had above their altar. from sunrise to sunset, not ‘from East to West’ as the phrase in Greek might also mean. ἄς nὰ THE ΑΘΘΌΜΡΤΙΟΝ OE MOSES 9. 1—10. 4 9, Then in that day there shall be a man of the tribe of Levi, whose name shall be Taxo, who having 2 seven sons shall speak to them exhorting (them): ‘Observe, my sons, behold a second ruthless (and) unclean visitation has come upon the people, and a punishment merciless and far exceeding the first. 3 For what nation or what region or what people of those who are impious towards the Lord, who 4 have done many abominations, have suffered as great calamities as have befallen us? Now, there- fore, my sons, hear me: for observe and know that neither did the fathers nor their forefathers 5 tempt God, so as to transgress His commands. And ye know that this is our strength, and thus we 6 will do. Let us fast for the space of three days and on the fourth let us go into a cave which is in the field, and let us die rather than transgress the commands of the Lord of Lords, the God of our 7 fathers. For if we do this and die, our blood shall be avenged before the Lord. t And then His kingdom shall appear throughout all His creation, And then Satan shall be no more, And sorrow shall depart with him. 2 Then the hands of the angel shall be filled Who has been appointed chief, : And he shall forthwith avenge them of their enemies. 3 For the Heavenly One will arise from His royal throne, And He will go forth from His holy habitation With indignation and wrath on account of His sons. 4 And the earth shall tremble: to its confines shall it be shaken: And the high mountains shall be made low And the hills shall be shaken and fall. 5 And the horns of the sun shall be broken and he shall be turned into darkness ; And the moon shall not give her light, and be turned wholly into blood. And the circle of the stars shall be disturbed. 6 And the sea shall retire into the abyss, And the fountains of waters shall fail, And the rivers shall dry up. For the Most High will arise, the Eternal God alone, And He will appear to punish the Gentiles, And He will destroy all their idols. 8 Then thou, O Israel, shalt be happy, And thou shalt }mount upon the necks and wings of the eagle, And they shall be endedj. ¢ And God will exalt thee, And He will cause thee to approach to the heaven of the stars, 7In the place of their habitationt. ro. And thou shalt look from on high and shalt.see thy enemies in Ge(henna), And thou shalt recognize them and rejoice, And thou shalt give thanks and confess thy Creator. 11,12 And do thou, Joshua (the son of) Nun, keep these words and this book; For from my death 13 [assumption] until His advent. there shall be CCL times. And this is the course of the times which 4. 15 they shall pursue till they are consummated. And I shall go to sleep with my fathers. Wherefore, Joshua thou (son of) Nun, (be strong and) be of good courage; (for) God hath chosen (thee) to be minister in the same covenant. 1: And when Joshua had heard the words of Moses that were so written in his writing all that he 2 had before said, he rent his clothes and cast himself at Moses’ feet. And Moses comforted him and 3, 4 wept with him. And Joshua answered him and said: ‘Why dost thou comfort me, (my) lord ; Moses? And how shall I be comforted in regard to the bitter word which thou hast spoken which has gone forth from thy mouth, which is full of tears and lamentation, in that thou departest from 5, 6 this people? (But now) what place shall receive thee? Or what shall be the sign that marks (thy) 7 sepulchre? Or who shall dare to move thy body from thence as that of a mere man from place to 8 place? For all men when they die have according to their age their sepulchres on earth ; but thy sepulchre is from the rising to the setting sun, and from the south to the confines of the north: all 9, to the world is thy sepulchre. My lord, thou art departing, and who shall feed this people? Or who ti is there that shall have compassion on them and who shall be their guide by the way? Or who shall pray for them, not omitting a single day, in order that I may lead them into the land of ¢ezr fore- 12 fathers? How therefore am I to foster this people asa father (his) only son, or as a mistress her daughter, a virgin who is being prepared to be given to the husband whom she will revere, while she guards her person from the sun and (takes care) that her feet are not unshod for running upon the 13 ground. (And how) shall I supply them with food and drink according to the pleasure of their 14 Will? For of them there shall be 600,000 (men), for these have multiplied to this degree through tῷ thy prayers, (my) lord Moses. And what wisdom or understanding have I that I should judge or 16 answer by word in the house (of the Lord)? And the kings of the Amorites also when they hear that we are attacking s/em, believing that there is no longer among them the sacred spirit who CCL times, i.e. 250 year-weeks, or 1,750 years. Thus from the Creation (2,500 years before Moses’ death) to the final judgement will be 4,250 years or 85 jubilees. Cf. Sanh.97", which gives the same date for the Messiah’s coming. was worthy of the Lord, manifold and incomprehensible, the lord of the word, who was faithful in all things, God’s chief prophet throughout the earth, the most perfect teacher in the world, [that he 17 is no longer among them], shall say “ Let us go against them. If the enemy have but once wrought impiously against their Lord, they have no advocate to offer prayers on their behalf to the Lord, like Moses the great messenger, who every hour day and night had his knees fixed to the earth, praying and looking for help to Him that ruleth all the world with compassion and righteous- 18 ness, reminding 77m of the covenant of the fathers and propitiating the Lord with the oath.” For they shall say: “He is not with them: let us go therefore and destroy them from off the face of the
19.  earth.” What shall then become of this people, my lord Moses?’ 12 1,2 And when Joshua had finished (these) words, he cast himself again at the feet of Moses. And Moses took his hand and raised him into the seat before him, and answered and said unto him: 3, 4 ‘ Joshua, do not despise thyself, but set thy mind at ease, and hearken to my words. AἹ] the nations which are in the earth God hath created and us, He hath foreseen them and us from the beginning of the creation of the earth unto the end of the age, and nothing has been neglected by Him even to 5 the least thing, but all things He hath foreseen and caused all to come forth. (Yea).all things which are to be in this earth the Lord hath foreseen and lo! they are brought forward (into the 6 light.... The Lord) hath on their behalf appointed me to (pray) for their sins and (make interces- 7 sion) for them. For not for any virtue or strength of mine, but of His good pleasure have His com- 8 passion and longsuffering fallen to my lot. For I say unto you, Joshua: it is not on account of the 9 godliness of this people that thou shalt root out the nations. The lights of the heaven, the founda- tions of the earth have been made and approved by God and are under the signet ring of His right tὸ hand. Those, therefore, who do and fulfil the commandments of God shall increase and be prospered : 11 but those who sin and set at nought the commandments shall be without the blessings before men- 12 tioned, and they shall be punished with many torments by the nations. But wholly to root out and 13 destroy them is not permitted. For God will go forth who has foreseen all things for ever, and His covenant has been established and by the oath which... worthy of the Lord. Cf. Wisd. iii. 5. lord of the word, a unique expression. faithful in all things. Num. xii. 7; Heb. iii. 2. God’s chief prophet. Text = divinum ... profetem = D’ndNA NῺ) = ‘ the prophet of God’. [that he ... them]. A dittography from above.


# 2 Enoch (The Book of the Secrets of Enoch)

2.  five years. On the first day of the first month I of the second month I was alone in my house. was in my house alone and was resting on my I was in great trouble, weeping with my eyes, 3
3.  couch and slept. And when I was asleep, great and was resting, asleep on my couch, and there 4 distress came up into my heart, and I was weep- appeared to me two very big men, such as I have ing with my eyes in sleep, and I could not never seen on earth—their faces shone like the 5 understand what this distress was, or what would sun, their eyes were like burning candles, out of 4happen to me. And there appeared to me two their mouths was fire coming forth, their clothes men, exceeding big, so that I never saw such on avd singing were various, and their arms like
5.  earth ; their faces were shining like the sun, their golden wings—at the head of my couch, and eyes too were like a burning light, and from their called upon me by my name. lips was fire coming forth twith clothing and singing of various kindst in appearance purple, their wings were brighter than gold, their hands whiter than snow. They were standing at the head of my couch and began to call me by my 6name. And I arose from my sleep and saw And 1 having awoken from my sleep and stood 6 clearly those two men standing in front of me. up tat my coucht bowed down to them and 7
7.  And I saluted them and was seized with fear covered my face from terror, and the appearance of my face was changed from
8.  terror, and those men said to me: ‘ Have courage, And the two men spoke to me: ‘ Have courage, 8 Enoch, do not fear; the eternal God sent us to Enoch, do not fear, the Eternal Lord hath sent I, 2, 3. Cf. 1 En, lxxxiii. 3, 5. eyes, ἄς. Dan. x. 6: cf. Ezek. i. 13; Rev. i. 145 xix. 12. fire coming forth. Cf. Rev. ix. 17; xi.5. The next clause is corrupt. Hed various kinds (A). The text has sazdayaniya = ‘of distribution’, Emend to raz(d)niya = ‘of different kinds’. various (B), i.e. differing from one another. their wings > B. whiter than snow. Cf. 1 En. on]. 2,10; Apoc. Petri. A thee, and lo! thou shalt to-day ascend with us
9.  into heaven, and thou shalt tell thy sons and all thy household all that they shall do without thee on earth in thy house, and let no one seek thee to till the Lord return thee to them. And I made haste to obey them and went out from my house, and made to the doors, as it was ordered me, and summoned my sons Mathusal and Regim and Gaidad and made known to them all the marvels those sex had told me. The Instruction. How Enoch instructed his sons. 2: Listen to me, my children. I know not whither
21.  go, or what will befall me; now therefore, my children, I tell you: turn not from God before the face of the vain, who made not Heaven and earth, for these shall perish and those who 3 worship them, and may the Lord make confident 4 your hearts in the fear of him. And now, my children, let no one think to seek me, until the Lord return me to you. Of Enoch’s assumption; how the angels took him into the first heaven. = It came to pass, when Enoch had told his sons, that the angels took him on to their wings and bore him up on to the first heaven and placed 2him on the clouds. And there I looked, and again I looked higher, and saw the ether, and 3 they placed me on the first heaven and showed me a very great Sea, greater than the earthly sea. 31 Of the Angels ruling the stars. They brought before my face the elders and rulers of the stellar orders, and showed me two hundred angels, who rule the stars and their 2 services to the heavens, and fly with their wings and come round all those who sail. 4: ascend with us. g. sons, Io. Regim. See lvii. 2. Cf nist, ὅς, Gaidad. Gen. iv. 18 (LXX) gives this as the son of the Enoch who is Cain’s grandson. Il. 1. know not whither. Chevilss5: oe A ‘Of how the Angels keep the store-houses of the snow. 51 And here I looked down and saw the treasure- houses of the snow, and the angels who keep 2 their terrible store-houses, and the clouds whence they come out and into which they go. Of the dew and of the olive-oil, and various flowers. 61 They showed me the treasure-house of the dew, like oil of the olive, and the appearance of its form, as of all the flowers of the earth; further many angels guarding the treasure-houses of these things, and how they are made to shut and open. t 5 Of how Enoch was taken on to the second heaven. ᾿ And those men took me and led me up on to the second heaven, and showed me darkness, I greater than earthly darkness, and there I saw , prisoners hanging, watched, awaiting the great 2 and boundless judgement, and these angels were dark-looking, more than earthly darkness, and incessantly making weeping through all hours, and I said to the men who were with me: 3 ‘ Wherefore are these incessantly tortured?’ they answered me: ‘These are God’s apostates, who obeyed not God’s commands, but took counsel a with their own will, and turned away with their prince, who also zs fastened on the fifth heaven. a And I felt great pity for them, and they saluted me, and said to me: ‘ Man of God, pray for us to 5 the the Lond > and 1 answered to them: Who am fra 454 mortal _man,-that-I should pray for_angels? who knoweth whither I go, or what will befall me? or who will pray for n me? 2? 8 Of the assumption of Enoch to the third heaven. t And those men took me thence, and led me up on to the third heaven, and placed me there ; V. 1, treasure-houses of the snow, Test. Levi iii. 2. store-house of cloud (B). Vi, 1. treasure-house of the dew. Cf. 1 En. lx. 20, VII. 1. darkness . . . prisoners . ii, 4; Jude 6, and possibly Test. Levi iii. 2. 1 En. x as in 2 En. xviii. 7; those who sinned by ambition are imprisoned in the second heaven. xviii, 4 (note). Job xxxviii. 22 ; . watched, awaiting the great and boundless judgement. The angels who sinned with women are imprisoned under the earth in 1—8. I B He showed me the store-house of cloud, whence 5 1 it goes up and goes out, and showed me all the treasure-houses of snow and cold, and terrible angels guarding the treasure-houses, and he 6 1 showed me the treasure-houses of the dew, like olive oil, and angels guarding their treasure- houses, and their clothing like all the flowers of the earth. Enoch’s ascent to the second heaven. And the two men placed me ¢hence and carried 7 1 me up on to the second heaven, and showed me there prisoners kept of the measureless judgement, and I saw the condemned weeping, and I spoke 2 to the two men who were with me: ‘ Wherefore are these tormented?’ and the two men said to me: ‘ These are the Lord’s apostates, not listen- 3 ing to the Lord’s voice, but taking counsel of their own will.’ And I was very sorry for them. And the 4 angels bowed down to me and said tome: ‘Man of God, would that thou mightst pray for us to God !’ And I answered them: ‘ Who am I, a mortal 5 man, that I should pray for angels? who knows whither I go or what will befall me or who pray for me?’ The ascent on to the third heaven. And the two men placed me thence and carried 8 1 me up on to the third heaven and set me down cf. 1 En, lx, 17, 18—in the second heaven according to Cf, 1 En, Ix. 19. A seems corrupt. Cf, 2° Pet: See, however, A and I looked downwards, and saw the produce of these places, such as has never been known for 2 goodness. And I saw all the sweet-flowering trees and beheld their fruits, which were sweei- smelling, and all the foods borne dy ‘hem bubbling 3 with fragrant exhalation. the trees that of life, in that place whereon the Lord rests, when he goes up into paradise; and this tree is of ineffable goodness and fragrance, 4 and adorned more than every existing thing ; and on all sides 12 zs in form gold-looking and vermilion and fire-like and covers all, and it has produce from all fruits. Its root is in the garden And in the midst of 5at the earth’s end. And paradise is between corruptibility and incorruptibility. And two springs come out which send forth honey and milk, and their springs send forth oil and wine, and they separate into four parts, and go round 6 with quiet course, and go down into the paradise of Eden, between corruptibility and incorrupti- bility. And thence they go forth along the earth, and havea revolution to their circle even as other 7 elements. And here there is no unfruitful tree, 8 and every place is blessed. And ¢here are three hundred angels very bright, who keep the garden, and with incessant sweet singing and never-silent voices serve the Lord throughout all days and hours. And I said: ‘How very sweet is this place, and those men said to me: The showing to Enoch of the place of the righteous and compassionate. This place, O Enoch, is prepared for the righteous, who endure all manner of offence from those that exasperate their souls, who avert their eyes from iniquity, and make righteous judge- ment, and give bread to the hungering, and cover the naked with clothing, and raise up the fallen, and help injured orphans, and who walk without 91 fault before the face of the Lord, and serve him B in the midst of Paradise, and a place unknown in goodness of appearance. Every tree sweet-flowering, every fruit ripe, all 2 manner of food perpetually bubbling with all pleasant smells, and four rivers flowing by with quiet course, and every growth is good, bearing fruit for food, and the tree of life is at that 3 place, at which God rests when he goes up into Paradise, and that tree is ineffable for the good- ness of its sweet scent, and another olive tree 5 alongside was always discharging the oil of its fruit. And there is no tree there without fruit, and 7 every tree is blessed. And the angels guarding 8 the Paradise are very bright and serve the Lord all days with incessant voice and sweet singing. And I said : ‘ How very sweet is this place !’ And the two men answered me: ‘ This place, 9 1 Enoch, is prepared for the righteous, who suffer offence in their lives and spite in their souls, and avert their eyes from injustice and make righteous judgement, to give bread to the hungering, to clothe the naked and cover them with a garment, to raise the fallen, and help the wronged, who walk before God’s face and serve him alone ; now unknown in goodness of appearance (B), i.e. the like of which is not known anywhere else. A alone, and for them is prepared this place for eternal inheritance. Here they showed Enoch the terrible place and various tortures. x And those two men led me up on to the Northern side, and showed me there a very 2terrible place, and ‘here were all manner of tortures in that place: cruel darkness and un- illumined gloom, and there is no light there, but murky fire constantly flameth aloft, and there is a fiery river coming forth, and that whole place is everywhere fire, and everywhere there is frost 3 and ice, thirst and shivering, while the bonds are very cruel, and the angels fearful and merciless. bearing angry weapons, merciless torture, and I 4 said : ‘ Woe, woe, how very terrible is this place,’ and those men said to me: This place,O Enoch, is prepared for those who dishonour God, who on earth practise sin against nature, which is child-corruption after the sodomitic fashion, magic-making, enchantments and devilish witch- crafts, and who boast of their wicked deeds, 5 stealing, lies, calumnies, envy, rancour, fornica- tion, murder, and who. accursed, steal the souls of men, who, seeing the poor take away their goods and themselves wax rich, injuring them for other men’s goods ; who being able to satisfy the empty, made the hungering to die; being 6 able to clothe, stripped the naked; and who knew not their creator, and bowed down to soulless (sc. lifeless) Gods, who cannot see nor hear, vain gods, who also built hewn images and bow down to unclean handiwork, for all these is prepared this place amongst these, for eternal inheritance. eternal inheritance. Cf. Heb. ix. 15. B for these is this place prepared for an eternal inheritance.’ And the two men lifted me up thence, and 10 1 carried me up to the north of the heaven, and showed me there a very terrible place, all torture and torment ; at that place there was darkness 2 and gloom, and there is no light there, but fire and flame, and obscurity comes down at that place and there zs cold and ice and dungeons, and 3 cruel relentless angels carrying arms and _tor- menting without mercy. And I said: ‘ How very terrible is this place. 4 And the two men answered me: ‘This place, Enoch, is prepared for the dishonest, that work godless things on earth, who make witchcraft and sorcery and boast of their works, who steal 5 men’s souls secretly, who sever a binding yoke, who grow rich by doing violence, from the pro- perty of the others, who being able to feed, kill the hungering through famine, and being able to clothe the naked, took away their clothes, who recognized not their creator, but bowed down to 6 vain gods: for all these is this place prepared for an eternal inheritance.’ X, 1-6. The idea of evil in heaven is foreign to modern thought, but we find Satan presenting himself in heaven in Job i. 7, 8, while Eph. vi. 12 speaks of ‘the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places’. 7, 8, 9 represents the end of this state of things. Rev. xii. Satan is cast down and henceforth limited to the earth, xii. 12. The older view is found in Test. Isaac 146, 147; Test. Jacob 153, but was later banished from both Christian and Jewish thought. 2, darkness, &c. gloom (B). ’g/a can also mean fog. river. punishment, like the Greek Pyriphlegethon. Cf. Apoc, Petri 12; Apoc. Pauli, pp. 57 and 62. In 1 En. xiv. 19; Dan. vii. 10 this idea is connected with God’s holiness, but here it connotes Cf. Rev. xix. 20; xx. 10, 14, 15; xxi. 8; Or. Sibyll. ii, 196-200, 252-3, 286 ; iii. 84; viii. 411; Apoc. Petri 8; Apoc. Pauli, p. 57. Clem. Alex. Exc. 7heod. 38 combines the two ideas. fire... and frost and ice. Cf. 1 En. xiv. 13, where God’s dwelling is described. A Here they took Enoch up on to the fourth heaven where is the course of sun and moon. 1 Those men took me, and led me up on to the fourth heaven, and showed me all the successive goings, and all the rays of the light of sun and 2moon. And I measured their goings, and com- pared their light, and saw that the sun’s light is greater than the moon’s. Its circle and the wheels on which it goes always, like a wind going past with very marvellous speed, and day 3 and night it has no rest. Its passage and return are accompanied by four great stars, and each star has under it a thousand stars, to the right of the sun’s wheel, avd dy four to the left, each having under it a thousand stars, altogether eight 4 thousand, issuing with the sun continually. And by day fifteen myriads of angels attend it, and by night a thousand. And six-winged ones issue with the angels before the sun’s wheel into 5 the fiery flames, and a hundred angels kindle the sun and set it alight. Of the very marvellous elements of the sun. 1 And I looked and saw other flying elements of the sun, whose names ave Phoenixes and Chalkydri, marvellous and wonderful, with feet and tails in the form of a lion, and a crocodile’s head, their appearance zs empurpled, like the rainbow; their size zs nine hundred measures, 2 their wings are like those of angels, each has tweive, and they attend and accompany the sun, bearing heat and dew, as it is ordered them from 3 God. Thus ¢he sux revolves and goes, and rises under the heaven, and its course goes under the earth with the light of its rays incessantly. B Enoch’s ascent on to the fourth heaven. And the two men lifted me up thence, and 111 carried me up on to the fourth heaven, and showed me all the courses and goings and all the rays of the light both of the sun and of the moon, their measurements and their goings, and I saw their goings. The sun has sevenfold more light than the 2 moon and their circles are the chariots on which each of them rides just as the wind goes, and ever going and returning they have rest neither by day nor by night. And / saw four great stars on the right of 3 the sun’s chariot and four on the left going with 4 the sun always, and angels going before the sun’s chariot. each of the angels that rolls the chariot has twelve wings, carrying dew and heat, when the Lord commands them to descend on to the earth with the sun’s rays. XI. 1. fourth heaven. This, according to Chagiga 12”, contained the heavenly Jerusalem, the temple, the altar, and Michael who offered daily sacrifice. the successive goings .. . of sun and moon. Cf. 1 En. Ixxii-lxxviii. A The angels took Enoch and placed him in the east at the sun’s gates. 1 Those men bore me away to the east, and placed me at the sun’s gates, where the sun goes forth according to the regulation of the seasons and the circuit of the months of the whole year, and the number of the thourst day and night. 2 And I saw six gates open, each gate having sixty-one stadia and a quarter of one stadium, and I measured ¢hem truly, and understood their size to be so much, through which the sun goes forth, and goes to the west, and is made even, 4 and rises throughout all the months, and turns back again from the six gates according to the 5 succession of the seasons; thus ¢he period of the whole year is finished after the returns of the four seasons. They took Enoch to the West. And again those men led me away to the western parts, and showed me six great gates open corresponding to the Eastern gates, opposite to where the sun sets, according to the number of the days three hundred and sixty-five and a - 2quarter. Thus again it goes down to the western gates, and draws away its light, the greatness of its brightness, under the earth; for since the crown of its shining is in heaven with the Lord, 3 and guarded by four hundred angels, while the ‘ sun goes round on wheel under the earth, and stands seven great hours in night, and spends half z¢s course under the earth, when it comes to the eastern approach in the eighth hour of the night, it brings its lights, and the crown of shining, and the sun flames forth more than fire. 4. The elements of the sun, the Phoenixes and ; Chalkydri broke into song. 15 1 Then the elements of the sun, called Phoenixes é and Chalkydri break into song, therefore every ἵ bird flutters with its wings, rejoicing at the giver of light, and they broke into song at the command of the Lord. A the whole world, and the morning guard takes shape, which is the rays of the sun, and the sun of the earth goes out, and receives its brightness 3 to light up the whole face of the earth, and they showed me this calculation of the sun’s going. And the gates which it enters, these are the great gates of the fcomputation of the hourst 40f the year; for this reason the sun is a great creation, whose circuit /as/s twenty-eight years, and begins again from the beginning. They took Enoch and again placed him in the east at the course of the moon. Those men showed me the other course, that of the moon, twelve great gates, crowned from west to east, by which the moon goes in and out of the customary times. It goes in at the first gate to the western places of the sun, by the first gates with ¢izrty-one days exactly, by the second gates with thirty-one days exactly, by the third with thirty days exactly, by the fourth with thirty days exactly, by the fifth with thirty-one days exactly, by the sixth with thirty-one days exactly, by the seventh with thirty days exactly, by the eighth with thirty-one days perfectly, by the ninth with thirty-one days exactly, by the tenth with thirty days perfectly, by the eleventh with thirty-one days exactly, by the twelfth with 3 twenty-eight days exactly. And it goes through the western gates in the order and number of the 4 eastern, and accomplishes the three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter days of the solar year, 5 while the lunar year has three hundred and fifty- four, and there are wanting Zo 17 twelve days of the solar circle, which are the lunar epacts of the whole year. [Thus, too, the great circle con- 6 tains five hundred and thirty-two years.] The quarter of a day is omitted for three years, the fourth fulfils 7¢ exactly. Therefore they are taken outside of heaven for three years and are not added to the number of days, because they -~ [Ὁ] B The two angels showed me this disposition of 15 3 the gates by which it goes up and goes out. These gates the Lord made for the taking of time and counting of the years for the sun. And they showed me the other lunar disposi- 16 a tion, all its courses, and the two men pointed out to me all its circuits, and they pointed out to me its gates, twelve eternal gates to the East, through which the moon enters at the usual seasons, thus also through the Western gates 2 after going round and according to the number of the Eastern gates. Thus it goes down also through the Western 3 gates, and completes the year; therefore it goes 5 in the: year with three hundred and sixty-four days complete, and therefore it is called outside heaven, and the years are not reckoned in the 6 number of the days, because the seasons of the year change. XVI. 1. Twelve great gates. These are the same as the gates of the sun in xiii, xiv. A jchange the time of the years to two new months towards completion, to two others towards 7 diminutiont. And when the western gates are finished, it returns and goes to the eastern to the lights, and goes thus day and night about the heavenly circles, lower than all circles, swifter than the heavenly winds, and spirits and elements 8 and angels flying ; each angel has six wings. It _ has a sevenfold course in nineteen years. Of the singings of the angels, which it is im- possible to describe. In the midst of the heavens I saw armed soldiers, serving the Lord, with tympana and organs, with incessant voice, with sweet voice, with sweet and incessant voice and various sing- ing, which it is impossible to describe, and which astonishes every mind, so wonderful and marvel- lous is the singing of those angels, and I was delighted listening to it. 17: Of the taking of Enoch on to the fifth heaven. The men took me on to the fifth heaven and placed me, and there I saw many and countless soldiers, called Grigori, of human appearance, and their size was greater than that of great giants each angel has six wings. twelve (xii. 2). happen on the same days of the year once more. κaὶ toῦ Βελίαρ. serving the Lord ... various singing. of the fourth heaven .. . ἐn ᾧ ἀeὶ ὕμνοι tῷ θeῷ προσφέρονται. » XVIII. 1. fifth heaven. hear the praises of Israel.’ xix, Ixxxvi. latter consisted in becoming subject to Satan. from that in 1 En. vi-xvi. A ? and their faces withered, and the silence of their mouths perpetual, and there was no service on the fifth heaven, and I said to the men who were with me: ‘ Wherefore are these very withered and their faces melancholy, and their mouths silent, and wherefore is there no service on this heaven?’ 3 And they said to me: These are the Grigori, who with their prince Satanail rejected the Lord of A 4 light, and after them are those who are held in great darkness on the second heaven, and three of them went down on to earth from the Lord’s throne, to the place Ermon, and broke through their vows on the shoulder of the hill Ermon and saw the daughters of men how good they are, and took 5 to themselves wives, and befouled the earth with their deeds, who in all times of their age made 6 lawlessness and mixing, and giants are born and marvellous big men and great enmity. And therefore God judged them with great judgement, and they-weep-for their brethren and they will be 7 punished on the Lord’s great day. πὰ I said-to-thé_Grigori/ ‘I saw your brethren and their works, and their great torments, and I prayed for them, but the Lord has condemned them Zo be 8 under earth till heaven and earth shall end for ever.’ And I said: ‘ Wherefore do you wait, brethren, and do not serve before the Lord’s face, and have not put your services before the Lord’s face, lest you anger your Lord utterly?’ 9 And they listened to my admonition, and spoke to the four ranks in heaven, and lo! as I stood with those two men four trumpets trumpeted together with great voice, and the Grigori broke into song with one voice, and their voice went up before the Lord pitifully and affectingly. A B Of the taking of Enoch on to the sixth heaven. 1 And thence those men took me and boreme —_ And the two men took me from thence, they 19 1 up on to the sixth heaven, and there I saw seven carried me up on to the sixth heaven, and I saw bands of angels, very bright and very glorious, there seven ranks of angels very bright and and their faces shining more than the sun’s_ glorious, their faces shining like the sun, and shining, glistening, and there is no difference in there is no difference in ¢heir faces, nor in their 2 their faces, or behaviour, or manner of dress; and extent, nor in the composition of their clothes. these make the orders, and learn the goings of These organize and learn the good ordering of 2 the stars, and the alteration of the moon, or the world and the goings of the stars, of the sun revolution of the sun, and the good government and of the moon. 3 oὗ the world. And when they see evil-doing Angels, angels, these heavenly angels harmo- 3 rebelled before the creation of Adam; that they had tempted Eve and brought about the fall of the angels in the days of Jared. Thus, in 1 En. Ixix and here, the leaders of the angels who fell in Jared’s days are Satans. This is practically the view of portions of the Talmud. See Weber, pp. 211, 243, 244. who with their prince Satanail. Quoted in Test. Dan v. 5,6... tῶn πνευμάτων tῆς πονηρίας. ᾿Ανέγνων yap ἐn bίbλῳ “Evady toῦ δικαίου... ὅti ὁ ἄρχων ὑμῶn ὁ Σατανᾶς ἐσtίn (ὑμῶn is corrupt for αὐτῶν). Our text can hardly mean that all the Watchers rebelled, but only that it was from the class of the Watchers that the rebels proceeded. It is indeed possible that the writer’s scheme may differ from the conception we have given above, and be as follows. The rebellious Watchers, with their prince Satanail, are confined to the fifth heaven. The subordinate angels (‘after them ’) who followed them (ἢ = ‘the order that was under him,’ xxix. 4) are imprisoned in the second heaven, whereas the Watchers who went further and descended to earth and sinned with women are imprisoned under the earth. This view is very attractive, but raises more difficulties than the one we have followed. The MSS. reading Sifth in vii. 3 does indeed favour it, but for ‘prince who’ in that verse we must read ‘prince and leaders who’. The main objections, however, lie in xviii. 8, 9, and in vii. 3 where the prisoners of the second heaven aré clearly identified with the fallen Watchers. In xxix. 4, 5 Satanail with his angels is cast down from heaven, to the air, above the abyss. A they make commandments and instruction, and sweet and loud singing, and all songs of praise. These are the archangels who are above angels, 4 measure all life in heaven and on earth, and the angels who are appointed over seasons and years, the angels who are over rivers and sea, and who are over the fruits of the earth, and the angels who are over every grass, giving food to all, to 5 every living thing, and the angels who write all the souls of men, and all their deeds, and their 6 lives before the Lord’s face; in their midst are six Phoenixes and six Cherubim and six six- winged ones continually with one voice singing one voice, and it is not possible to describe their singing, and they rejoice +before the Lord} at his footstool. Hence they took Enoch into the seventh Heaven. And those two men lifted me up thence on to the seventh Heaven, and I saw there a very great light, and fiery troops of great archangels, in- corporeal forces, and dominions, orders and governments, cherubim and seraphim, thrones and many-eyed ones, nine regiments, the Ioanit stations of light, and I became afraid, and began to tremble with great terror, and those men took me, and led me after them, and said to me: 3 ‘ Have courage, Enoch, do not fear,’ and showed me the Lord from afar, sitting on His very high throne. For what is there on the tenth heaven, since the Lord dwells here? On the tenth heaven is God, in the Hebrew tongue he is called Aravat. And all the heavenly troops would iS) A come and stand on the ten steps according to their rank, and would bow down to the Lord, 4and would again go to their places in joy and felicity, singing songs in the boundless light with small and tender voices, gloriously serving him. Of how the angels here left Enoch, at the end of the seventh Heaven, and went away from him unseen. And the cherubim and seraphim standing about the throne, the six-winged and many-eyed ones do not depart, standing before the Lord’s face doing his will, and cover his whole throne, singing with gentle voice before the Lord’s face: ‘Holy, holy, holy, Lord Ruler of Sabaoth, heavens and earth are full of Thy glory.’ When I saw all these things, those men said to me: ‘Enoch, thus far is it commanded us to journey with thee,’ and those men went away from me, and thereupon I saw them not. And I remained alone at the end of the seventh heaven and became afraid, and fell on my face and said to myself: ‘Woe is me, what has befallen me?’ 3 And the Lord sent one of his glorious ones, the archangel Gabriel, and he said to me: ‘ Have courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise before the Lord’s face into eternity, arise, come with me,’ 4 and I answered him, and said in myself: ‘My Lord,-my soul is departed from me, from terror and trembling,’ and I called to the men who led me up to this place, on them I relied, and 7¢ zs 5 with them I go before the Lord’s face. And Gabriel caught me up, as a leaf caught up by the wind, and placed me before the Lord’s face. 21: to B and the glorious 21 1 ones serving him do not leave him by night nor go away by day, standing before the Lord’s face, and working his will, and all the troops of cheru- bim and seraphim about his throne never leaving him, and the six-winged ones cover his throne, singing before the Lord’s face. And when I saw all, the two men went away 2 from me and thenceforward I saw them not. And they left me alone at the end of heaven, and I grew afraid and fell on my face. And the Lord sent one of his glorious ones 3 Gabriel to me, and he said to me: ‘ Have cour- age, Enoch, fear not the troops, come after me, and stand before the Lord’s face into eternity.’ And I said to him: ‘Woe is me, my Lord, my 4 soul is gone out of me for terror, call up to me the two men who brought me to the place, be- cause 1 trusted them and with them I go before the Lord’s face.’ And Gabriel seized me, just as a leaf seized by 5 the wind, and took me, and put me before the Lord’s face, 6 And I saw the eighth Heaven, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Muzaloth, changer of the seasons, of drought, and of wet. and of the twelve signs of the zodiac, which are above the seventh Heaven. And I saw the ninth Heaven, which is called in Hebrew Kuchavim, where are the heavenly homes of the twelve signs of the zodiac. /n the tenth Heaven the archangel Michael led Enoch to before the Lord's face.
22.  1 On the tenth Heaven, Aravoth, I saw the appearance of the Lord’s face, like iron made to glow in fire, and brought out, emitting sparks, and it burns. Thus I saw the Lord’s face, but the Lord’s face is ineffable, marvellous and very awful, and very, very terrible. 2 And who am I to tell of the Lord’s unspeakable being, and of his very wonderful face? and I cannot tell the quantity of his many instructions, and various voices, the Lord’s throne very great XXI. 1. do not depart. Cf. 1 En. xiv. 23. six-winged ... Thy glory. Isa. vi. 2, 3. b b 28: THE BOOK OE THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 22. 3—23. 1 A and not made with hands, nor the quantity of those standing round him, troops of cherubim and 3 seraphim, nor their incessant singing, nor his immutable beauty, and who shall tell of the ineffable greatness of his glory? A 4 And I fell prone and bowed down to the Lord, 5 and the Lord with his lips said to me: ‘Have courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise and stand before my face into eternity.’ 6 And the archistratege Michael lifted me up, and led me to before the Lord’s face. And the Lord said to his servants tempting them: ‘Let Enoch stand before my face into 7 eternity, and the glorious ones bowed down to the Lord, and said: ‘ Let Enoch go according to Thy word.’ 8 And the Lord said to Michael : ‘Go and take Enoch from out his earthly garments, and anoint him with my sweet ointment, and put him into the garments of My glory.’ 9 And Michael did thus, as the Lord told him. He anointed me, and dressed me, and the appear- ance of that ointment is more than the great light, and his ointment is like sweet dew, and its 10 smell mild, shining like the sun’s ray, and I looked at myself, and was like one of his glorious ones, 1: And the Lord summoned one of his arch- angels by name Pravuil, whose knowledge was co Sage TREES archangels,~ who wrote all the deeds of the Lord ; and the 12 Lord said to Pravuil : ‘ Bring out the books from ~my~stere-houses, and a reed of quick-writing, “Enoch, and deliver-to him the eee oomtontingy books out-of thy hand.’ Of Enoch’s writing, how he wrote his wonderful journeyings and the heavenly apparitions and himself wrote three hundred and sixty- six books. And he was telling me all the works of heaven, earth and sea, and all the elements, their passages and goings, and the thunderings of the thunders, the sun and moon, the goings and changes of the stars, the seasons, years, days, and hours, the risings of the wind, the numbers of the angels, A B 2 and the formation of their songs, and all human things, the tongue of every human song and life, the commandments, instructions, and sweet- voiced singings, and all things that it is fitting to learn. And Pravuil told me: ‘All the things 4 that I have told thee, we have written. Sit and write all the souls of mankind, however many of them are born, and the places prepared for them 5 to eternity ; for all souls are prepared to eternity, before the formation of the world.’ And all And Vretil was telling me thirty days and 6 double thirty days and thirty nights, and I wrote thirty nights, his lips talking unintermittently. out all things exactly, and wrote three hundred And I did not rest thirty days and thirty nights and sixty-six books. writing all the signs, and when I finished, I had written three hundred and sixty books. Of the great secrets of God, which God revealed and told to Enoch, and spoke with him face to face. I And the Lord summoned me, and said to me: And the Lord summoned me, and put me on 24 1 ‘Enoch, sit down on my left with Gabriel.’ And his left near Gabriel. And I bowed down to the I bowed down to the Lord, and the Lord spoke Lord. 2 to me: Enoch, beloved, all thou seest, all things And he spake to me: All the things thou hast 2 that are standing finished I tell to thee even seen, Enoch, standing and walking and completed before the very beginning, all that I created from by me, I will tell thee, before they took shape. non-being, and visible things from invisible. First all the things I created from non-existence 3 Hear, Enoch, and take in these my words, for into existence, and from invisible to visible. not to My angels have I told my secret, and I Aπά to my angels I have not made known my 3 formation of their songs. Possibly we should read ‘ songs of the armed hosts’, see xvii. A have not told them their rise, nor my endless realm, nor have they understood my creating, 4 which I tell thee to-day. For before all things were visible, I alone used to go about in the in- visible things, like the sun from east to west, and 5 from west to east. But even the sun has peace ; in itself, while I. found no peace, because I was creating all things, and I conceived the thought of placing foundations, and of creating visible creation. God relates to Enoch, how out of the very lowest darknesscomes down thevisibleand invisible. I commanded in the very lowest parts, that visible things should come down from invisible, and Adoil came down very great, and I beheld 2 him, and lo! he had a belly of great light. And I said to him: ‘ Become undone, Adoil, and let 3 the visible come out of thee.’ And he came un- done, and a great light came out. And I was in the midst of the great light, and as there is born light from light, there came forth a great age, and showed all creation, which I had thought to 4create. And I saw that 12 was good. And I placed for myself a throne, and took my seat on it, and said to the light: ‘Go thou up higher and fix thyself high above the throne, and be 5 a foundation to the highest things. And above the light there is nothing else, and then I bent up and looked up from my throne. 25 « Sa God summons from the very lowest a second time that Archas, heavy and very red, should come forth. And I summoned the very lowest a second time, and said: ‘Let Archas come forth hard,’ 26. ᾿ and he came forth hard from the invisible. And Archas came forth, hard, heavy, and very red. 2 And I said: ‘ Be opened, Archas, and let there THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 24 3—26. 2 B secrets, nor told them the secrets, nor their establishments, nor my endless and incompre- hensible thinking out of creation. And I opened 4 up the light. And I rode through the midst of the light, just as one of the invisible, just as the sun rides from east to west; and I conceived the 5 thought to place foundations and to create visible creation. . I commanded in the very lowest that the very 25 1 great Idoil should come forth, having in his belly avery great stone. And I spoke to him: ‘ Burst asunder Idoil, 2 and let there be the visible born out of thee.’ And he burst asunder. There came out of 3 him a great stone, and thither bearing (or ‘carry- ing,’ szc) all creation, which I had wished to create, and I saw that 22 was good. And I put a throne also for myself, and sat 4 down on it. I said to the light : ‘Go up higher and make thyself firm and be a foundation for the highest.’ And there is nothing higher than the light, 5 only nothing ; and I saw, having bent myself up from my throne. I summoned a second time in the very lowest, 26 t and said that there should come out from the invisible into the firm one thing visible. And Aruchas came out firm and heavy and very black. And I saw that 22 was well. 3 be born from thee, and he came undone, an age their establishments (B). lit. ‘the manner in which they were established ’. XXV. 1. Here the formation of the world from pre-existing elements is taught, as in the Book of Wisdom xi. 17 ἐξ ἀμόρφου ὕλης. Cf. also Philo, De Justitia 7 Μηνύει δὲ ἡ toῦ Κόσμου yéveots . . . tὰ γὰp μὴ ὄντα ἐκάλεσεν eis tὸ εἶναι. This is in the main the teaching of the Talmud. See Weber, 193-6. Adoil. Is this from 5x 7° = ‘thehand of God’? The word does not occur elsewhere that 1 am aware of. In this and the two subsequent verses we have an adaptation of an Egyptian myth. A came forth, very great and very dark, bearing 3 the creation of all lower things, and I saw that 22 was good and said to him: ‘Go thou down below, and make thyself firm, and be for a foundation for the lower things,’ and it happened and he went down and fixed himself, and became the foundation for the lower things, and below the darkness there is nothing else. Of how God founded the water, and surrounded it with light, and established on it seven islands. 1 And commanded that there should be taken 2 from light and darkness, and I said: ‘ Be thick,’ and it became thus, and I spread it out with the light, and it became water, and I spread it out over the darkness, B And I said to him : ‘Go below and make thyself firm.’ And _ it became the foundation for the lowest. And under the darkness there is nothing. Having surrounded some things with light, 271 I made thick and stretched forth a road of water 2 over the darkness, A 3 below the light, and then I made firm the waters, that is to say the bottomless, and I made founda- tion of light around the water, and created seven circles from inside, and imaged it (sc. the water) like crystal wet and dry, that is to say like glass, avd the circumcession of the waters and the other elements, and I showed each one of them its road, and the seven stars each one of them in its 4 heaven, that they go thus, and I saw that it was darkness, that is to say in the midst of the water good. And I separated between light and between hither and thither, and I said to the light, that it should be the day, and to the darkness, that it should be the night, and there was evening and there was morning the first day. A The week in which God showed Enoch all his wisdom and power, throughout all the seven days, how he created all the heavenly and earthly forces and all moving things even down to man. 1 And then I made firm the heavenly circle, and made that the lower water which is under heaven collect itself together, into one whole, and that the chaos become dry, and it became so. 2 Out of the waves I created rock hard and big, and from the rock I piled up the dry, and the dry 3 I called earth, and the midst of the earth I called 4 abyss, that is to say the bottomless, I collected the sea in one place and bound it together with a yoke. And I said to the sea: ‘ Behold I give thee iy eternal limits, and thou shalt not break loose from thy component parts.’ Thus I made 5 fast the firmament. This day I called me the first-created. XXVII. The title is very corrupt. A B 29: Thenit became evening, and then again morn- ing, and it was the second day. [Monday is the first day.] The fiery Essence. And for all the heavenly troops I imaged the And for all the heavenly troops I formed the 29 1 image and essence of fire, and my eye looked at sun out of the great light, avd put it in the the very hard, firm rock, and from the gleam of heavens that it should shine over the earth. my eye the lightning received its wonderful 2 nature, which is both fire in water and water in fire, and one does not put out the other, nor does the one dry up the other, therefore the lightning is brighter than the sun, softer than water and 3 firmer than hard rock. And fromthe rock I cut , From the stone I cut a great fire and from the 3 off a great fire, and from the fire I created the stone I created the incorporeal troops, and all orders of the incorporeal ten troops of angels,and the troops of stars, of Cherubim, Seraphim and their weapons are fiery and their raiment a , Ophannim I cut from the fire. burning flame, and I commanded that each one should stand in his order. A Here Satanail with his angels was thrown down from the height. 4 And one from out the order of angels, having turned away with the order that was under him, conceived an impossible thought, to place his throne higher than the clouds above the earth, that he might become equal in rank to my power. 5 And I threw him out from the height with his angels, and he was flying in the air continuously above the bottomless. Yahang te B t And then I created all the heavens, and the third day was. [Tuesday]. On the third day I commanded And the earth I commanded to bring forth all 30 1 the earth to make grow great and fruitful trees, kinds of tree and high hills, all kinds of grass and XXIX. t. [Monday is the first day] bracketed as a Christian interpolation as ‘ Tuesday ’, ‘ Wednesday’, &c., in xxx. 1,2, &c. In Jub. ii. 2, and occasionally in patristic tradition, the creation of the angels is assigned to the first day — evidently on the ground of Job xxxviii. 7—but according to Shemoth Rabba 15 and the Targ. Jer. on Gen. i. 26 the angels were created on the second day as in our text. A B and hills, and seed to sow, and I planted Paradise, all kinds of seed that are sown, before I created - and enclosed it, and placed as armed guardians living souls, and prepared food for them, flaming angels, and thus I created renewal. A 2 Then came evening, and came morning the fourth day. [Wednesday]. On the fourth day I commanded that there should be great lights on the heavenly 3 circles. On the first uppermost circle I placed the stars, Kruno, and on the second Aphrodit, on the 4 third Aris, on the fifth Zeus, on the sixth Ermis, on the seventh lesser the moon, and adorned it with the lesser stars. 5 And on the lower I placed the sun for the illumination of day, and the moon and stars for the 6 illumination of night. The sun that it should go according to each animal (sc. signs of the zodiac), twelve, and I appointed the succession of the months and their names and lives, their thunderings, 7 and their hour-markings, how they should succeed. Then evening came and morning came the fifth day. A B [Thursday]. On the fifth day I commanded And the sea I commanded to bring forth and the sea, that it should bring forth fishes, and give birth to its fishes, all kinds of reptiles that feathered birds of many varieties, and allanimals creep over the earth, and wild beasts and cattle. creeping over the earth, going forth over the and all kinds of feathered birds. earth on four legs, and soaring in the air, male = And when I had finished all, I told my wisdom sex and female, and every soul breathing the _ to create me man. spirit of life. Io A his flesh from the earth; two, his blood from the dew; three, his eyes from the sun; four, his bones from stone ; five, his intelligence from the swiftness of the angels and from cloud ; six, his veins and his hair from the grass of the earth; seven, his soul from my breath and from the wind. And I gave him seven natures: to the flesh hearing, the eyes for sight, to the soul smell, the veins for touch, the blood for taste, the bones for endurance, to the intelligence sweetness (sc. enjoyment). I conceived a cunning saying to say, I created man from invisible and from visible nature, of both are his death and life and image, the knows speech like some created thing, small in great- ness and again great in smallnesst, and I placed him on earth, a second angel, honourable, great and glorious, and I appointed him as ruler to rule on earth and to have my wisdom, and there was none like him of earth of all my existing creatures. And I appointed him a name, from the four component parts, from east, from west, from south, 15 from north, and I appointed for him four special stars, and I called his name Adam, and showed him the two ways, the light and the darkness, and I told him: ‘ This is good, and that bad, that μετέχει κaὶ tὰ ἐn ἡμῖn ἐοικότα λίθoiς ὀσtέa) and on a higher level again man is allied to plant nature (ἡ δὲ φύσiς διατείνει κaὶ ἐπὶ tὰ φutά. κaὶ ἐn ἡμῖn δέ εἰσιν ἐοικότα φυτοῖς, ὄνυχές te κaὶ τρίχες), 6. g. in respect to his nails and hair. Perhaps for ‘veins’ we should read ‘nails’ accordingly in our text. Finally, for the seventh element we may compare De Mundi Op. 46. Philo’s view of man’s nature is well summed up in De Mundi Of. 51 πᾶς ἄνθρωπος κatὰ μὲn tὴn διάνοιαν φκείωται θeίῳ λόγῳ, tῆς μακαρίας φύσeως... ἀπαύγασμα γεγονώς, κatὰ δὲ tὴn toῦ σώματος κατασκευὴν ἅπαντι tῷ κόσμῳ" συγκέκριται γὰp ἐκ tῶn αὐτῶν, γῆς κaὶ ὕδατος κaὶ ἀέpoς κaὶ πupός, ἑκάστου tῶn στοιχείων εἰσενεγκόντος tὸ ἐπιβάλλον μέpoς πpὸς ἐκπλήρωσιν αὐταρκεστάτης ὕλης, ἣn ἔδei λαβεῖν tὸn δημιουργόν, ἵna τεχνιτεύσηται tὴn ὁρατὴν ταύτην εἰκόνα. For the later Talmudic views cf. Weber, 202-4; Malan’s Book of Adam and Eve, pp. 209-15. In the Anglo-Saxon Ritual (circ. 950), to which Dr. Murray has called my attention, man is said to be made out of eight substances : ‘ Octo pondera de quibus factus est Adam. Pondus limi, inde factus est caro; pondus ignis, inde rubeus est sanguis et calidus ; pondus salis, inde sunt salsae lacrimae ; pondus roris, inde factus est sudor; pondus floris, inde est varietas oculorum; pondus nubis, inde est instabilitas mentium ; pondus venti, inde est anhela frigida; pondus gratiae, inde est sensus hominis.’ 31: 2 9 a A I should learn whether he has love towards me, or hatred, that it be clear which in his race love me. For I have seen his nature, but he has not seen his own nature, therefore ¢hrough not seeing he will sin worse, and I said: ‘ After sin what zs there but death?’ And I put sleep into him and he fell asleep. And I took from him a rib, and created him a wife, that death should come to him by his wife, and I took his last word and called her name mother, that is to say, Eva. God gives over paradise to Adam, and gives him a command to see the heavens opened, and that he should see the angels singing the song of victory. Adam has life on earth, and I created a garden in Eden in the east, that he should observe the testament and keep the command. I made the heavens open to him, that he should see the angels singing the song of victory, and the gloomless light. And he was continuously in paradise, and the devil understood that I want to create another world, because Adam was lord on earth, to rule and control it. The devil is the evil spirit of the lower places, tas a fugitive he made, he made Sotona from the heavens} as his name was Satomail, thus he became different from the angels, du¢ Ais nature did not change /7s intelligence as far as Azs understanding of righteous and sinful ching. that I should learn whether he has love towards me or hatred. Deut. xiii. 3 ‘ Your God proveth you to know whether ye love the Lord your God’. A 6 And he understood his condemnation and the sin which he had sinned before, therefore he con- ceived thought against Adam, in such form he entered and seduced Eva, but did not touch Adam. 7 But I cursed ignorance, but what I had blessed previously, those I did not curse, I cursed not man, 8 nor the earth, nor other creatures, but man’s evil fruit, and his works. After Adam’s sin God sends 42m away into the earth ‘ whence I took thee’, but does not wish to ruin him for all years to come. 32:1 Isaid to him: ‘ Earth thou art, and into the earth whence I took thee thou shalt go, and I will not ruin thee, but send thee whence I took thee. Then I can again take thee at My second coming.’ And I blessed all my creatures visible and invisible. And Adam was five and half hours in 2 paradise. And I blessed the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, on which he rested from all his works. God shows Enoch the age of this world, 225 existence of seven thousand years, and the eighth thousand is the end, neither years, nor months, nor weeks, nor days. 331 AndI appointed the eighth day also, that the eighth day should be the first-created after my 2 work, and that the first seven revolve in the form of the seventh thousand, and that at the beginning of the eighth thousand there should be a time of not-counting, endless, with neither years nor months nor weeks nor days nor hours. A B 3 And now, Enoch, all that I have told thee, all And now, Enoch, all the things I have told 33 3 that thou hast understood, all that thou hast seen thee and all the things thou hast seen on earth of heavenly things, all that thou hast seen on and all the things thou hast written in these earth, and all that I have written in books by books, I invented the creation of all ¢hzs, having my great wisdom, all these things I have devised created from the highest to the lowest. and created from the uppermost foundation to There is no counsellor here. I am eternal and 4 4 the lower and to the end, and there is no coun- not made with hands, and my thought is coun- sellor nor inheritor to my creations. I am self- sellor, and my word is deed, and my eyes behold A eternal, not made with hands, and without change. My thought is my counsellor, my wisdom and my word are tmadejf, and my eyes observe all things how they stand here and tremble with terror. If I turn away my face, then all things will be destroyed. δ And apply thy mind, Enoch, and know him who is speaking to thee, and take thou the books which thou thyself hast written. 6 And I give thee Samuil and Raguil, who led thee up, and the books, and go down to earth, and tell thy sons all that I have told thee, and all that thou hast seen, from the lower heaven up to my throne, and all the troops. 7 For I created all forces, and there is none that resisteth me or that does not subject himself to me. For all subject themselves to my monarchy, and labour for my sole rule. 8 Give them the books of the handwriting, and they will read zem and will know me for the creator of all things, and will understand how there is no other God but me. 9 And let them distribute the books of thy handwriting—children to children, generation to generation, nations to nations. Io ©6©And I will give thee, Enoch, my intercessor, the archistratege Michael, for the handwritings of thy fathers Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahaleleel, and Jared thy father. God convicts the idolaters and sodomitic forni- cators, and therefore brings down a deluge upon them. They have rejected my commandments and my yoke, worthless seed has come up, not fear- ing God, and they would not bow down to me, but have begun to bow down to vain gods, and denied my unity, and have laden the whole earth with untruths, offences, abominable lecheries, 34 1 to A namely one with another, and all manner of other unclean wickednesses, which are disgusting to relate. 8 And therefore I will bring down a deluge upon the earth and will destroy all men, and the whole earth will crumble together into great darkness. God leaves one righteous man of Enoch’s tribe with his whole house, who did God’s plea- sure according to his will. 351 Behold from their seed shall arise another generation, much afterwards, but of them many 2will be very insatiate. He who raises that generation, shall reveal to them the books of thy handwriting, of thy fathers, zo them to whom he must point out the guardianship of the world, to the faithful men and workers of my pleasure, who do not acknowledge my name in vain. 3 And they shall tell another generation, and those others having read shall be glorified there- after, more than the first. God commanded Enoch to live on earth thirty days, to give instruction to his sons and to his children’s children. After thirty days he was again taken on to heaven. Now, Enoch, I give thee the term of thirty days to spend in thy house, and tell thy sons and all thy household, that all may hear from my face what is told them by thee, that they may read and understand, how there is no other God but me. And that they may always keep my commandments, and begin to read and take in the books of thy handwriting. 2 And after thirty days I shall send my angel for thee, and he will take thee from earth and from thy sons to me. 36: Here God summons an angel. And the Lord called up one of the older angels, terrible and menacing, and placed him by me, in appearance white as snow, and his hands like ice, having the appearance of great frost, and he froze my face, because I could not endure the terror of the Lord, just as it is not possible to endure a stove’s fire and the sun’s heat, and the frost of the air. quake (B), lit. ‘be shaken’ (as though in fever). 37 1 ‘4 XXXV, t. just man (B), i.e. Noah. THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 34. 2—87. 1 B and the whole earth will quake with injustice, 2 wrongs, and fornication and idolatry. Then also I shall bring a deluge on to the 3 earth, and the earth will crumble together in great chaos. And I shall leave over ove just man with all 35 1 his house, who shall work according to my will (sc. who shall be found to have been working, &c.), and from their seed shall rise another race after- wards, very numerous and insatiable. Then he who has brought up (sc. founded and 2 formed) that race shall reveal the books of thy handwriting and of thy fathers, through whom the guardians of the earth shall show ¢hem to the 3 faithful men and shall tell hem to that race, and it shall be glorified thereafter more than before. And now, Enoch, I give thee a term of waiting 36 1 of thirty days to do (sc. all) in thy house; tell thy sons all that thy heart contains, that they may read and understand, how that there is no God but me, and after thirty days I shall send 2 my angels for thee, and they will take thee from the earth and from thy sons, whatever may be according to my will. But the Lord summoned one of the angels, 37 1 the eldest (sc. commander) of Tartarus, and put him by me, and the appearance of that angel was as snow, and his hands were as of ice, and he chilled my face, because I could not suffer the great heat (52) and that terror. A 2 And the Lord said to me: ‘Enoch, if thy face be not frozen here, no man will be able to behold thy face.’ B And thus spake the Lord to me. Mathusal continued to have hope and to await his father Enoch at his couch day and night. 1 And the Lord said to those men who first led me up: ‘ Let Enoch go down on to earth with you, 2 And they placed me by night on my couch. 3 And Mathusal expecting my coming, keeping watch by day and by night at my couch, was filled with awe when he heard my coming, and I told him, ‘Let all my household come together, that 38 and await him till the determined day.’ I tell them everything.’ A K:noch’s pitiful admonition to his sons with weep- ing and great lamentation, as he spoke to them. A B Enoch admonishes his children truly. of all things from the Lord’s lips, how he saw and heard and wrote down. 1 And now, my children, I know all things, for For, my children, I know all things from the 40 t this zs from the Lord’s lips, and this my eyes Lord’s mouth. - have seen, from. beginning to end. A 2 I know all things, and have written all things into books, the heavens and their end, and their plenitude, and all the armies and their marchings. I have measured and described the stars, the great countless multitude of them. 3 What man has seen their revolutions, and their entrances? For not even the angels see their number, while I have written all their names. 6,7 And I measured the sun’s circle, and measured its rays, counted the hours, I wrote down too all things that go over the earth, I have written the things that are nourished, and all seed sown and unsown, which the earth produces and all plants, and every grass and every flower, and their sweet smells, and their names, A : B 8 and the dwelling-places of the clouds, and their This have my eyes seen from the beginning composition, and their wings, and how they even to the end, and the dwelling-places of the 8 , bear rain and rain-drops. clouds, both rain-bearing and thunderous. And 9 9 And I investigated all things, and wrote the they showed me the angels that guard them and road of the thunder and of the lightning, and their keys. they showed me the keys and their guardians, their rise, the way they go; it is let out in measure (sc. gently) by a chain, lest by a heavy chain and violence it hurl down the angry clouds and destroy all things on earth. to ©I wrote the treasure-houses of the snow, and I saw the treasure-houses of snow and of ice, to the store-houses of the cold and the frosty airs, and the going-up, whence they go up in measure. 9 and I observed their season’s key-holder, he fills they are carried up by a chain and let down by the clouds with them, and does not exhaust a chain, lest by heavy violence they tear asunder their treasure-houses. the clouds and destroy what is on earth, both air ro tr And I wrote the resting-places of the winds and frost. I beheld for a time how those who and observed and saw how their key-holders hold fast the keys do fill the clouds full, and the bear weighing-scales and measures; first, they treasure-houses are never exhausted. put them in ove weighing-scale, then in the other I saw the lairs of the winds, how those who rr the weights and let them out according to keep their keys do carry weighing-scales and measure cunningly over the whole earth, lest by measures, and first put them (sc. the winds) in heavy breathing they make the earth to rock. the weighing-scales and then in the measure, and 12 And I measured out the whole earth, its let them out in measure over the whole earth, mountains, and all hills, fields, trees, stones, lest by ¢heir heavy breath they make the earth tivers, all existing things I wrote down, the to rock. height from earth to the seventh heaven, and Thence I was led to the judgement-place, and 12 XL. 1. I know all things . . . my eyes have seen, ἅς, Cf. Clem. Alex. Eclog. Proph. (Dind. iii. 456) ὁ Δανιὴλ λέγei ὁμοδοξῶν tῷ ᾿Ενὼχ tῷ εἰρηκότι “ κaὶ εἶδον tὰς ὕλaς waoas’, and Origen, de Princ. iv. 35 ‘dicente Enoch universas materias perspexi’. Cf. too Sibyll. Or. viii. 375. A B downwards to the very lowest hell, and the I saw hell all open and the prisoners and infinite judgement-place, and the very great, open and judgement, weeping hell. And I saw how the prisoners are 13 in pain, expecting the limitless judgement. And I wrote down all those being judged by the judge, and all their judgements (sc. sentences) and all their works. Of how Enoch lamented Adam’s sin. 41:1 And I sawall forefathers from a// time with And having seen I sighed and wept for the 411 Adam and Eva, and I sighed and broke into destruction of the impious, and I said in my tears and said of the ruin of their dishonour: heart: ‘Woe is me for my infirmity and for that of my forefathers,’ and thought in my heart and said: 2‘ Blessed zs the man who has not been born or ‘Blessed is he who has not been born, or 2 who has been born and shall not sin before the who having been born has not sinned before Lord’s face, that he come not into this place, nor God, that he may not be come to this place, nor bring the yoke of this place. have borne this yoke.’ Of how Enoch saw the key-holders and guards of the gates of hell standing. 421 I saw the key-holders and guards of the gates and I saw the guardians of the keys 42 1 of hell standing, like great serpents, and their of hell standing over against the gates like great faces like extinguished lamps, and their eyes of serpents, their faces like lamps that are gone out, fire, their sharp teeth, their eyes like darkened flames, and their teeth naked down to their breasts. And I spake to their faces: ‘I had better not 2 have seen you, and may none of my tribe come to you.’ Enoch’s ascent into the paradise of the righteous. And I saw there a blessed place, and all blessed 3 creatures and all there living in joy and in infinite happiness in eternal life. 12, the very lowest hell. The old Jewish beliefs of an underworld of punishment are too strong to be excluded, and intrude even into our author’s scheme which in x locates hell in the third heaven. But see xviii. 7 (note). It is possible further that the author may have had some idea of a series of seven hells, hence the phrase ‘lowest hell’ here. See Eisenmenger, ii. 302, 328-33 for later Rabbinic tradition. A and I saw all the Lord’s works, how they are right, while the works of man are some good, and others bad, and in their works are known those who lie evilly. Enoch shows his children how he measured and wrote out God’s judgements, I, my children, measured and wrote out every work and every measure and every righteous judgement. 43. 2 As one year is more honourable than another, so is oze man more honourable than another, some for great possessions, some for wisdom of heart, some for particular intellect, some for cunning, one for silence of lip, another for cleanliness, one for strength, another for comeliness, one for youth, another for sharp wit, 3 one for shape of body, another for sensibility, let it be heard everywhere, but there is none better than he who fears God, he shall be more glorious in time to come. Enoch instructs his sons, that they revile not the face of man, small or great. The Lord with his hands having created man, in the likeness of his own face, the Lord made 6-14. Nine rather colourless beatitudes. A him small and great. Whoever reviles the ruler’s face, and abhors the Lord’s face, has despised 2 the Lord’s face, and he who vents anger on any man without injury, the Lord’s great anger will 3 cut him down, he who spits on the face of man reproachfully, will be cut down at the Lord’s great judgement. 4 Blessed is the man who does not direct his heart with malice against any man, and helps the injured and condemned, and raises the broken 5 down, and shall do charity to the needy, because on the day of the great judgement every weight, every measure and every makeweight wi// be as in the market, that is to say ‘hey are hung on scales and stand in the market, avd every one shall learn his own measure, and according to his measure shall take his reward. God shows how he does not want from men sacrifices, nor burnt-offerings, but pure and contrite hearts. .Whoever hastens to make offering before the Lord’s face, the Lord for his part will hasten that offering by granting of his work. 2 But whoever increases his lamp before the Lord’s face and make not true judgement, the Lord will oz increase his treasure in the realm of the highest. 3 When the Lord demands bread, or candles, or flesh (sc. cattle), or any other sacrifice, then that is nothing ; but God demands pure hearts, and with all that ov/y tests the heart of man. 45: B The Lord God created aὐ things great and small. He that brings into contempt the face of man, brings the Lord’s face into contempt. The Lord’s anger and great judgement are on 2 him who spits in the face of man. Blessed is he who turns his heart towards such 4 a man, so as to help the condemned and raise the broken. He who multiplies lights before the Lord’s 45 2 face, the Lord will multiply their storehouses. The Lord God wants not bread nor candles, 3 meal nor cattle, but by this means tempts the heart of man. A Of how an earthly ruler does not accept from man abominable and unclean gifts, then how much more does God abominate unclean gifts, but sends ¢#em away with wrath and does not accept his gifts. Hear, my people, and take in the words of my lips. If any one bring any gifts to an earthly ruler, and have disloyal thoughts in his heart, and the ruler know this, will he not be angry with him, and not refuse his gifts, and not give him over to 2 judgement? Or zf one man make himself appear good to another by deceit of tongue, but have evil in his heart, then will not ¢he other understand the treachery of his heart, and himself be 3 condemned, since his untruth was plain to all? And when the Lord shall send a great light, then there will be judgement for the just and the unjust, and there no one shall escape notice. 46: XLIV. 1. Whoever reviles, &c. A Enoch instructs his sons from God’s lips, and hands them the handwriting of this book. 7, And now, my children, lay thought on your hearts, mark well the words of your father, which are all come to you from the Lord’s lips. 2 Take these books of your father’s handwriting and read them. For the books are many, and in them you will learn all the Lord’s works, all that has been from the beginning of creation, and will be till the end of time. 3 And if you will observe my handwriting, you will not sin against the Lord; because there is no other except the Lord, neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor in the very lowest A/aces, nor in the ove foundation. 4 The Lord has placed the foundations in the unknown, and has spread forth heavens visible and _5 invisible ; he fixed the earth on the waters, and created countless creatures, and who has counted the water and the foundation of the unfixed, or the dust of the earth, or the sand of the sea, or the drops of the rain, or the morning dew, or the wind’s breathings? Who has filled earth and sea, and the indissoluble winter ? I cut the stars out of fire, and decorated heaven, and put it in their midst. Of the sun’s passage along the seven circles. G1 That the sun go along the seven heavenly circles, which are the appointment of one hundred and 2 eighty-two thrones, that it go down on a short day, and again one hundred and eighty-two, that it go down on a big day, and he has two thrones on which he rests, revolving hither and thither above the thrones of the months, from the seventeenth day of the month Tsivan it goes down to the month Thevan, from the seventeenth of Thevad it goes up. 3 And thus it goes close to the earth, then the earth is glad and makes grow its fruit, and when it goes away, then the.earth is sad, and trees and all fruits have no florescence. 4 All this he measured, with good measurement of hours, and fixed a measure by his wisdom, of the visible and the invisible. 5 From the invisible he made all things visible, himself being invisible. 6 Thus I make known to you, my children, and distribute the books to your children, into all your 7 generations, and amongst the nations who shall have the sense to fear God, let them receive them, and may they come to love them more than any food or earthly sweets, and read them and apply themselves to them. 8 And those who understand not the Lord, who fear not God, who accept not, but reject, who do not receive them (sc. the books), a terrible judgement awaits these. 9 Blessed is the man who shall bear their yoke and shall drag them along, for he shall be released on the day of the great judgement. XLVII. 1. Cf. xxxix. 2. 49: A Enoch instructs his sons not to swear either by heaven or earth, and shows God’s promise, even in the mother’s womb. I swear to you, my children, but I swear not by any oath, neither by heaven nor by earth, nor by any other creature which God created. The Lord said: ‘ There is no oath in me, nor injustice, but truth.’ If there is no truth in men, let them swear by the words ‘yea, yea’, or else, ‘ nay, nay.’ 2 And I swear to you, yea, yea, that there has been no man in his mother’s womb, but that already before, even to each one there is a place prepared for the repose of that soul, and a mea- sure fixed how much it is intended that a man be tried in this world. Yea, children, deceive not yourselves, for there has been previously prepared a place for every soul of man. Of how none born on earth can remain hidden nor his work remain concealed, but he (sc. God) bids ws be meek, to endure attack and insult, and not to offend widows and orphans. I have put every man’s work in writing and none born on earth can remain hidden nor his 2 works remain concealed. I seeall things. Now therefore, my children, in patience and meekness spend the number of your days, that you inherit endless life. 3 Endure for the sake of the Lord every wound, every injury, every evil word and attack. 4 If ill-requitals befall you, return ¢hem not either to neighbour or enemy, because the Lord will return ¢hem for you and be your avenger on the day of great judgement, that there be no avenging here among men. 5 Whoever of you spends gold or silver for his brother’s sake, he will receive ample treasure in the world to come. Injure not widows nor orphans nor strangers, lest God’s wrath come upon you. XLIX. 1. I swear not, ἄς. Cf. Matt. v. 34, 35. B For I swear to you, my children, that before 49 2 man was, a judgement-place was prepared for him, and a measure and a weighing-scale, in which man will be proved, and ¢hey are there already prepared. And I shall put the work of every man in 50 1 writing. And now, my children, spend the number of 2 your days in patience and gentleness, that you inherit the endless age that is to come. Every wound, every hurt and heat (sic) and 3 wicked word (sc. which) shall befall you, suffer them for the Lord God’s sake; and if you are able to requite (sc. ill), do not 4 requite your neighbour (sc. with ill) because the Lord is your requiter, and he (22. who) will be the avenger on the day of the great judgement. Lose gold or silver for a brother's sake, that 5 you receive inexhaustible treasure on the judge- ment-day. See also Philo, De Special. Leg. ii. 1; Leg. Ali. iii. 72; De Decem Orac. 17; De Sac. Abelis et Caini, 28; De Plant. Noe,19; Quod Omnis Probus Liber, 12. This appears to be a Jewish commonplace (Conybeare). A . Enoch instructs his sons, that they hide not trea- sures in the earth, but bids zem give alms to the poor. 51 t Stretch out your hands to the poor according 2to your stren Hide not your silver in the earth. Help the faithful man in affliction, and affliction will not find you in the time of your trouble. 838 And every grievous and cruel yoke that come upon you bear all for the sake of the Lord, and thus you will find your reward in the day of judgement. 4 It is good to go morning, midday, and evening into the Lord’s dwelling, for the glory of your creator. 5 Because every breathing ¢hing glorifies him, and every creature visible and invisible returns him praise. God instructs his faithful, how they are to praise his name. 2x Blessed is the man who opens his lips in praise of God of Sabaoth and praises the Lord with his heart. 2 Cursed every man who opens his lips for the bringing into contempt and calumny of his neigh- bour, because he brings God into contempt. 3 Blessed is he who opens his lips blessing and praising God. 4 Cursed is he before the Lord all the days of his life, who opens his lips to curse and abuse. 5 . Blessed is he who blesses all the Lord’s works. 6 Cursed is he who brings the Lord’s creation into contempt. 4 Blessed is he who looks down and raises the fallen. 8 Cursed is he who looks to and is eager for the destruction of what is not his. 9 Blessed is he who keeps the foundations of his fathers made firm from the beginning. to Cursed is he who perverts the decrees of his forefathers. 1t Blessed is he who implants peace and love. LI. 1. Sir. vii. 32; Prov. xxxi. 20, accordin A B 12 Cursed is he who disturbs those that love their Cursed is he who disturbs what is in peace. 12 neighbours. A tance of your peace. Hand them to all who want them, and instruct them, that they may see the Lord's very great and marvellous works. Here Enoch shows his sons, telling them with tears: ‘ My children, the hour has approached for me to go up on to heaven ; behold, the angels are standing before me.’ ‘My children, behold, the day of my term and the time have approached. For the angels who shall go with me are stand- ing before me and urge me to my departure from you; they are standing here on earth, awaiting what has been told them. 2 For to-morrow I shall go up on to heaven, to the uppermost Jerusalem to my eternal inherit- ance. 3 Therefore I bid you do before the Lord’s face all ψὲς good pleasure. Methosalam asks of his father blessing, that he (sc. Methosalam) may make him (sc. Enoch) food to eat. x Methosalam having answered his father Enoch, said: ‘What is agreeable to thy eyes, father, that I may make before thy face, that thou mayst bless our dwellings, and thy sons, and that thy people may be made glorious through thee, and then at thou mayst depart thus, as the Lord said?’ said: ‘ Hear, child, from the time when the Lord anointed me with the ointment of his glory, there has been no food in me, and my soul remem- bers not earthly enjoyment, neither do I want anything earthly.’ Enoch bade his son Methosalam to summon all his brethren. ‘My child Methosalam, summon all thy brethren and all your household and the elders of the people, that I may talk to them and depart, as is planned for me.’ 2 And Methosalam made haste, and summoned his brethren, Regim, Riman, Uchan, Chermion, Gaidad, and all the elders of the people before the face of his father Enoch; and he blessed them, avd said to them: 57 1 the Lord’s... LV. See xxxvi. A Enoch’s instruction to his sons. ‘ Listen to me, my children, to-day. In those days when the Lord came down on to earth for Adam’s sake, and visited all his creatures, which he created himself, after all 2 these he created Adam, and the Lord called all the beasts of the earth, all the reptiles, and all the birds that soar in the air, and brought them all before the face of our father Adam. And Adam gave the names to all things living 3on earth. And the Lord appointed him ruler over all, and subjected to him all things under his hands,and made them dumb and made them dull (lit. deaf) that they be commanded of man, and be in subjection and obedience to him. Thus also the Lord created every man lord over all his possessions. 4 The Lord will not judge a single soul of beast for man’s sake, but adjudges the souls of men to 5 their beasts in this world ; for men have a special place. And as every soul of man is according to 6 number, similarly beasts will not perish, nor all B ‘Listen, children, in the days of our father 58 1 Adam, the Lord God came down (sc. to earth) and visited it and all his creatures, which he 2 created himself, and the Lord God called all the beasts of the earth and all the wild animals and all the quadrupeds, and all the reptiles of the earth, and all the birds that soar, and brought them before the face of our father Adam, and called the names to all things that move over the earth. And God subjected to Adam all things 3 existing into subservience (lit. lessness) and secondly made them all dull (lit. deaf) that they might be in subjection and obedience to man. For the Lord created man ruler over all his possessions. In this there will be no judgement of every 4 living soul, but only of man’s. But for the souls of beasts there is in the great 5 age one place and one fold. For no soul of any animal which the Lord 6 created will be shut up till the great judgement, LVIII. 1. the Lord came down, &c. See xxxii. 1 (note). A souls of beasts which the Lord created, till the great judgement, and they will accuse man, if he feed them ill. Enoch instructs his sons wherefore they may not touch beef because of what comes from it. 9x Whoever defiles. the soul of beast, defiles his own soul. 2 For man brings clean animals to make sacrifice for sin, that he may have cure of his soul. ark ὦ own soul. A He who does injury to soul of man, does injury to his own soul, and there is no cure for his flesh, nor pardon for all time. 60: How it is not fitting to kill man neither by weapon nor by tongue. 2 He who works the killing of a man’s soul, kills his own soul, and kills his own body, and there is no cure for him for all time. 3 He who puts a man in any snare, shall stick in it himself, and there is no cure for him for all time. 4 He who puts a man in any vessel, his retri- bution will not be wanting at the great judgement for all time. 5 He who works crookedly or speaks evil against any soul, will not make justice for himself for all time. Enoch instructs his sons to keep themselves from injustice and often to stretch forth hands to the poor, to give a share of their labours. And now, my children, keep your hearts from every injustice, which the Lord hates. Just as a man asks (sc. something) for his own 61: also occasionally subjected to torture, and their cries were regarded as a confession of guilt (/. c. Pp. 46). as 1531 a book was written by Chassauée to discuss the lawfulness of trying animals judicially, methods of procedure (/. ¢. p. 75). THE BOOK OF THE SECRETS OF ENOCH 58. 6—61. 1 B and all souls will accuse the man, whoever feeds 59 1 ill the soul of beast, defiles his own soul. But he who brings sacrifice of clean beasts, 2 cures his own soul, and he who brings an offering of clean birds, cures his own soul. A And if they bring for sacrifice clean animals, and birds, man has cure, he cures his soul. All is given you for food, bind it by the four feet, that is to make good the cure, he cures his soul. But whoever kills beast without wound, kills his own soul and defiles his own flesh. And he who does any beast any injury whatsoever, in secret, it is evil practice, and he defiles his B He who does injury to the soul of man, in- 60 t jures his own soul, and there is no cure for him into eternity. He who puts a man into tparadise+—his 3 judgement shall not be exhausted into eternity. Now, my children, keep yourselves from every 61 1 thing unrighteous, which the Lord hateth, still more from every living soul. Even as late and the legitimate LIX. 1. Whoever defiles the soul of beast. This refers not to the sin of bestiality, but, as B and 2-4 show, to some unlawful way of sacrificing or slaughtering animals. 2, 3. These verses suggest a date earlier than the destruction of the Temple, A, Ὁ. 70. 62 « A 2 soul from God, so let him do to every living soul, because I know all things, how in the great time (sc. to come) are many mansions prepared for men, good for the good, and bad for the bad, without number many. 3 Blessed are those who enter the good houses, for in the bad (sc. houses) there is no peace nor return (sc. from them). 4 Hear, my children, small and great! B Just as man asks (sc. something) for his own soul from the Lord, so let him do to every living 2 soul, lest in the great age... He has prepared many mansions, very good dwellings, and bad dwellings without number. Blessed is he who departs into the sweet 3 houses. A When man puts a good thought in his heart, brings gifts from his labours before the Lord’s face and his hands made them not, then the Lord will turn away his face from the labour of his hand, and he (sc. 5 And if his hands made it, but his heart m incessantly, he has not any advantage. A Of how it is fitting to bring one’s gift with faith, because there is no repentance after death. Blessed is the man who in his patience brings his gifts with faith before the Lord’s face, because he will find forgiveness of sins. 2 But if he take back his words before the time, there is no repentance for him; and if the time pass and he do not of his own will what is promised, there is no repentance after death. 3 Because every work which man does before the time, is all deceit before men, and sin before God. Of how not to despise the poor, but to share with them equally, lest thou be murmured against before God. When man clothes the naked and fills the hungry, he will find reward from God. 2 But if his heart murmur, he commits a double evil: ruin of himself and of that which he gives ; and for him there will be no finding of reward on account of that. 3 And if his own heart is filled with his food and his own flesh (sc. clothed) with his clothing, he commits contempt, and will forfeit all his endurance of poverty, and will not find reward of his good deeds. 64. A Of how the Lord calls up Enoch, and people took counsel to go and kiss him at the place called Achuzan. When Enoch had spoken these words to his sons, all people far and near heard how the Lord was calling Enoch. They took counsel together : 2*Let us go and kiss Enoch,’ and two thousand men came together and came to the place Achuzan where Enoch was, and his sons. 3 And the elders of the people, the whole assem- bly, came and bowed down and began to kiss Enoch and said to him: ‘Our father Enoch, be 4 thou blessed of the Lord, the eternal ruler, and now bless thy sons and all the people, that we may be glorified to-day before thy face. 5 For thou shalt be glorified before the Lord’s face for all time, since the Lord chose thee, rather than all men on earth, and designated thee writer of all his creation, visible and invisible, and re- deemer of the sins of man, and helper of thy household.’ And Enoch answered all his people, saying : Of Enoch’s instruction of his sons. ‘Hear, my children, before that all creatures were created, the Lord created the visible and invisible things. 2 And as much time as there was and went past, understand that after all that he created manin the likeness of his own form, and put into him eyes to see, and ears to hear, and heart to reflect, and intellect wherewith to deliberate. 3 And the Lord sawall man’s works, and created all his creatures, and divided time, from time he fixed the years, and from the years he appointed the months, and from the months he appointed the days, and of days he appointed seven. A 7 to the great judgement, and then all time shall perish, and the years, and thenceforward there will be neither months nor days nor hours, they will be stuck together and will not be counted. 8 There will be one aeon, and all the righteous who shall escape the Lord’s great judgement, shall be collected in the great aeon, for the righteous the great aeon will begin, and they will 9 live eternally, and then too there will be amongst them neither labour, nor sickness, nor humiliation, nor anxiety, nor need, nor violence, nor night, nor darkness, but great light. And they shall have a great indestructible wall, and a paradise bright and incorruptible, for all corruptible things shall pass away, and there will be eternal life. Io Enoch instructs his sons and all the elders of the people, how they are to walk with terror and trembling before the Lord, and serve him alone and not bow down to idols, but to God, who created heaven and earth and every creature, and To his image. And now, my children, keep your souls from all injustice, such as the Lord hates. 66. 2 Walk before his face with terror and trembling and serve him alone. B righteous shall be collected together, and they shall be eternal and incorruptible. And thenceforward there shall be no. labour 9 amongst them, nor sickness nor humiliation, nor anxiety zor need, nor night nor darkness, but great, endless, and indestructible light. And the great paradise will be their shelter ro and eternal dwelling-place, and they shall no more bear the injuries (lit. lawlessnesses) of those on earth. The Lord will send down great destruction on to earth and the earth’s whole composition shall perish. For I know, that this will end in tumult and 11 will perish, only my brother will be preserved on that day, placed in . . . and those of his tribe and the sun. And now, my children, keep your souls from 66 & all unrighteousness, such as the Lord hates. Bow down to the true God, not to dumb idols, [but bow down to his picture], and bring all just offerings before the Lord’s face. The Lord hates what is unjust. 3 For the Lord sees all things ; when man takes thought in his heart, then he counsels the intellects, and every thought is always before the Lord, who made firm the earth and put all creatures on it. 4 If you look to heaven, the Lord is there; if you take thought of the sea’s deep and all the under-earth, the Lord is there. 5 For the Lord created all things. Bow not down to things made by man, leaving the Lord of all creation, because no work can remain hidden before the Lord’s face. 6 Walk, my children, in long-suffering, in meekness, honesty, in provocation, in grief, in faith and in truth, in ve/zance on promises, in illness, in abuse, in wounds, in temptation, in nakedness, in privation, loving one another, till you go out from this age of ills, that you become inheritors of endless time. 7 Blessed are the just who shall escape the great judgement, for they shall shine forth more than 8 the sun sevenfold, for in this world the seventh part is taken off from all, light, darkness, food, enjoyment, sorrow, paradise, torture, fire, frost, and other things; he put all down in writing, that you might read and understand.’ A B The Lord let out darkness on to earth and covered the people and Enoch, and he was taken up on high, and light came again zz the heaven. 671 When Enoch had talked to the people, the When Enoch had talked to the people, the 67 1 Lord sent out darkness on to the earth, and Lord sent down murk on to the earth, and there there was darkness, and it covered those men was darkness, it covered all the men standing 2 standing and talking with Enoch, and they took with Enoch. Enoch up on to the highest heaven, where the And the angels hastened and having taken 2 Lord ἐς; and he received him and placed him Enoch, they carried him up on to the highest before his face, and the darkness went off from heaven. And he received him, and put him the earth, and light came again. before his face into eternity. And the darkness 3 Aπά the people saw and understood not how went off from the earth, and light came again, Enoch had been taken, and glorified God, and and all the people saw, and understood not how 3 found a roll in which was traced: ‘the invisible Enoch had been taken, and glorified God. God, and all went to their homes. And they came to their homes, those who had seen such things. Glory be to our God into eternity. Amen. A € 81 Enoch was born on the sixth day of the month Tsivan, and lived three hundred and sixty-five years. He was taken up to heaven on the first day of the month Tsivan and remained in heaven sixty 2 days. He wrote all these signs of all creation, which the Lord created, and wrote three hundred 3 and sixty-six books, and handed them over to his sons and remained on earth thirty days, and was again taken up to heaven on the sixth day of the month Tsivan, on the very day and hour when 4he was born. As every man’s nature in this life is dark, so are also his conception, birth, and departure from this life. At what hour he was conceived, at that hour he was born, and at that hour too he died. 5 Methosalam and his brethren, all the sons of Enoch, made haste, and erected an altar at the place called Achuzan, whence and where Enoch had been taken up to heaven. 6 And they took sacrificial oxen and summoned al] people and sacrificed the sacrifice before the Lord’s face. 7 All people, the elders of the people and the whole assembly came to the feast and brought gifts to the sons of Enoch. And they made a great feast, rejoicing and making merry three days, praising God, who had given them such a sign through Enoch, who had found favour with him, and that they should hand it on to their sons from generation to generation, from age to age. Amen. LXVII. 2. highest heaven. Cf. lxv.2(B). This is an exceptional privilege, as Paradise in the third heaven is the eternal abode of the righteous, lv. 2. In Asc. Is. ix. 7 the future habitation of the righteous is the seventh heaven. LXVIII. A short résumé of Enoch’s life. Cf. xxiii. I. a days. Cf. xxiii. 6 and xxxvi. I. 5-7. Cf. the fragment of Melchizedekian literature (appended to my Commentary on 2 Enoch) for Methusalem’s sacrifice. The place of sacrifice, and here of Enoch’s assumption, is called Achuzan in i. 3, but Aruzan in ii. 17.


# 2 Baruch (The Syriac Apocalypse)

2.  came to Baruch, the son of Neriah, and said to him: ‘Hast thou seen all that this people are doing = B* to Me, that the evils which these two tribes which remained have done are greater than (those of)
3.  the ten tribes which were carried away captive? For the former tribes were forced by their kings to commit sin, but these two of themselves have been forcing and compelling their kings to commit 4sin. For this reason, behold I bring evil upon this city, and upon its inhabitants, and it shall be removed from before Me for a time, and I will scatter this people among the Gentiles that they may do good to the Gentiles. And My people shall be chastened, and the time shall come when they will seek for the prosperity of their times. 1 For I have said these things to thee that thou mayst bid Jeremiah, and all those that are like you, to retire from this city. 2 For your works are to this city as a firm pillar, And your prayers as a strong wall.’ THE First SECTION. I-V. 6. The first of the seven sections into which, according to the scheme of the final editor, the book was originally divided by fasts, generally lasting seven days. See v. 7, note; ix, note. In this section the word of the Lord comes to Baruch announcing the coming, though temporary, destruction of Jerusalem (i); Baruch is to bid Jeremiah to withdraw (ii); Baruch then asks, Will this destruction be final? will chaos return ? (iii); God answers that the punishment is temporary (iv. 1). Yet even so, Baruch rejoins, The enemy will boast before their idols over God’s own nation (v. 1). Not so, God replies, the heathen will have no cause to glory, as it is not they who will destroy Zion (v. 2, 3). Baruch assembles the people, and delivers the message (v. 5). I, [Translated from the Greek into Syriac.] These words occur in the Syriac MS., and the statement is supported by (1) transliterations of Greek words ; (2) renderings explicable only on the hypothesis that the translator followed the wrong meaning of the Greek word before him. I. 1. in the twenty-fifth year of Jeconiah. The reckoning is by the years of Jeconiah’s life, and not of his reign. He was eighteen years old when he began to reign in 599, and thus his twenty-fifth year would be 592, or two years before Nebuchadrezzar’s approach. In vi. 1 only one day, and not two years, elapses between the prediction and its fulfilment. So, too, the siege of Jerusalem is there represented as lasting but one day, whereas it lasted two years. Moreover, Jeconiah was in captivity when the city fell, and Zedekiah was king, as the author was aware (viii. 5). Accuracy of detail is sacrificed to general dramatic effect. the Lord. This title of God is found in all sections of the book alike. Baruch, the son of Neriah. Cf. Jer. xxxii. 12; xxxvi. 4; 1 Baruchi. 1. II BARUCH 8. 1—4. 7 31 And I said: ‘O Lorn, my Lord, have I come into the world for this purpose that I might see the 2 evils of my mother? Not (so) my Lord. If I have found grace in Thy sight, first take my spirit 3that I may go to my fathers and not behold the destruction of my mother. For two things vehemently constrain me: for I cannot resist Thee, and my soul, moreover, cannot behold the evils
5.  of my mother. But one thing I will say in Thy presence,O Lord. What, therefore, will there be after these things ? for if Thou destroyest Thy city, and deliverest up Thy land to those that hate
6.  us, how shall the name of Israel be again remembered? Or how shall one speak of Thy praises ?
7.  or to whom shall that which is in Thy Jaw be explained? Or shall the world return to its nature (of
8.  aforetime), and the age revert to primeval silence? And shall the multitude of souls be taken away, g and the nature of man not again be named? And where is all that which Thou didst say to Moses regarding us?’ 41 “And the Lord said unto me: ‘ This city shall be delivered up for a time, And the people shall be chastened during a time, And the world will not be given over to oblivion. 4 IV. 2-7. The heavenly Ferusalem. 2. [* Dost thou think that this is that city of which I said: “On the palms of My hands have I graven 3thee”? This building now built in your midst is not that which is revealed with Me, that which was prepared beforehand here from the time when I took counsel to make Paradise, and showed it to Adam before he sinned, but when he transgressed the commandment it was removed from him, as +also Paradise. And after these things I showed it to My servant Abraham by night among the 5 portions of the victims. And again also I showed it to Moseson Mount Sinai when I showed to him 6 the likeness of the tabernacle and all its vessels. And now, behold, it is preserved with Me, as also 7 Paradise. Go, therefore, and do as I command thee.’] 111. 1. O LORD, my Lord. This title of God is confined, except in one instance (xxxviii. 1), to B? and BL It recurs in xiv. 8, 16; xvi. I; xxiii, 1; xlviii. 4, 5. While used only of God in this work, in 4 Ezra it is applied to an angel six times (see 4 Ezra iv. 38, &c.), as also FTN in Dan. x. 17,19. The words uzs0 lugs are to be rendered “Ὁ LORD, my Lord’, as above, and not Dominator Domine, as we find in Ceriani. The suffix is not moribund. The Syriac is a translation either of δέσποτα κύριε μou or κύριε κύpiέ pov; and these in turn would point either to 717 ἡ) ΣN or ‘ITN nN. my mother. Cf. iii. 2, 3, x. 16; 1 Baruch iv. 9-16. This was a very natural term for a Jew to apply to Jerusalem, as Isa. xlix. 21. Cf. Matt. xxiii. 37. The writer here (B*) uses it as an earthly Jerusalem, as St. Paul in Gal. iv. 26 of the heavenly. II BARUCH 5. 1—6. 6 V. Baruch’s Complaint and God's Reassurance. 51 And I answered and said: ‘So then I am destined to grieve for Zion, For Thine enemies will come to this place and pollute Thy sanctuary, And lead Thine inheritance into captivity, And make themselves masters of those whom Thou hast loved, And they will depart again to the place of their idols, And will boast before them : And what wilt Thou do for Thy great name?’ 2 And the Lord said unto me : ‘ My name and My glory are unto all eternity ; And My judgement shall maintain its right in its own time. 3 And thou shalt see with thine eyes That the enemy will not overthrow Zion, Nor shall they burn Jerusalem, But be the ministers of the Judge for the time. 4 But do thou go and do whatsoever I have said unto thee.’ 5 And I went and took Jeremiah, and Adu, and Seriah, and Jabish, and Gedaliah, and all the honourable men of the people, and I led them to the valley of Cedron, and I narrated to them all 6, 7 that had been said to me. And they lifted up their voice, and they all wept. And we sat there and fasted until the evening. VI-VIII. Invasion of the Chaldeans and their Entrance into the City after the Sacred Vessels were hidden and the City’s Walls overthrown by Angels. Gr And it came to pass on the morrow that, lo! the army of the Chaldees surrounded the city, and at the time of the evening, I, Baruch, left the people, and I went forth and stood by the zoak. And I was grieving over Zion, and lamenting over the captivity which had come upon 3 the people. And lo! suddenly a strong spirit raised me, and bore me aloft over the wall of 4 Jerusalem. And I beheld, and lo! four angels standing at the four corners of the city, each of 5 them holding a torch of fire in his hands. And another angel began to descend from heaven, 6 and said unto them: ‘Hold your lamps, and do not light them till I tell you. For I am first sent to speak a word to the earth, and to place in it what the Lord the Most High has commanded V. t. grieve. MS. reads Saw (=‘ guilty’) which I have emended into (Ὁ 9 = ‘grieve’. whom Thou hast loved, Ixxviii. 3, xxi. 20, 21 ; 4 Ezra iv. 23. what wilt Thou do. Joshua vii.9. Cf. 4 Ezra iv. 25. II BARUCH 6. 7—9. 1 7 me.’ And I saw him descend into the Holy of Holies, and take from thence the veil, and the holy ark, and the mercy-seat, and the two tables, and the holy raiment of the priests, and the altar of incense, and the forty-eight precious stones, wherewith the priest was adorned and all the holy 8 vessels of the tabernacle. And he spake to the earth with a loud voice: 8: 3) 4 Say ‘ Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the mighty God, And receive what I commit to thee, And guard them until the last times, So that, when thou art ordered, thou mayst restore them, So that strangers may not get possession of them. For the time comes when Jerusalem also will be delivered for a time, Until it is said, that it is again restored for ever.’ And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up. And after these things I heard that angel saying unto those angels who held the lamps: ‘ Destroy, therefore, and overthrow its wall to its foundations, lest the enemy should boast and “We have overthrown the wall of Zion, And we have burnt the place of the mighty God.”’ And tye have seized the placet where I had been standing before. Now the angels did as he had commanded them, and when they had broken up the corners of the walls, a voice was heard from the interior of the temple, after the wall had fallen, saying : ‘Enter, ye enemies, And come, ye adversaries ; For he who kept the house has forsaken (it).’ And I, Baruch, departed. And it came to pass after these things that the army of the Chaldees 5 entered and seized the house, and all that was around it. And they led the people away captive, 9: in the mountain where Moses climbed up ‘the tabernacle and the ark and the altar of incense’. This place was to remain unknown till God should gather His people again together. 2 Macc. ii. 5 the things hidden are these—rjv σκηnὴn κaὶ tὴn κιβωτὸν κaὶ tὸ θυσιαστήριον toῦ θυμιάματος. temple: the candlestick, the ark, the fire, the Holy Spirit, and the Cherubim. Josephus it means not ‘censer’ but ‘altar of incense’. Cf. Heb. ix. 1-5 (?), and 2 Macc. as above (tὸ θυσιαστήριον toῦ θυμιάματος) which mention the altar but not a censer. See Appendix to my Commentary, p. 168. and two on the ephod (Exod. xxviii. 9). Vulg. of that passage; in LXX only twice. Beloved.’ centre, and likewise the temple in which the sacred vessels of the former temple will again be used. During this kingdom the dispersion will again return to Palestine (Ixxvii. 6 ; lxxviii. 7, notes). Jo (wKS30/ or) WAKA? Joos ‘the spirit brought me to the place.’ In vi. 3 a strong spirit carried Baruch aloft over the walls for the vision: now he carries him back to the place beside the oak. maior humana vox excedere deos’. Baruch to tell Jeremiah to go to Babylon, and promises a revelation of what should be in the end. Baruch tells Jeremiah the message, and laments before the temple gates for Zion. and slew some of them, and bound Zedekiah the king, and sent him to the king of Babylon. IX-XII. 4. First Fast of seven Days: Baruch to remain amid the Ruins of Ferusalem and Feremiah to accompany the Exiles to Babylon. Baruch’s Dirge over Ferusalem. And I, Baruch, came, and Jeremiah, whose heart was found pure from sins, who had not been II BARUCH 9. 2—10. tὸ 2 captured in the seizure of the city. And we rent our garments, we wept, and mourned, and fasted ix. 2=XXV. seven days. ; = 1,2 And it came to pass after seven days, that the word of God came to me, and said unto me: ‘ Tell 3 Jeremiah to go and support the captivity of the people unto Babylon. But do thou remain here amid the desolation of Zion, and I will show to thee after these days what will befall at the end of 4,5 days. And I said to Jeremiah as the Lord commanded me. And he, indeed, departed with the people, but I, Baruch, returned and sat before the gates of the temple, and I lamented with the following lamentation over Zion and said: 6 ‘Blessed is he who was not born, Or he, who having been born, has died. 7 But as for us who live, woe unto us, Because we see the afflictions of Zion, And what has befallen Jerusalem. 8 I will call the Sirens from the sea, And ye Lilin, come ye from the desert, And ye Shedim and dragons from the forests : Awake and gird up your loins unto mourning, And take up with me the dirges, And make lamentation with me.
9.  Ye husbandmen, sow not again; And, O earth, wherefore givest thou thy harvest fruits? Keep within thee the sweets of thy sustenance. to And thou, vine, why further dost thou give thy wine ; For an offering will not again be made therefrom in Zion, Nor will first-fruits again be offered. IX. 2. The first fast of seven days. - Fasting was the usual preparation for supernatural communications. Cf. Dan. ix. 3, 20-21; and 7. X. 1. God. This word is found only twice again, i.e. liv. 12; Ixxxii.9. Its use is more frequent in 4 Ezra. ll; II BARUCH 10, r1—11. 3 And do ye, O heavens, withhold your dew, And open not the treasuries of rain : And do thou, O sun, withhold the light of thy rays. And do thou, O moon, extinguish the multitude of thy light ; For why should light rise again Where the light of Zion is darkened ? And you, ye bridegrooms, enter not in, And let not the brides adorn themselves with garlands ; And, ye women, pray not that ye may bear. For the barren shall above all rejoice, And those who have no sons shall be glad, And those who have sons shall have anguish. For why should they bear in pain, Only to bury in grief? Or why, again, should mankind have sons ? Or why should the seed of their kind again be named, Where this mother is desolate, And her sons are led into captivity ? From this time forward speak not of beauty, And discourse not of gracefulness. Moreover, ye priests, take ye the keys of the sanctuary, And cast them into the height of heaven, And give them to the Lord and say: “Guard Thy house Thyself, For lo! we are found false stewards.” And you, ye virgins ; who weave fine linen And silk with gold of Ophir, Take with haste all (these) things And cast (them) into the fire, That it may bear them to Him who made them, And the flame send them to Him who created them, Lest the enemy get possession of them.’ Moreover, I, Baruch, say this against thee, Babylon : ‘If thou hadst prospered, And Zion had dwelt in her glory, Yet the grief to us had been great That thou shouldst be equal to Zion. But now, lo! the grief is infinite, And the lamentation measureless, For lo! thou art prospered And Zion desolate. Who will be judge regarding these things ? Or to whom shall we complain regarding that which has befallen us ? O Lord, how hast Thou borne (it) ? And say to the dead: t But I will say this as I think. And I will speak against thee, O land, which art prospering. 2 The noonday does not always burn. Nor do the rays of the sun constantly give light. 3 Do notexpect [and hope] that thou wilt always be prosperous and rejoicing. And be not greatly up- lifted and boastful. 4 For assuredly in its own season shall the (divine) wrath awake against thee. Which now in long-suf- fering is held in as it were by reins. XII. XIΠ. 5 And when I had said these things, I fasted seven days. et
11.  BARUCH 18, 1-5 II BARUCH 15. 5—14. 1 thou to them, thou and those like thee who shall have seen this evil: ‘(This is the evil) and retribution which is coming upon you and upon your people in its (destined) time that the nations 6, 7 may be thoroughly smitten. And then they shall be in anguish. And if they say at that time: 8 For how long? Thou wilt say to them: “Ye who have drunk the strained wine, Drink ye also of its dregs, The judgement of the Lofty One Who has no respect of persons.”’ 9 On this account he had aforetime no mercy on His own sons, But afflicted them as His enemies, because they sinned, to Then therefore were they chastened That they might be sanctified. . OXYRHYNCHUS GREEK FRAGMENT. Recto. Recto. « 11 But now, ye peoples and (19-20) 11. (Ye) peoplesand... oπηζ΄ 1 nations, ye are guilty Because ye have always (Ye) have trodden down the ta eθnὴ κaί 14 letters trodden down the earth, _ earth καταπα And used the creation And misused thecreated things 20 τήσαντες tὴn (γὴn κaὶ Ka- unrighteously. in it. ταχρήσαμενοι
12.  For I have always bene- (21-22) 12. For ye were always being toὺς ἐn aὐtὴ κτισμίασι 12 fited you. benefited UPLELS ‘yap EvEp And ye have always been But ye were always ungrateful. γετουμενοι ae nxa(piore- ungrateful for the bene- ιτε αει ficence. XIV-XIX. The Righteousness of the Righteous has profited neither them nor their City; God's Fudgements are incomprehensible ; the World was made for the Righteous, yet they pass and the World remains (X1V). Answer—-Man knows Goa’s Fudgements and has sinned willingly. This World is a Weariness to the Righteous but the next is theirs(XV), to be won through Character whether a Man’s Time here be long or short (XV\-XVII). Final Weal or Woe— the supreme Question (XVIII-XIX). 4: And I amswered and (23-25) 14. 1. And I answered and κai απεκριθην κai eἰπoὺ)»14 1 said: ‘Lo! Thou hast said: ‘ Behold, thou hast shown wou απεδει shown me the method of me the methods of the times, €as μoi καιρων ταξεις" κίai the times, and that which and that which shall be. To μελλον Il BARUCH 14. 1-12 shall be after these things, (25-27) And thou hast said unto me 25 (εσγεσθαι κaὶ eἰπeς μάo)i" and Thou hast said unto that the retribution which was {ort ut εθνων me, that the retribution, spoken of by thee shall be jen- υπενεχθῃσείται ἡ ὑπo σou which has been spoken of duredt by the nations. λεχθεισα by Thee, shall come upon (27-32) 2. And now I know that those mpagis κaὶ vey (oda ort 2 2the nations. And now I who have sinned are many, and moAAo. ... ἃ know that those who have they have lived ..., and de- εἰσιν oἱ “μαρτυρησανίτες sinned are many, and they parted from the world, but that KREG STat leh < have lived in prosperity, few nations will be left in those εγσαν᾽ κai επορευθη(σαν and departed from the times to whom . .. the words eκ κοσμου : world, but that few nations (which) thou didst say. 80 odtya be περιζεσται eθnὴ will be left in those times, en €KELVOLS to whom those words shall τοις καιροις" offs .. ... be said which Thou didst + 6 + OUS ELTES 3say. For what advantage (32-33) 3. And what advantage (is Aoyous* Kat ti πίλεον ev 3 is there in this, or what there) in this or what worse than τούτω ἡ τινὰ χει (evil), worse than what we (these's)i2:5. pova r(oyv tίωn have seen befall us, are we 3 : : to expect to see? 4,5 But again I will speak in Thy presence : What have they profited who had knowledge before Thee, and have not walked in vanity as the rest of the nations, and have not said to the dead: “ Give 6 us life,” but always feared Thee, and have not left Thy ways? And lo! they have been carried off, 7 nor on their account hast Thou had mercy on Zion. And if others did evil, it was due to Zion, that on account of the works of those who wrought good works she should be forgiven, and 8 should not be overwhelmed on account of the works of those who wrought unrighteousness. But who, O LorD, my Lord, will comprehend Thy judgement, Or who will search out the profoundness of Thy way ? Or who will think out the tweight} of Thy path? 9 Or who will be able to think out Thy incomprehensible counsel ὃ Or who of those that are born has ever found ‘The beginning or end of Thy wisdom ? to, 11 For we have all been made like a breath. Foras the breath ascends involuntarily, and again dies, so it is with the nature of men, who depart not according to their own will, and know not 12 what will befall them in the end. For the righteous justly hope for the end, and without fear come upon the nations. This could also be rendered : ‘be of service to the nations.’ But xiii. 8 is against this rendering. II BARUCH 14. 12—16, 1 depart from this habitation, because they have with Thee a store of works preserved in treasuries.
13.  On this account also these without fear leave this world, and trusting with joy they hope to
14.  receive the world which Thou hast promised them. But as for us—woe to us, who also are
15.  now shamefully entreated, and at that time look forward (only) to evils. But Thou knowest accurately what Thou hast done by means of Thy servants; for we are not able to understand tό that which is good as Thou art, our Creator. But again I will speak in Thy presence, O Lorn,
17.  my Lord. When of old there was no world with its inhabitants, Thou didst devise and speak
18.  with a word, and forthwith the works of creation stood before Thee. And Thou didst say that Thou wouldst make for Thy world man as the administrator of Thy works, that it might be known that he was by no means made on account of the world, but the world on account of him. 1g And now I see that as for the world which was made on account of us, lo! it abides, but we, on account of whom it was made, depart.’ 5x And the Lord answered and said unto me: ‘Thou art rightly astonied regarding the departure of 2 man, but thou hast not judged well regarding the evils which befall those who sin. And as regards 3 what thou hast said, that the righteous are carried off and the impious are prospered, And as 4 regards what thou hast said: “Man knows not Thy judgement ”—On this account hear, and I will 5 speak to thee, and hearken, and I will cause thee to hear My words. Man would not rightly have understood My judgement, unless he had accepted the law, and 1 had instructed him in understand- 6ing. But now, because he transgressed wittingly, yea, just on this ground that he wot (thereof), he shall be tormented. 7 And as regards what thou didst say touching the righteous, that on account of them has this. 8 world come, so also again shall that, which is to come, come on their account. For this world is to them a strife and a labour with much trouble; and that accordingly which is to come, a crown with great glory.’ 6: And I answered and said: ‘O Lorb, my Lord, lo! the years of this time are few and evil, and who is able in his little time to acquire that which is measureless ?’ a store of works, or lit. a‘ supply’. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 77 (‘a treasure of works’); Matt. vi. 19,20; Pss. Sol. ix. 9. II BARUCH 17. 1—20. 2 17:1 And the Lord answered and said unto me: ‘With the Most High account is not taken of much 2 time nor of a few years. For what did it profit Adam that he lived nine hundred and thirty years, 3 and transgressed that which he was commanded? Therefore the multitude of time that he lived 4 did not profit him, but brought death and cut off the years of those who were born from him. Or wherein did Moses suffer loss in that he lived only one hundred and twenty years, and, inasmuch as he was subject to Him who formed him, brought the law to the seed of Jacob, and lighted a lamp for the nation of Israel δ᾽ 181 And I answered and said: ‘ He that lighted has taken from the light, and there are but few that 2 have imitated him. But those many whom he has lighted have taken from the darkness of Adam and have not rejoiced in the light of the lamp.’ 19: And He answered and said unto me: ‘ Wherefore at that time he appointed for them a covenant and said: “ Behold I have placed before you life and death,” And he called heaven and earth to witness against them. For he knew that his time was but short, But that heaven and earth endure always. 3 But after his death they sinned and transgressed, Though they knew that they had the law reproving (them), And the light in which nothing could err, Also the spheres which testify, and Me. 4 Now regarding everything that is, it is I that judge, but do not thou take counsel in thy soul 5 regarding these things, nor afflict thyself because of those which have been. For now it is the consummation of time that should be considered, whether of business, or of prosperity, or of shame, 6 and not the beginning thereof. Because if a man be prospered in his beginnings and shamefully 7 entreated in his old age, he forgets all the prosperity that he had. And again, if a man is shame- fully entreated in his beginnings, and at his end is prospered, he remembereth not again his evil 8 entreatment. And again hearken: though each one were prospered all that time—all the time from the day on which death was decreed against those who transgress—and in his end was destroyed, in vain would have been everything.’ to XX. Zion has been taken away to hasten the Advent of the Fudgement. 20: ‘Therefore, behold! the days come, And the times shall hasten more than the former, And the seasons shall speed on more than those that are past, And the years shall pass more quickly than the present (years). 2 Therefore have I now taken away Zion, That I may the more speedily visit the world in its season. XVII. 3. brought death, &c. See xxiii. 4 (note). II BARUCH 90. 3—21. tὸ Now therefore hold fast in thy heart everything that I command thee, And seal it in the recesses of thy mind. And then I will show thee the judgement of My might, And My ways which are unsearchable. 5 Go therefore and sanctify thyself seven days, and eat no bread, nor drink water, nor speak to 6 anyone. And afterwards come to that place and I will reveal Myself to thee, and speak true things with thee, and I will give thee commandment regarding the method of the times; for they are coming and tarry not.’ XXI. 1-11. Fast of seven Days: Baruch’s Prayer: God’s Answer. The Prayer of Baruch the Son of Neriah. 158. 22, II BARUCH 21. 10-23 11 finding out, and knowest the number of mankind. And if in time many have sinned, yet others not a few have been righteous. XXI. 12-18. Baruch’s Depreciation of this Life. 12 Thou knowest where Thou preservest the end of those who have sinned, or the consummation of 13 those who have been righteous. For if there were this life only, which belongs to all men, nothing could be more bitter than this. 14 For of what profit is strength that turns to sickness, Or fullness of food that turns to famine, Or beauty that turns to ugliness. 16 For the nature of man is always changeable. For what we were formerly now we no longer are, 17 and what we now are we shall not afterwards remain. For if a consummation had not been prepared 18 for all, in vain would have been their beginning. But regarding everything that comes from Thee, do Thou inform me, and regarding everything about which I ask Thee, do Thou enlighten me. XXI. 19-25. Baruch prays to God to hasten the Fudgement and fulfil His Promise.
19.  How long will that which is corruptible remain, and how long will the time of mortals be prospered, and until what time will those who transgress in the world be polluted with much
20.  wickedness? Command therefore in mercy and accomplish all that Thou saidst Thou wouldst
21.  bring, that Thy might may be made known to those who think that Thy long-suffering is weakness. And show to those who know not, that everything that has befallen us and our city until now has been according to the long-suffering of Thy power, because on account of Thy name Thou hast called
23.  usa beloved people. Bring to an end therefore henceforth mortality. And reprove accordingly the angel of death, and let Thy glory appear, and let the might of Thy beauty be known, and let Sheol be sealed so that from this time forward it may not receive the dead, and let the treasuries of to. knowest the number of mankind. Gen. xiiii. 4, 5. II BARUCH 21. 24—23. 7
24.  souls restore those which are enclosed in them. For there have been many years like those that are desolate from the days of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and of all those who are like them, who
25.  sleep in the earth, on whose account Thou didst say that Thou hadst created the world. And now
26.  quickly show Thy glory, and do not defer what has been promised by Thee.’ And (when) I had completed the words of this prayer I was greatly weakened. XXII-XXIII. God's Reply to Baruch’s Prayer: He will fulfil His Promise: Time needed for its Accomplishment: Things must be judged in the Light of their Consummation (XXII). Till all Souls are born the End cannot come (XXIII). 2: And it came to pass after these things that lo! the heavens were opened, and I saw, and 2 power was given to me, and a voice was heard from on high, and it said unto me: ‘ Baruch, Baruch, 3 why art thou troubled? He who travels by a road but does not complete it, or who departs by sea 4 but does not arrive at the port, can he be comforted? Or he who promises to give a present to 5 another, but does not fulfil it, is it not robbery? Or he who sows the earth, but does not reap its 6 fruit in its season, does he not lose everything? Or he who plants a plant unless it grows till the 7 time suitable to it, does he who planted it expect to receive fruit from it? Ora woman who has 8 conceived, if she bring forth untimely, does she not assuredly slay her infant? Or he who builds a house, if he does not roof it and complete it, can it be called a house? Tell Me that first.’ 2 And I answered and said: ‘Not so, O LORD, my Lord.’ And He answered and said unto me: ‘Why therefore art thou troubled about that which thou knowest not, and why art thou ill at ease 3 about things in which thou art ignorant? For as thou hast not forgotten the people who now are 4 and those who have passed away, so I remember those who are appointed to come. Because when Adam sinned and death was decreed against those who should be born, then the multitude of those who should be born was numbered, and for that number a place was prepared where the living might 5 dwell and the dead might be guarded. Before therefore the number aforesaid is fulfilled, the creature will not live again [for My spirit is the creator of life], and Sheol will receive the dead. 6, 7 And again it is given to thee to hear what things are to come after these times. For truly My redemption has drawn nigh, and is not far distant as aforetime. I “ II BARUCH 24. 1—27. 6 XXIV. The coming Fudgement. 24: ‘For behold! the days come and the books shall be opened in which are written the sins of all those who have sinned, and again also the treasuries in which the righteousness of all those who have 2 been righteous in creation is gathered. For it shall come to pass at that time that thou shalt see—and }the many that are witht thee—the long-suffering of the Most High, which has been throughout all generations, who has been long-suffering towards all who are born, (alike) those 3 who sin and (those who) are righteous.’ And I answered and said: ‘ But, behold! O Lord, no one knows the number of those things which have passed nor yet of those things which are to come. 4 For I know indeed that which has befallen us, but what will happen to our enemies I know not, and when Thou wilt visit Thy works.’ oe XXV-XXVI. 1. Sign of the coming Fudgement. 25: And He answered and said unto me: ‘ Thou too shalt be preserved till that time till that 2 sign which the Most High will work for the inhabitants of the earth in the end of days. This 3 therefore shall be the sign. When a stupor shall seize the inhabitants of the earth, and they 4 shall fall into many tribulations, and again when they shall fall into great torments. And it will come to pass when they say in their thoughts by reason of their much tribulation: “ The Mighty One doth no longer remember the earth ”—yea, it will come to pass when they abandon hope, that the time will then awake.’ 26 And I answered and said: ‘ Will that tribulation which is to be continue a long time, and will xxvi = that necessity embrace many years?’ ᾿ XXVII-XXX. 1. The Twelve Woes that are to come upon the Earth: the Messiah and the temporary Messianic Kingdom. 27: And He answered and said unto me: ‘Into twelve parts is that time divided, and each one of xxvii- 2 them is reserved for that which is appointed for it. In the first part there shall be the begin- 1=A 3, 4 ning of commotions. And in the second part (there shall be) slayings of the great ones. And in ;, 6 the third part the fall of many by death. And in the fourth part the sending of the sword. And XXIV. 1. the books shall be opened. Dan. vii. 10; 1 En. xc. 20; Rev. xx. 12; 4 Ezra vi. 20. Here the books record the sins of sinners only, as in 1 En. xc and probably Rev. (as cited). 4 Ezra vi. 10 has also ‘another book of life’. the treasuries in which. Divine storehouses are a familiar idea in the O.T., e.g. of rain (Deut. xxviii. 12). - Again, the idea of laying up spiritual things in store is found in the LXX, Prov. i, 18 θησαυρίζουσιν ἑαυτοῖς κaκά (cf. Pss. Sol. ix. 9). One may lay up treasures of works or faith (4 Ezra vii. 77, vi. 5); treasures in heaven (Matt. vi. 19, 20); stores of wrath (Rom. ii. 5). “ISIS and θησαυρός may mean the treasure itself, and the place where it is stored. the righteousness of all, ἄς. The standard of righteousness was the Law. The legalistic wing of the Pharisees held it consisted first and mainly in fulfilling ceremonial observances. See, 6. 5. the Book of Jubilees. The prophetical wing, from whom emanated most of the Messianic Apocalypses, understood it primarily as the fulfilling of moral duties. XXIV. 2-4. Probably followed originally on xx. tthe many that are witht thee. See xiii. 5 (note). Read ‘those like thee’, i.e. the surviving righteous. 3-4. Baruch objects that no man knows when the end may come, and he knows only that Israel is in distress. What will the Gentiles suffer as the penalty (answered xiii. 3-12). When will they suffer it? (answered xxv). II BARUCH 27, 6—29. 5 7 in the fifth part famine and the withholding of rain. And in the sixth part earthquakes and 8, 9 terrors. [Wanting.] And in the eighth part a multitude of spectres and attacks of the Shedim. 1,12 And in the ninth part the fall of fire. And in the tenth part rapine and much oppression. And in 13 the eleventh part wickedness and unchastity. And in the twelfth part confusion from the mingling 14 together of all those things aforesaid. For {these parts of that time are reserved, and} shall be 15 mingled one with another and minister one toanother. For some shall leave out some of their own, and receive (in its stead) from others, and some complete their own and that of others, so that those may not understand who are upon the earth in those days that this is the consummation of the times. 1,2 ‘Nevertheless, whosoever understandeth shall then be wise. For the measure and reckoning of 3 that time are two parts a week of seven weeks.’ And I answered and said: ‘It is good for a man to 4 come and behold, but it is better that he should not come lest he fall. [But I will say this also: 5 Will he who is incorruptible despise those things which are corruptible, and whatever befalls in the case of those things which are corruptible, so that he might look only to those things which are not 6 corruptible?] But if, O Lord, those things shall assuredly come to pass which Thou hast foretold 7 to me, so do Thou show this also unto me if indeed I have found grace in Thy sight. Is it in one place or in one of the parts of the earth that those things are come to pass, or will the whole earth experience (them) ?’ t And He answered and said unto me: ‘Whatever will then befall (will befall) the whole earth ; 2 therefore all who live will experience (them). For at that time I will protect only those who are 3 found in those self-same days in thisland. And it shall come to pass when all is accomplished that 4 was to come to pass in those parts, that the Messiah shall then begin to be revealed. And Behemoth shall be revealed from his place and Leviathan shall ascend from the sea, those two great monsters which I created on the fifth day of creation, and shall have kept until that time ; and then they shall 5 be for food for all that are left. The earth also shall yield its fruit ten thousandfold and on each (?) 6,7. famine . . . earthquakes, as signs of the end. Cf. Ixx, 8; Matt. xxiv. 7, &c.
31.  II BARUCH 29. 6—381. 3 *e vine there shall be a thousand branches, and each branch shall produce a thousand clusters, and each 6 cluster produce a thousand grapes, and each grape produce a cor of wine. And those who have 7 hungered shall rejoice : moreover, also, they shall behold marvels every day. For winds shall go forth from before Me to bring every morning the fragrance of aromatic fruits, and at the close of the 8 day clouds distilling the dew of health. And it shall come to pass at that self-same time that the treasury of manna shall again descend from on high, and they will eat of it in those years, because these are they who have come to the consummation of time. 1 ‘And it shall come to pass after these things, when the time of the advent of the Messiah is fulfilled, that He shall return in glory. XXX. 2-5. The Resurrection. II BARUCH 31. 4—35. ; 4 Forget not Zion, But hold in remembrance the anguish of Jerusalem. 5 For lo! the days come, When everything that is shall become the prey of corruption And be as though it had not been. 32:1 ‘But as for you, if ye prepare your hearts, so as to sow in them the fruits of the law, it shall pro- 2 tect you in that time in which the Mighty One is to shake the whole creation. [Because after a 3 little time the building of Zion will be shaken in order that it may be built again. But that building will not remain, but will again after a time be rooted out, and will remain desolate until 4,5 the time. And afterwards it must be renewed in glory, and perfected for evermore.| Therefore we should not be distressed so much over the evil which has now come as over that which is 6 still to be. For there will be a greater trial than these two tribulations when the Mighty One will renew His creation. And now do not draw near to me for a few days, nor seek me till I come to g you.’ And it cameto pass when I had spoken to them all these words, that I, Baruch, went my way, and when the people saw me setting out, they lifted up their voice and lamented and said : ‘ Whither departest thou from us, Baruch, and forsakest us as a father who forsakes his orphan children, and departs from them ? 3x ‘Are these the commands which thy companion, Jeremiah the prophet, commanded thee, and 2 said unto thee: ‘“ Look to this people till I go and make ready the rest of the brethren tint Babylon, 3 against whom has gone forth the sentence that they should be led into captivity”? And now if Phen also forsakest us, it were good for us all to die before thee, and then that thou shouldst withdraw from us.’ XXXIV-XXXV. Lament of Baruch.
34.  And I answered and said unto the people: ‘ Far be it from me to forsake you or to withdraw from you, but I will only go unto the Holy of Holies to inquire of the Mighty One concerning you and concerning Zion, if in some respect I should receive more illumination: and after these things I will return to you.’ 851 And I, Baruch, went to the holy place, and sat down upon the ruins and wept, and said: 2 ‘O that mine eyes were springs, And mine eyelids a fount of tears. 3 For how shall I lament for Zion, And how shall I mourn for Jerusalem ? II BARUCH 85. 4--88. 4 4 Because in that place where I am now prostrate, Of old the high priest offered holy sacrifices, And placed thereon an incense of fragrant odours. . 5 But now our glorying has been made into dust, And the desire of our soul into sand.’ XXXVI-XXXVII. The Vision of the Forest, the Vine, the Fountain and the Cedar.
36.  1,2 And when I had said these things I fell asleep there, and I saw a vision in the night. And lo! xxxvi.- a forest of trees planted on the plain, and lofty and rugged rocky mountains surrounded it, and that = A® 3 forest occupied much space. And lo! over against it arose a vine, and from under it there went forth 4a fountain peacefully. Now that fountain came to the forest and was (stirred) into great waves, and those waves submerged that forest, and suddenly they rooted out the greater part of that forest, and 5 overthrew all the mountains which were round about it. And the height of the forest began to be made low, and the top of the mountains was made low and that fountain prevailed greatly, so that it 6 left nothing of that great forest save one cedar only. Also when it had cast it down and had destroyed and rooted out the greater part of that forest, so that nothing was left of it, nor could its place be recognized, then that vine began to come with the fountain in peace and great tranquillity, and it came toa place which was not far from that cedar, and they brought the cedar which had 7 been cast down to it. And I beheld and lo! that vine opened its mouth and spake and said to that cedar: ‘Art thou not that cedar which was left of the forest of wickedness, and by whose means 8 wickedness persisted, and was wrought all those years, and goodness never. And thou didst keep conquering that which was not thine, and to that which was thine thou didst never show compassion, and thou didst keep extending thy power over those who were far from thee, and those who drew nigh thee thou didst hold fast in the toils of thy wickedness, and thou didst uplift thyself always as 9, To one that could not be rooted out! But now thy time has sped and thine hour is come. Do thou also therefore depart, O cedar, after the forest, which departed before thee, and become dust with it, 11 and let your ashes be mingled together. And now recline in anguish and rest in torment till thy last time come, in which thou wilt come again, and be tormented still more.’
37.  And after these things I saw that cedar burning, and the vine growing, itself and all around it, the plain full of unfading flowers. And I indeed awoke and arose. XXXVIII-XL. Juterpretation of the Vision, 38: And I prayed and said: ‘O Lorn, my Lord, Thou dost always enlighten those who are led by 2, 3 understanding. Thy law is life,and Thy wisdom is right guidance. Make known to me therefore 4 the interpretation of this vision. For Thou knowest that my soul hath always walked in Thy law, and from my (earliest) days I departed not from Thy wisdom.’ THE SIXTH SECTION. XXXVI-XLVI. We must insert a seven days’ fast after xxxv to keep the symmetry of the book as constructed by the final editor. The structure of this section is then as follows: first, the omitted fast, then a Messiah vision and its interpretation (xxxvi-xl) with disclosures as to apostates and proselytes (xli. 2-xlii. 8), and an announcement as to Baruch’s coming death (xliii), and finally Baruch’s address to the people (xliv-xlvi). This section is very composite. xxxvi-xl is a Messiah Apocalypse earlier than A.D. 70; xliii-xliv. 7, xlv-xlvi. 6 belongs to B!; the rest mainly to B*. XXXVI-XL. The Second Messiah Apocalypse, A’. (a) Date of A*’—before A.D. 70. Unlike Bt and B* it has no mention of the Roman destruction of Jerusalem ; nor has it a restoration of the city for the Messiah’s rule, or a return of the dispersion. A? is optimistic as regards this world, unlike B?; and centres its hope on the Messiah, not the law, unlike B* and B% (4) Relation of A? to At. In Al the Messiah has a passive réle ; here an active one, destroying the wicked and vindicating Israel. XXXVI. 1. These visions are only found in A? and A®, Elsewhere we have direct revelations. II BARUCH 89. 1—42. 3 89: And He answered and said unto me: ‘Baruch, this is the interpretation of the vision which thou 2 hast seen. As thou hast seen the great forest which lofty and rugged mountains surrounded, this is 3 theword. Behold! the days come, and this kingdom will be destroyed which once destroyed Zion, 4 and it will be subjected to that which comes after it. Moreover, that also again after a time will be destroyed, and another, a third, will arise, and that also will have dominion for its time, and will be 5 destroyed. And after these things a fourth kingdom will arise, whose power will be harsh and evil far beyond those which were before it, and it will rule many times as the forests on the plain, and it 6 will hold fast for times, and will exalt itself more than the cedars of Lebanon. And by it the truth will be hidden, and all those who are polluted with iniquity will flee to it, as evil beasts flee and 7 creep into the forest. And it will come to pass when the time of its consummation that it should fall has approached, then the principate of My Messiah will be revealed, which is like the fountain 8 and the vine, and when it is revealed it will root out the multitude of its host. And as touching that which thou hast seen, the lofty cedar, which was left of that forest, and the fact, that the vine spoke those words with it which thou didst hear, this is the word. t ‘The last leader of that time will be left alive, when the multitude of his hosts will be put to the sword, and he will be bound, and they will take him up to Mount Zion, and My Messiah will convict 2 him of all his impieties, and will gather and set before him all the works of his hosts. And afterwards he will put him to death, and protect the rest of My people which shall be found in the place which 3 Ihave chosen. And his principate will stand for ever, until the world of corruption is at an end, 4 and until the times aforesaid are fulfilled. This is thy vision, and this is its interpretation.’ XLI-XLII. The Destiny of the Apostates and of the Proselytes. 1: And I answered and said: ‘For whom and for how many shall these things be? or who will be xli-xlii 2 worthy to live at that time? For I will speak before thee everything that I think, and I will ask of = B? 3 Thee regarding those things which I meditate. For lo! I see many of Thy people who have with- 4 drawn from Thy covenant, and cast from them the yoke of Thy law. But others again I have seen 5 who have forsaken their vanity, and fled for refuge beneath Thy wings. What therefore will be to. 6 them? or how will the last time receive them? Or perhaps the time of these will assuredly be weighed, and as the beam inclines will they be judged accordingly ?’ 1,2 And He answered and said unto me: ‘ These things also will I show unto thee. As for what thou didst say—* To whom will these things be, and how many (will they be) ?””—to those who have believed there shall be the good which was spoken of aforetime, and to those who despise there shall 3 be the contrary of these things. And as for what thou didst say regarding those who have drawn XXXIX. 3-5. Of the four world-empires here mentioned undoubtedly the first is Babylon (ver. 3), and the fourth Rome (5-7 ; xxxvi. 5-10). The second and third are probably Persia and the Diadochi. The fourfold division of world-empires is due to Dan. vii, where the fourth [tὰ δ μon, is decidedly different, as 4 Ezra xii. 11-12 admits. Il BARUCH 42. 4--44. 2 4 near and those who have withdrawn this is the word. As for those who were before subject, and afterwards withdrew and mingled themselves with the seed of mingled peoples, the time of these was 5 the former, and was accounted as something exalted. And as for those who before knew not but afterwards knew life, and mingled (only) with the seed of the people which had separated itself, the 6 time of these (is) the latter, and is accounted as something exalted. And time shall succeed to time and season to season, and one shall receive from another, and then with a view to the consummation shall everything be compared according to the measure of the times and the hours of the seasons. 7, 8 For corruption shall take those that belong to it, and life those that belong to it. And the dust shall be called, and there shall be said to it : “Give back that which is not thine, and raise up all that thou hast kept until its time”. XLIIL. Baruch told of his Death and bidden to give his last Commands to the People. 43:1 ‘But, do thou, Baruch, direct thy heart to that which has been said to thee, And understand those things which have been shown to thee ; For there are many eternal consolations for thee. For thou shalt depart from this place, And thou shalt pass from the regions which are now seen by thee, And thou shalt forget whatever is corruptible, And shalt not again recall those things which happen among mortals. 3 Go therefore and command thy people, and come to this place, and afterwards fast seven days, and then I will come to thee and speak with thee.’ tN XLIV. 1-8, XLV-XLVI. Baruch tells the Elders of his impending Death, but encourages them to expect the Consolation of Zion. 44, And I, Baruch, went from thence, and came to my people, and I called my first-born son and [the Gedaliahs] my friends, and seven of the elders of the people, and I said unto them: ‘Behold, I go unto my fathers According to the way of all the earth. II BARUCH 44. 3—46. 1 But withdraw ye not from the way of the law, But guard and admonish the people which remain, Lest they withdraw from the commandments of the Mighty One. For ye see that He whom we serve is just, And our Creator is no respecter of persons. And see ye what hath befallen Zion, And what hath happened to Jerusalem. For the judgement of the Mighty One shall (thereby) be made known, And His ways, which, though past finding out, are right. For if ye endure and persevere in His fear, And do not forget His law, The times shall change over you for good, And ye shall see the consolation of Zion. Because whatever is now is nothing, xliv. 8-15 But that which shall be is very great. = B For everything that is corruptible shall pass away, And everything that dies shall depart, And all the present time shall be forgotten, Nor shall there be any remembrance of the present time, which is defiled with evils. For that which runs now runs unto vanity, And that which prospers shall quickly fall and be humiliated. For that which is to be shall be the object of desire, And for that which comes afterwards shall we hope ; For it is a time that passes not away, And the hour comes which abides for ever. And the new world (comes) which does not turn to corruption those who depart to its blessedness, And has no mercy on those who depart to torment, And leads not to perdition those who live in it. For these are they who shall inherit that time which has been spoken of, And theirs is the inheritance of the promised time. These are they who have acquired for themselves treasures of wisdom, And with them are found stores of understanding, And from mercy have they not withdrawn, And the truth of the law have they preserved. For to them shall be given the world to come, But the dwelling of the rest who are many shall be in the fire.’ ‘Do ye therefore so far as ye are able instruct the people, for that labour is ours. For if ye xlv-xlvi.6 teach them, ye will quicken them.’ = Bi And my son and the elders of the people answered and said unto me: ‘Has the Mighty One humiliated us to such a degree As to take thee from us quickly ἢ 3: commandments of the Mighty One. Cf. xlviii. 38.
48.  {21} ω] tN σi II BARUCH 46. 2.--48. 5 And truly we shall be in darkness, And there shall be no light to the people who are left. ) For where again shall we seek the law, Or who will distinguish for us between death and life?’ And I said unto them: ‘The throne of the Mighty One I cannot resist ; Nevertheless, there shall not be wanting to Israel a wise man Nor a son of the law to the race of Jacob. But only prepare ye your hearts, that ye may obey the law, And be subject to those who in fear are wise and understanding ; And prepare your souls that ye may not depart from them. I For if ye do these things, Good tidings shall come unto you. [Which I before told you of ; nor shall ye fall into the torment, of which I testified to you before.’ xlvi. But with regard to the word that I was to be taken I did not make (it) known to them or to my son. ] And when I had gone forth and dismissed them, I went thence and said unto them: ‘ Behold! aves I go to Hebron: for thither the Mighty One hath sent me.’ And I came to that place where the word had been spoken unto me, and I sat there, and fasted seven days. XLVIII. 1-47. PRAYER OF BARUCH. And it came to pass after the seventh day, that I prayed before the Mighty One and said ‘O my Lord, Thou summonest the advent of the times, And they stand before Thee ; Thou causest the power of the ages to pass away, And they do not resist Thee ; . Thou arrangest the method of the seasons, And they obey Thee. Thou alone knowest the duration of the generations, And Thou revealest not Thy mysteries to many. And Thou weighest the lightness of the wind. Thou explorest the limit of the heights, Thou makest known the multitude of the fire, And Thou scrutinizest the depths of the darkness. XLVI. 4. a son of the law = ΠY Ὁ “3, i.e. one bound to observe the Law. An answer to the question put in iii, 6% The expression seems to occur here first in existing literature. The verse means: There never should be lacking wise ! teachers and obedient servants of the Law. The expression has nothing to do with don “3 as Ryssel suggests. 21 II BARUCH 48. 6-22 Thou carest fer the number which pass away that they may be preserved, And Thou preparest an abode for those that are to be. Thou rememberest the beginning which Thou hast made, And the destruction that is to be Thou forgettest not. With nods of fear and findignationt Thou commandest the flames, And they change into spirits, And with a word Thou quickenest that which was not, And with mighty power Thou holdest that which has not yet come. Thou instructest created things in the understanding of Thee, And Thou makest wise the spheres so as to minister in their orders. Armies innumerable stand before Thee And minister in their orders quietly at Thy nod. Hear Thy servant And give ear to my petition. For in a little time are we born, And in a little time do we return, ‘, But with Thee hours are as a time, And days as generations. Be not therefore wroth with man; for he is nothing And take not account of our works; For what are we? For lo! by Thy gift do we come into the world, And we depart not of our own will. For we said not to our parents, “ Beget us,” Nor did we send to Sheol and say, “ Receive us.” What therefore is our strength that we should bear Thy wrath, Or what are we that we should endure Thy judgement ? Protect us in Thy compassions, And in Thy mercy help us. Behold the little ones that are subject unto Thee, And save all that draw nigh unto Thee: And destroy not the hope of our people, And cut not short the times of our aid. For this is the nation which Thou hast chosen, And these are the people, to whom Thou findest no equal. But I will speak now before Thee, And I will say as my heart thinketh. In Thee do we trust, for lo! Thy law is with us, And we know that we shall not fall so long as we keep Thy statutes. XLVIII. 6. See xxiii. 4, note. Thou carest for. The text here follows a wrong sense of 1P5 in the Hebrew original, and so gives ‘commandest’. that they may. Text reads ‘and they are’. The Greek translator appears to have rendered “2%! wrongly. 36 Il BARUCH 48, 23-36 To all time are we blessed at all events in this that we have not mingled with the Gentiles. ‘or we are all one celebrated people, Who have received one law from One: And the law which is amongst us will aid us, And the surpassing wisdom which is in us will help us.’ And when I had prayed and said these things, I was greatly weakened. And He answered and said unto me: ‘Thou hast prayed simply, O Baruch, And all thy words have been heard. But My judgement exacts its own And My law exacts its rights. For from thy words I will answer thee, And from thy prayer I will speak to thee. For this is as follows: he that is corrupted is not at all; he has both wrought iniquity so far as he could do anything, and has not remembered My goodness, nor accepted My long-suffering. There- fore thou shalt surely be taken up, as I before told thee. For,that time shall arise which brings affliction ; for it shall come and pass by with quick vehemence, and it shall be turbulent coming in the heat of indignation. And it shall come to pass in those days that all the inhabitants of the earth shall be moved one against another, because they know not that My judgement has drawn nigh. For there shall not be found many wise at that time, And the intelligent shall be but a few: Moreover, even those who know shall most of all be silent. And there shall be many rumours and tidings not a few, And the doings of phantasmata shall be manifest, And promises not a few be recounted. Some of them (shall prove) idle, And some of them shall be confirmed. And honour shall be turned into shame, And strength humiliated into contempt, tAnd probity destroyed,+ And beauty shall become ugliness. And many shall say to many at that time: “Where hath the multitude of intelligence hidden itself, And whither hath the multitude of wisdom removed itself?” II BARUCH 48. 37-50 37 And whilst they are meditating these things, Then envy shall arise in those who had not thought aught of themselves (?) And passion shall seize him that is peaceful, And many shall be stirred up in anger to injure many, And they shall rouse up armies in order to shed blood, And in the end they shall perish together with them. 38 And it shall come to pass at the self-same time, That a change of times shall manifestly appear to every man, Because in all those times they polluted themselves And they practised oppression, And walked every man in his own works, And remembered not the law of the Mighty One. 39 Therefore a fire shall consume their thoughts, And in flame shall the meditations of their reins be tried ; For the Judge shall come and will not tarry. 490 Because each of the inhabitants of the earth knew when he was transgressing. But My Law they knew not by reason of their pride. 41 But many shall then assuredly weep. Yea, over the living more than over the dead,’ 42 And I answered and said : “Ὁ Adam, what hast thou done to all those who are born from thee ? And what will be said to the first Eve who hearkened to the serpent ? 43 For all this multitude are going to corruption, Nor is there any numbering of those whom the fire devours. 45 But again I will speak in Thy presence. Thou, O LorpD, my Lord, knowest what is in Thy 46 creature. For Thou didst of old command the dust to produce Adam, and Thou knowest the number of those who are born from him, and how far they have sinned before Thee, who have 47 existed and not confessed Thee as their Creator. And as regards all these their end shall convict them, and Thy law which they have transgressed shall requite them on Thy day.’ XLVIII. 48-50. Fragment of an Address of Baruch to the People. 48 [* But now let us dismiss the wicked and inquire about the righteous.
49.  And I will recount their blessedness And not be silent in celebrating their glory, which is reserved for them. 5° © For assuredly as in a little time in this transitory world in which ye live, ye have endured much labour, So in that world to which there is no end, ye shall receive great light.’ 49: 50: 51: 2 - 9 Il BARUCH 49, :---ὃ]. 6 XLIX-LII. The Nature of the Resurrection Body: the final Destinies of the Righteous and the Wicked. ‘Nevertheless, I will again ask from Thee, O Mighty One, yea, I will ask mercy from Him who made all things. “In what shape will those live who live in Thy day? Or how will the splendour of those who (are) after that time continue ? Will they then resume this form of the present, And put on these entrammelling members, Which are now involved in evils, And in which evils are consummated, Or wilt Thou perchance change these things which have been in the world As also the world ?”’ And He answered and said unto me: ‘ Hear, Baruch, this word, And write in the remembrance of thy heart all that thou shalt learn. For the earth shall then assuredly restore the dead, oe it now receives, in order to preserve them]. t shall make no change in their form, But as it has received, so shall it restore them, And as I delivered them unto it, so also shall it raise them. For then it will be necessary to show to the living that the dead have come to life again, and that those who had departed have returned (again). And it shall come to pass, when they have severally recognized those whom they now know, then judgement shall grow strong, and those things which before were spoken of shall come. ‘ And it shall come to pass, when that appointed day has gone by, that then shall the aspect of those who are condemned be afterwards changed, and the glory of those who are justified. For the aspect of those who now act wickedly shall become worse than it is, as they shall suffer torment. Also (as for) the glory of those who have now been justified in My law, who have had understanding in their life, and who have planted in their heart the root of wisdom, then their splendour shall be glorified in changes, and the form of their face shall be turned into the light of their beauty, that they may be able to acquire and receive the world which does not die, which is then promised to them. For over this above all shall those who come then lament, that they rejected My law, and stopped their ears that they might not hear wisdom or receive understanding. When therefore they see those, over whom they are now exalted, (but) who shall then be exalted and glorified more than they, they shall respectively be transformed, the latter into the splendour of angels, and the former shall yet more waste away in wonder at the visions and in the beholding of the forms. For they shall first behold and afterwards depart to be tormented. XLIX. 2. In what shape, &c. Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 35 ‘How are the dead raised up? and with what manner of body do they come?’ splendour, or perhaps ‘ appearance’; also in li. 3, 5. Il BARUCH 51. 7—52. 7 But those who have been saved by their works, And to whom the law has been now a hope, And understanding an expectation, And wisdom a confidence, Shall wonders appear in their time. For they shall behold the world which is now invisible to them, And they shall behold the time which is now hidden from them : And time shall no longer age them. to For in the heights of that world shall they dwell, And they shall be made like unto the angels, And be made equal to the stars, And they shall be changed into every form they desire, From beauty into loveliness, And from light into the splendour of glory. For there shall be spread before them the extents of Paradise, and there shall be shown to them the beauty of the majesty of the living creatures which are beneath the throne, and all the armies of the angels, who [are now held fast by My word, lest they should appear, and] are held fast by a 12 command, that they may stand in their places till their advent comes. Moreover, there shall then be 13 excellency in the righteous surpassing that in the angels. For the first shall receive the last, those _ whom they were expecting, and the last those of whom they used to hear that they had passed away. 14 For they have been delivered from this world of tribulation, And laid down the burthen of anguish. ti For what then have men lost their life, And for what have those who were on the earth exchanged their soul ? 16 For then they chose (not) for themselves this time, Which, beyond the reach of anguish, could not pass away: But they chose for themselves that time, Whose issues are full of lamentations and evils, And they denied the world which ages not those who come to it, And they rejected the time of glory, So that they shall not come to the honour of which I told thee before.’ 2x And I answered and said: ‘How can we forget those for whom woe is then reserved ? 2 And why therefore do we again mourn for those who die? Or why do we weep for those who depart to Sheol ? 3 Let lamentations be reserved for the beginning of that coming torment, And let tears be laid up for the advent of the destruction of that time. But even in the face of these things will I speak. nd as for the righteous, what will they do now? Rejoice ye in the suffering which ye now suffer : For why do ye look for the decline of your enemies ? 7 Make ready your soul for that which is reserved for you, And prepare your souls for the reward which is laid up for you.’] ans Il BARUCH 58. 1—54, 3 LIII-LXXIV. THE MESSIAH APOCALYPSE. 1111. Zhe Vision of the Cloud with black and white Waters. 53: And when 1 had said these things I fell asleep there, and I saw a vision, and lo! a cloud was liii-t ascending from a very great sea, and I kept gazing upon it, and lo! it was full of waters white and = ἃ black, and there were many colours in those self-same waters, and as it were the likeness of great 2 lightning was seen at its summit. And I saw the cloud passing swiftly in quick courses, and it 3 covered all the earth. And it came to pass after these things that that cloud began to pour 4 upon the earth the waters that were in it. And I saw that there was not one and the same like- 5 ness in the waters which descended from it. For in the first beginning they were black and many for a time, and afterwards I saw that the waters became bright, but they were not many, and after these things again I saw black (waters), and after these things again bright, and again 6 black and again bright. Now this was done twelve times, but the black were always more numerous 7 than the bright. And it came to pass at the end of the cloud, that lo! it rained black waters, and they were darker than had been all those waters that were before, and fire was mingled 8 with them, and where those waters descended, they wrought devastation and destruction. And after these things I saw how that lightning which I had seen on the summit of the cloud, seized 9 hold of it and hurled it to the earth. Now that lightning shone exceedingly, so as to illuminate the whole earth, and it healed those regions where the last waters had descended and wrought 10, 11 devastation. And it took hold of the whole earth, and had dominion over it. And I saw after these things, and lo! twelve rivers were ascending from the sea, and they began to surround 12 that lightning and to become subject to it. And by reason of my fear I awoke. LIV-LV. Baruch's Prayer for an Interpretation of the Vision: Ramiel’s advent for this Purpose. 541 And I besought the Mighty One, and said: ‘Thou alone, O Lord, knowest of aforetime the deep things of the world, And the things which befall in their times Thou bringest about by Thy word, And against the works of the inhabitants of the earth Thou dost hasten the beginnings of the times, And the end of the seasons Thou alone knowest. to (Thou) for whom nothing is too hard, But who dost everything easily by a nod: 3 (Thou) to whom the depths tcome} as the heights, And whose word the beginnings of the ages serve: LIII-LXXIV. The third Messiah Apocalypse, or A%. In date it seems to be prior to A.D. 70 (Ixviii. 5-6), and subsequent to A.D. 50. If this is the date of this section, it is distinct from B! and B*, which were composed subsequently to the fall of the Temple. In B! and B? there is no expectation of the Messiah, whereas in A® the Messiah is the centre of interest. Again, it appears to be distinct from A'; for in A! the Messiah does not appear till the enemies of Israel are destroyed, whereas in A* the Messiah is the agent of their destruction. The relations of A® to Aἴ are doubtful. They could come from the same hand. The warlike character of the Messiah in this section is noteworthy. LIII. In this vision a cloud rises from the sea with its summit crowned with lightning. After six successions of black and bright waters, comes the blackest shower of all. Then the lightning flashes forth and heals the earth. I. avery great sea. Cf. Dan. vii. 2. wit 18 ve ET ee II BARUCH 54. 4-18 (Thou) who revealest to those who fear Thee what is prepared for them, That thenceforth they may be comforted. Thou showest great acts to those who know not ; Thou breakest up the enclosure of those who are ignorant, And lightest up what is dark, And revealest what is hidden to the pure, [Who in faith have submitted themselves to Thee and Thy law.] Thou hast shown to Thy servant this vision ; Reveal to me also its interpretation. For I know that as regards those things wherein I besought Thee, I have received a response, And as regards what 1 besought, Thou didst reveal to me with what voice I should praise Thee, And from what members I should cause praises and hallelujahs to ascend to Thee. For if my members were mouths, And the hairs of my head voices, Even so I could not give Thee the meed of praise, Nor laud thee as is befitting, _ Nor could I recount Thy praise, Nor tell the glory of Thy beauty. For what am I amongst men, Or why am I reckoned amongst those who are more excellent than I, That I have heard all these marvellous things from the Most High, And numberless promises from Him who created me? Blessed be my mother among those that bear, And praised among women be she that bare me. For I will not be silent in praising the Mighty One, And with the voice of praise I will recount His marvellous deeds. For who doeth like unto Thy marvellous deeds, O God, Or who comprehendeth Thy deep thought fof lifet. For with Thy counsel Thou dost govern all the creatures which Thy right hand has created, And Thou hast established every fountain of light beside Thee, And the treasures of wisdom beneath Thy throne hast Thou prepared. And justly do they perish who have not loved Thy law, And the torment of judgement shall await those who have not submitted themselves to Thy power. For though Adam first sinned And brought untimely death upon all, Yet of those who were born from him Each one of them has prepared for his own soul torment to come, And again each one of them has chosen for himself glories to come. [For assuredly he who believeth will receive reward. But now, as for you, ye wicked that now are, turn ye to destruction, because ye shall speedily be visited, in that formerly ye rejected the understanding of the Most High. For His works have not taught you, Nor has the skill of His creation which is at all times persuaded you. Il BARUCH 54. 19—56. 5 19 Adam is therefore not the cause, save only of his own soul, But each of us has been the Adam of his own soul. 20 But do Thou, O Lord, expound to me regarding those things which Thou hast revealed to me, And inform me regarding that which I besought Thee. 21 For atthe consummation of the world vengeance shall be taken upon those who have done wickedness according to their wickedness, And Thou wilt glorify the faithful according to their faithfulness. 22 For those who are amongst Thine own Thou rulest, _ And those who sin Thou blottest out from amongst Thine own.’ 551 And it came to pass when I had finished speaking the words of this prayer, that I sat there under 2 ἃ tree, that I might rest in the shade of the branches. And I wondered and was astonied, and pondered in my thoughts regarding the multitude of goodness which sinners who are upon the earth have rejected, and regarding the great torment which they have despised, though they knew that 3 they should be tormented because of the sin they had committed. And when I was pondering on these things and the like, lo! the angel Ramiel who presides over true visions was sent to me, and he said unto me: 4 ‘Why does thy heart trouble thee, Baruch, and why does thy thought disturb thee ? 5 For if owing to the report which thou hast only heard of judgement thou art so moved, What (wilt thou be) when thou shalt see it manifestly with thine eyes ? 6 And if with the expectation wherewith thou dost expect the day of the Mighty One thou art so overcome, What (wilt thou be) when thou shalt come to its advent? 7 And, if at the word of the announcement of the torment of those who have done foolishly thou art so wholly distraught, How much more when the event will reveal marvellous things ? And if thou hast heard tidings of the good and evil things which are then coming and art grieved, What (wilt thou be) when thou shalt behold what the majesty will reveal, Which shall convict these and cause those to rejoice.’ 8 LVI-LXXIV. Jnterpretation of the Vision. The black and bright Waters symbolize the World's : History from Adam to the Advent of the Messiah. 561 ‘Nevertheless, because thou hast besought the Most High to reveal to thee the interpretation 2 of the vision which thou hast seen, I have been sent to tell thee. And the Mighty One hath assuredly made known to thee the methods of the times that have passed, and of those that are destined to pass in His world from the beginning of its creation even unto its consummation, 3 of those things which (are) deceit and of those which (are) in truth. For as thou didst see a great cloud which ascended from the sea, and went and covered the earth, this is the duration of the world (= aἰώn) which the Mighty One made when he took counsel to make the world. 4 And it came to pass when the word had gone forth from His presence, that the duration of the world had come into being in a small degree, and was established according to the multitude of 5 the intelligence of Him who sent it. And as thou didst previously see on the summit of the cloud black waters which descended previously on the earth, this is the transgression wherewith Adam the first man transgressed. II BARUCH 56. 6—59. 4 6 For [since] when he transgressed Untimely death came into being, _Grief was named And anguish was prepared, And pain was created, And trouble consummated, And disease began to be established, And Sheol kept demanding that it should be renewed in blood, And the begetting of children was brought about, And the passion of parents produced, And the greatness of humanity was humiliated, And goodness languished. 7,8 What therefore can be blacker or darker than these things? This is the beginning of the black 9 waters which thou hast seen. And from these black (waters) again were black derived, and the to darkness of darkness was produced. For he became a danger to his own soul: even to the angels , 12 became he a danger. For, moreover, at that time when he was created, they enjoyed liberty. And 13 some of them descended, and mingled with the women. And then those who did so were tormented 14in chains. But the rest of the multitude of the angels, of which there is (no) number, restrained 15 themselves. And those who dwelt on the earth perished together (with them) through the waters 16 of the deluge. These are the black first waters. 7: ‘And after these (waters) thou didst see bright waters: this is the fount of Abraham, also his 2 generations and advent of his son, and of his son’s son, and of those like them. Because at that time the unwritten law was named amongst them, And the works of the commandments were then fulfilled, And belief in the coming judgement was then generated, And hope of the world that was to be renewed was then built up, And the promise of the life that should come hereafter was implanted. 3 These are the bright waters, which thou hast seen. 1 ‘And the black third waters which thou hast seen, these are the mingling of all sins, which the nations afterwards wrought after the death of those righteous men, and the wickedness of the land of 2 Egypt, wherein they did wickedly in the service wherewith they made their sons to serve. Never- theless, these also perished at last. 1 ‘And the bright fourth waters which thou hast seen are the advent of Moses and Aaron and 2 Miriam and Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb and of all those like them. For at that time the lamp of the eternal law shone on all those who sat in darkness, which announced to them that believe the 3 promise of their reward, and to them that deny, the torment of fire which is reserved for them. But also the heavens at that time were shaken from their place, and those who were under the throne of 4 the Mighty One were perturbed, when He was taking Moses unto Himself. For He showed him many admonitions together with the principles of the law and the consummation of the times, as also to thee, and likewise the pattern of Zion and its measures, in the pattern of which the 7: ae II BARUCH 59. 5—62. 6 5 sanctuary of the present time was to be made. But then also He showed to him the measures of © the fire, also the depths of the abyss, and the weight of the winds, and the number of the drops of 6 rain: And the suppression of anger, and the multitude of long-suffering, and the truth of judgement : 8 And the root of wisdom, and the riches of understanding, and the fount of knowledge: And the height of the air, and the greatness of Paradise, and the consummation of the ages, and the beginning 9 of the day of judgement: And the number of the offerings, and the earths which have not yet come: 10 And the mouth of Gehenna, and the station of vengeance, and the place of faith, and the region of 11 hope: And the likeness of future torment, and the multitude of innumerable angels, and the flaming hosts, and the splendour of the lightnings, and the voice of the thunders, and the orders of the chiefs of the angels, and the treasuries of light, and the changes of the times, and the investigations of the 12 law. These are the bright fourth waters which thou hast seen. ΘO: ‘And the black fifth waters which thou hast seen raining are the works which the Amorites
62.  wrought, and the spells of their incantations which they wrought, and the wickedness of their 2 mysteries, and the mingling of their pollution. But even Israel was then polluted by sins in the days of the judges, though they saw many signs which were from Him who made them. I + And the bright sixth waters which thcu didst see, this is the time in which David and Solomon were born. 2 And there was at that time the building of Zion, And the dedication of the sanctuary, And the shedding of much blood of the nations that sinned then, And many offerings which were offered then in the dedication of the sanctuary. II BARUCH 62. 7—65. 2 7 them away captive. But regarding the Gentiles it were tedious to tell how they always wrought 8 impiety and wickedness, and never wrought righteousness, These are the black seventh waters which thou hast seen. 63:1 ‘And the bright eighth waters which thou hast seen, this is the rectitude and uprightness of 2 Hezekiah king of Judah and the grace (of God) which came upon him. For when Sennacherib was stirred up in order that he might perish, and his wrath troubled him in order that he might thereby 3 perish, for the multitude also of the nations which were with him.t When, moreover, Hezekiah the king heard those things which the king of Assyria was devising, (i.e.) to come and seize him and destroy his people, the two and a half tribes which remained: nay, more he wished to overthrow Zion also: then Hezekiah trusted in his works, and had hope in his righteousness, and spake with 4the Mighty One and said: “Behold, for lo! Sennacherib is prepared to destroy us, and he will be boastful and uplifted when he has destroyed Zion.” 5 And the Mighty One heard him, for Hezekiah was wise, And He had respect unto his prayer, because he was righteous. 6,7 And thereupon the Mighty One commanded Ramiel His angel who speaks with thee. And I went forth and destroyed their multitude, the number of whose chiefs only was a hundred and 8 eighty-five thousand, and each one of them had an equal number (at his command). And at that time I burned their bodies within, but their raiment and arms I preserved outwardly, in order that the still more wonderful deeds of the Mighty One might appear, and that thereby His name might 9 be spoken of throughout the whole earth. And Zion was saved and Jerusalem delivered: Israel also to was freed from tribulation. And all those who were in the holy land rejoiced, and the name of the 11 Mighty One was glorified so that it was spoken of. These are the bright waters which thou hast , . seen.
64.  1 ‘And the black ninth waters which thou hast seen, this is all the wickedness which was in the days 2 of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah. For he wrought much impiety, and he slew the righteous, and he wrested judgement, and he shed the blood of the innocent, and wedded women he violently polluted, and he overturned the altars, and destroyed their offerings, and drove forth their priests 3 lest they should minister in the sanctuary. And he made an image with five faces: four of them looked to the four winds, and the fifth on the summit of the image as an adversary of the zeal of the 4 Mighty One. And then wrath went forth from the presence of the Mighty One to the intent that 5 Zion should be rooted out, as also it befell in your days. But also against the two tribes and a half 6 went forth a decree that they should also be led away captive, as thou hast now seen. And to such a degree did the impiety of Manasseh increase, that it removed the praise of the Most High from 7 the sanctuary. On this account Manasseh was at that time named “the impious”, and finally his 8 abode was in the fire. For though his prayer was heard with the Most High, finally, when he was cast into the brazen horse and the brazen horse was melted, it served as a sign unto him for the 9hour. For he had not lived perfectly, for he was not worthy—but that thenceforward he might 10 know by whom finally he should be tormented. For he who is able to benefit is also able to torment, 51 ‘Thus, moreover, did Manasseh act impiously, and thought that in his time the Mighty One would 2 not inquire into these things. These are the black ninth waters which thou hast seen. LXIII. 1. the grace. The MS. originally read ‘bounty’. I have with Ryssel added ‘of God’. Ryssel emends and reads ‘ the benignity of God’. II BARUCH 66; t- 268,2 6: ‘And the bright tenth waters which thou hast seen: this is the purity of the generations of Josiah
68.  king of Judah, who was the only one at the time who submitted himself to the Mighty One with all 2 his heart and with all his soul. And he cleansed the land from idols, and hallowed all the vessels which had been polluted, and restored the offerings to the altar, and raised the horn of the holy, and exalted the righteous, and honoured all that were wise in understanding, and brought back the priests to their ministry, and destroyed and removed the magicians and enchanters and necromancers from 3 the land. And not only did he slay the impious that were living, but they also took from the 4 sepulchres the bones of the dead and burned them with fire. [And the festivals and the sabbaths he established in their sanctity], and their polluted ones he burnt in the fire, and the lying prophets which deceived the people, these also he burnt in the fire,and the people who listened to them when 5 they were living, he cast them into the brook Cedron, and heaped stones upon them. And he was zealous with zeal for the Mighty One with all his soul, and he alone was firm in the law at that time, so that he left none that was uncircumcised, or that wrought impiety in all the land, all the days of 6 his life. Therefore he shall receive an eternal reward, and he shall be glorified with the Mighty One 7 beyond many at a later time. For on his account and on account of those who are like him were 8 the honourable glories, of which thou wast told before, created and prepared. These are the bright waters which thou hast seen. 1 ‘And the black eleventh waters which thou hast seen: this is the calamity which is now befalling Zion. 2 Dost thou think that there is no anguish to the angels in the presence of the Mighty One, That Zion was so delivered up, And that lo! the Gentiles boast in their hearts, And assemble before their idols and say, “ She is trodden down who ofttimes trod down, And she has been reduced to servitude who reduced (others) ” ? 3 Dost thou think that in these things the Most High rejoices, Or that His name is glorified ? 4 [But how will it serve towards His righteous judgement ?] 5 Yet after these things shall the dispersed among the Gentiles be taken hold of by tribulation, And in shame shall they dwell in every place. 6 Because so far as Zion is delivered up And Jerusalem laid waste, Shall idols prosper in the cities of the Gentiles, And the vapour of the smoke of the incense of the righteousness which is by the law is extinguished in Zion, And in the region of Zion in every place lo! there is the smoke of impiety. -1 But the king of Babylon will arise who has now destroyed Zion, And he will boast over the people, And he will speak great things in his heart in the presence of the Most High. 8 But he also shall fall at last. These are the black waters. 2 ‘And the bright twelfth waters which thou hast seen: this is the word. For after these things a time will come when thy people shall fall into -distress, so that they shall all run the risk- of perishing together. Nevertheless, they will be saved, and their enemies will fall in their presence. w LXVI. 2. necromancers, i.e. JIN. Cf. 2 Kings xxi. 6. II BARUCH 68. 4—70. 8 4, 5 And they will have in (due) time much joy. And at that time after a little interval Zion will again be builded, and its offerings will again be restored, and the priests will return to their ministry, and 6, 7 also the Gentiles will come to glorify it. Nevertheless, not fully as in the beginning. But it will g come to pass after these things that there will be the fall of many nations. These are the bright waters which thou hast seen. 9: ‘For the last waters which thou hast seen which were darker than all that were before them, those 2 which were after the twelfth number, which were collected together, belong to the whole world. For 3 the Most High made division from the beginning, because He alone knows what will befall. For as to the enormities and the impieties which should be wrought before Him, He foresaw six kinds of 4them. And of the good works of the righteous which should be accomplished before Him, He foresaw six kinds of them, beyond those which He should work at the consummation of the age. 5 On his account there were not black waters with black, nor bright with bright; for it is the consummation. 1 ‘Hear therefore the interpretation of the last black waters which are to come [after the black]: this 2isthe word. Behold! the days come, and it shall be when the time of the age has ripened, And the harvest of its evil and good seeds has come, That the Mighty One will bring upon the earth and its inhabitants and upon its rulers Perturbation of spirit and stupor of heart. 3 And they shall hate one another, And provoke one another to fight, And the mean shall rule over the honourable, And those of low degree shall be extolled above the famous. 4 And the many shall be delivered into the hands of the few, And those who were nothing shall rule over the strong, And the poor shall have abundance beyond the rich, And the impious shall exalt themselves above the heroic. 5 And the wise shall be silent, And the foolish shall speak, Neither shall the thought of men be then confirmed, Nor the counsel of the mighty, Nor shall the hope of those who hope be confirmed. 6 And when those things which were predicted have come to pass, Then shall confusion fall upon. all men, And some of them shall fall in battle, And some of them shall perish in anguish, 7 And some of them shall be destroyed by their own. Then the Most High will reveal those peoples whom He has prepared before, And they shall come and make war with the leaders that shall then be left. 8 And it shall come to pass that whosoever gets safe out of the war shall die in the earthquake, And whosoever gets safe out of the earthquake shall be burned by the fire, And whosoever gets safe out of the fire shall be destroyed by famine. II BARUCH 70. 9--T4. 4 9 [And it shali come to pass that whosoever of the victors and the vanquished gets safe out of and 10 escapes all these things aforesaid will be delivered into the hands of My servant Messiah.] For all the earth shall devour its inhabitants. 71, ‘And the holy land shall have mercy on its own, And it shall protect its inhabiters at that time. 2,3 This is the vision which thou hast seen, and this is the interpretation. For I have come to tell thee these things, because thy prayer has been heard with the Most High. 721: Hear now also regarding the bright lightning which is to come at the consummation after these 2 black (waters): this is the word. After the signs have come, of which thou wast told before, when the nations become turbulent, and the time of My Messiah is come, he shall both summon all the 3 nations, and some of them he shall spare, and some of them he shall slay. These things therefore 4 shall come upon the nations which are to be spared by Him. Every nation, which knows not Israel 5 and has not trodden down the seed of Jacob, shall indeed be spared. And this because some out of 6 every nation shall be subjected to thy people. But all those who have ruled over you, or have known you, shall be given up to the sword. 73, ‘And it shall come to pass, when He has brought low everything that is in the world, And has sat down in peace for the age on the throne of His kingdom, That joy shall then be revealed, And rest shall appear. And then healing shall descend in dew, . And disease shall withdraw, And anxiety and anguish and lamentation pass from amongst men, And gladness proceed through the whole earth. Ny 3 And no one shall again die untimely, Nor shall any adversity suddenly befall. 4 And judgements. and revilings, and contentions, and revenges, And blood, and passions, and envy, and hatred, And whatsoever things are like these shall go into condemnation when they are removed. 5 or it is these very things which have filled this world with evils, And on account of these the life of man has been greatly troubled. 6 And wild beasts shall come from the forest and minister unto men, And asps and dragons shall come forth from their holes to submit themselves to a little child. 7 And women shall no longer then have pain when they bear, Nor shall they suffer torment when they yield the fruit of the womb. 74, ‘And it shall come to pass in those days that the reapers shall not grow weary, Nor those that build be toilworn ; For the works shall of themselves speedily advance Together with those who do them in much tranquillity. 2 For that time is the consummation of that which is corruptible, And the beginning of that which is not corruptible. 3 Therefore those things which were predicted shall belong to it : Therefore it is far away from evils, and near to those things which die not. 4 This is the bright lightning which came after the last dark waters.’ y. An interpolation? Verse 10 is the natural sequel to verse 8. The appearance of the Messiah and the extermination of the Gentiles are at least anticipated if not premature here. LXXI. See xxix. 2, note. ΘE live ts LXXII. 1. the bright lightning. The Syriac has ‘ the bright waters’, which contradicts the vision in liii. 7-11. The same emendation is necessary in Ixxiv. 4. The verb must be read in the sing. to agree with its subject. 4-6. The Messiah was to extend his dominion over the Gentiles (Ps. Ixxii. 11,17; Isa. xiv. 2; Ixvi. 12, 19-21 ; Zech. xiv; 1 En. xc. 20; Pss. Sol. xvii. 32). A harsher view grew up in the first century B.C. In 1 Enoch xxxvii-Ixx and Assumpt. Mos. x the Gentiles are to be annihilated; so in 4 Ezra xiii. 37, 38, 49, and later Judaism. The Messiah here, as in xxxix. 7-xl; 4 Ezra xii. 32, is a warrior who slays Israel’s enemies with his own hand. Cf. Isa. xi. 4. Contrast His passive réle in xxix. 2 of this book. ἘΣ XI t ΘO Corxvs 24,25: 6: Il BARUCH 75. 1—76. 4 LXXV. Baruch’s Hymn on the Unsearchableness of God's Ways and on His Mercies through which the Faithful shall attain to a blessed Consummation. 975.1 And I answered and said : ‘Who can understand, O Lord, Thy goodness ? For it is incomprehensible. 2 Or who can search into thy compassions, Which are infinite ? 3 Or who can comprehend Thy intelligence ? 4 Or who is able to recount the thoughts of Thy mind? 5 Or who of those who are born can hope to come to those things, Unless he is one to whom Thou art merciful and gracious? 6 Because, if assuredly Thou didst not have compassion on man, Those who are under Thy right hand, They could not come to those things, But those who are in the numbers named can be called. 7 But if, indeed, we who exist know wherefore we have come, And submit ourselves to Him who brought us out of Egypt, We shall come again and remember those things which have passed, And shall rejoice regarding that which has been. g But if now we know not wherefore we have come, And recognize not the principate of Him who brought us up out of Egypt, We shall come again and seek after those things which have been now, And be grieved with pain because of those things which have befallen.’ LXXVI. Baruch bidden to instruct the People for forty days and then to hold himself ready for his Assumption on the Advent of the Messiah. And He answered and said unto me: [‘Inasmuch as the revelation of this vision has been in- , terpreted to thee as thou besoughtest], hear the word of the Most High that thou mayst know what is to befall thee after these things. For thou shalt surely depart from this earth, nevertheless not unto death, but thou shalt be preserved unto the consummation of the times. Go up therefore to the top of that mountain, and there shall pass before thee all the regions of that land, and the figure of the inhabited world, and the top(s) of the mountains, and the depth(s) of the valleys, and the depths of the seas, and the number of the rivers, that thou mayst see what thou art leaving, and 4 whither thou art going. Now this shall befall after forty days. Go now therefore during these days and instruct the people so far as thou art able, that they may learn so as not to die at the last time, but may learn in order that they may live at the last times.’ LXXV-LXXVI. Here B? returns. Baruch addresses God and not Ramiel, who in ly. 4-Ixxiv. has been explaining the vision in liii. LXXV. 1. understand. Syriac reads lsooks =‘ be likened to *, which I have emended into sp \s =‘ understand ’, omitting the following >. at II BARUCH 77. 1-13 LXXVII. Baruch’s Admonition to the People and his writing of two Letters—one to the nine and a half tribes in Assyria and the other to the two and a half in Babylon. 771 And I, Baruch, went thence and came to the people, and assembled them together from the Ixxvii- 2 greatest to the least, and said unto them: ‘ Hear, ye children of Israel, behold how many ye are who Ἰχχχὶ 3 remain of the twelve tribes of Israel. For to you and to your fathers the Lord gave a law more 4 excellent than to all peoples. And because your brethren transgressed the commandments of the ἱ Most High, He brought vengeance upon you and upon them, And He spared not the former, And the latter also He gave into captivity : § : And He left not a residue of them, But behold! ye are here with me. i 6 If, therefore, ye direct your ways aright, Ye also shall not depart as your brethren departed, But they shall come to you. 7 For He is merciful whom ye worship, And He is gracious in whom ye hope, And He is true, so that He shall do good and not evil. 8 Have ye not seen here what has befallen Zion ? 9 Ordo ye perchance think that the place had sinned, And that on this account it was overthrown ? Or that the land had wrought foolishness, And that therefore it was delivered up? ro ἀπά know ye not that on account of you who did sin, That which sinned not was overthrown, And, on account of those who wrought wickedly, That which wrought not foolishness was delivered up to (its) enemies ?’ 11 And the whole people answered and said unto me: ‘So far as we can recall the good things which j the Mighty One has done unto us, we do recall them ; and those things which we do not remember ‘ 12 Hein His mercy knows. Nevertheless, do this for us thy people: write also to our brethren in Babylon an epistle of doctrine and a scroll of hope, that thou mayst confirm them also before thou dost depart from us. 13 For the shepherds of Israel have perished, And the lamps which gave light are extinguished, And the fountains have withheld their stream whence we used to drink. LXXVII-LXXXVI. These chapters belong to B! with the exception of Ixxxiii and Ixxxv. The chief differences between B! and B? are: in B* an earthly felicity is looked for, the dispersion is to return, and the earthly Jerusalem to be rebuilt; in B* none of these things are expected. In B! Baruch is to die, in B® to be translated; in B* Jeremiah is not sent to Babylon, in B? he is. LXXVII. 1. from the greatest to the least. This order belongs to the later books; cf. 2 Chron. xxxiv. 30; Esther i. 5, 20. Contrast Gen. xix. 11; 1 Sam. v. 93 Jer. vi. 13, &c. II] BARUCH 77. 14—78. 5 14 And weare left in the darkness, And amid the {trees of the forest}, And the thirst of the wilderness.’ 15 And I answered and said unto them: ‘Shepherds and lamps and fountains come from the law: And though we depart, yet the law abideth. 16 Iftherefore ye have respect to the law, And are intent upon wisdom, A lamp will not be wanting, And a shepherd will not fail, And a fountain will not dry up. 11 Nevertheless, as ye said unto me, I will write also unto your brethren in Babylon, and I will send by means of men, and I will write in like manner to the nine tribes and a half, and send by means of 18a bird.’ And it came to pass on the one and twentieth day in the eighth month that I, Baruch, came and sat down under the oak under the shadow of the branches, and no man was with me, but 19 I was alone. And I wrote these two epistles: one I sent by an eagle to the nine and a half tribes; 20 and the other I sent to those that were at Babylon by means of three men. And I called the eagle 21 and spake these words unto it: ‘ The Most High hath made thee that thou shouldst be higher than 22all birds. And now go and tarry not in (any) place, nor enter a nest, nor settle upon any tree, till - thou hast passed over the breadth of the many waters of the river Euphrates, and hast gone to the _ 23 people that dwell there, and cast down to them this epistle. Remember, moreover, that, at the time of the deluge, Noah received from a dove the fruit of the olive, when he sent it forth from the ark. 24, 25 Yea, also the ravens ministered to Elijah, bearing him food, as they had been commanded. Solo- mon also, in the time of his kingdom, whithersoever he wished to send or seek for anything, 26 commanded a bird (to go thither), and it obeyed him as he commanded it. And now let it not weary thee, and turn not to the right hand nor the left, but fly and go by a direct way, that thou mayst preserve the command of the Mighty One, according as I said unto thee.’ LXXVIII-LXXXVI. THE EPISTLE OF BARUCH THE SON OF NERIAH WHICH HE - WROTE TO THE NINE AND A HALF TRIBES. 1 These are the words of that epistle which Baruch the son of Neriah sent to the nine and a half 2 tribes, which were across the river Euphrates, in which these things were written. Thus saith Baruch 3 the son of Neriah to the brethren carried into captivity: ‘Mercy and peace. I bear in mind, my brethren, the love of Him who created us, who loved us from of old, and never hated us, but above 4 all educated us. And truly I know that behold all we the twelve tribes are bound by one bond, 5 inasmuch as we are born from one father. Wherefore I have been the more careful to leave you the words of this epistle before I die, that ye may be comforted regarding the evils which have come upon you, and that ye may be grieved also regarding the evil that has befallen your brethren; and again, also, that ye may justify His judgement which He has decreed against you that ye should be Il BARUCH 78. 6—82. 2 carried away captive—for what ye have suffered is disproportioned to what ye have done—in order 6 that, at the last times, ye may be found worthy of your fathers. Therefore, if ye consider that ye have now suffered those things for your good, that ye may not finally be condemned and tormented, then ye will receive eternal hope; if above all ye destroy from your heart vain error, on account of 7 which ye departed hence. For if ye so do these things, He will continually remember you, He who always promised on our behalf to those who were more excellent than we, that He will never forget or forsake us, but with much mercy will gather together again those who were dispersed. 1 Now, my brethren, learn first what befell Zion: how that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came 2 up against us. For we have sinned against Him who made us, and we have not kept the command- 3 ments which he commanded us, yet he hath not chastened us as we deserved. For what befell you we also suffer in a pre-eminent degree, for it befell us also. 80: And now, my brethren, I make known unto you that when the enemy had surrounded the city,
81.  the angels of the Most High were sent, and they overthrew the fortifications of the strong wall, and 2 they destroyed the firm iron corners, which could not be rooted out. Nevertheless, they hid all 3 the vessels of the sanctuary, lest the enemy should get possession of them. And when they had done these things, they delivered thereupon to the enemy the overthrown wall, and the plundered house, and the burnt temple, and the people who were overcome because they were delivered up, lest the enemy should boast and say: ‘ Thus by force have we been able to lay waste even the house of the 4 Most High in war.’ Your brethren also have they bound and led away to Babylon, and have caused 5, 6 them to dwell there. But we have been left here, being very few. This is the tribulation about 7 which I wrote to you. For assuredly I know that (the consolation of) the inhabitants of Zion consoleth you: so far as ye knew that it was prospered (your consolation) was greater than the tribulation which ye endured in having to depart from it. 1,2 But regarding consolation, hear ye the word. For I was mourning regarding Zion, and I prayed for mercy from the Most High, and I said : 3 * How long will these things endure for us Ὁ And will these evils come upon us always?’ 4 And the Mighty One did according to the multitude of His mercies, And the Most High according to the greatness of His compassion, And He revealed unto me the word, that I might receive consolation, And He showed me visions that I should not again endure anguish, And He made known to me the mystery of the times. And the advent of the hours he showed me. 82: Therefore, my brethren, I have written to you, that ye may comfort yourselves regarding the ty multitude of your tribulations. For know ye that our Maker will assuredly avenge us on all our enemies, according to all that they have done to us, also that the consummation which the Most High will make is very nigh, and His mercy that is coming, and the consummation of His judgement, is by no means far off. II BARUCH 82. 3—83. 12 8 For lo! we see now the multitude of the prosperity of the Gentiles, Though they act impiously, But they shall be like a vapour: 4 And we behold the multitude of their power, Though they do wickedly, But they shall be made like unto a drop: 5 And wesee the firmness of their might, Though they resist the Mighty One every hour, But they shall be accounted as spittle. 6 And we consider the glory of their greatness, Though they do not keep the statutes of the Most High, But as smoke shall they pass away. 7 And we meditate on the beauty of their gracefulness, Though they have to-do with pollutions, But as grass that withers shall they fade away. 8 And we consider the strength of their cruelty, ' Though they remember not the end (thereof), But as a wave that passes shall they be broken. 9 And we remark the boastfulness of their might, Though they deny the beneficence of God, who gave (it) to them, But they shall pass away as a passing cloud. 1 [For the Most High will assuredly hasten His times, Ixxxiii = nd He will assuredly bring on His hours. Bt 2 And He will assuredly judge those who are in His world, And will visit in truth all things by means of all their hidden works. 3 And He will assuredly examine the secret thoughts, And that which is laid up in the secret chambers of all the members of man. And will make (them) manifest in the presence of all with reproof. . 4 Let none therefore of these present things ascend into your hearts, but above all let us be expec- 5 tant, because that which is promised to us shall come. And let us not now look unto the delights 6 of the Gentiles in the present, but let us remember what has been promised to us in the end. For the ends of the times and of the seasons and whatsoever is with them shall assuredly pass by 7 together. The consummation, moreover, of the age shall then show the great might of its ruler, 8 when all things come to judgement. Do ye therefore prepare your hearts for that which before ye believed, lest ye come to be in bondage in both worlds, so that ye be led away captive here and be 9 tormented there. For that which exists now or which has passed away, or which is to come, in all these things, neither is the evil fully evil, nor again the good fully good. to For all healthinesses of this time are turning into diseases, 11 And all might of this time is turning into weakness, And all the force of this time is turning into impotence, 12 And every energy of youth is turning into old age and consummation. 3,4. avapour...adrop. Cf. 4 Ezra vii. 61, vi. 56 (Isa. xl. 15).' II BARUCH 83. 13--8ὅ. 2 And every beauty of graccfulness of this time is turning faded and hateful, 13 And every proud dominion of the present is turning into humiliation and shame, And every praise of the glory of this time is turning into the shame of silence, And every vain splendour and insolence of this time is turning into voiceless ruin. 15 And every delight and joy of this time is turning to worms and corruption, - 16 And every clamour of the pride of this time is turning into dust and stillness. 1 And every possession of riches of this time is being turned into Sheol alone, 18 And all the rapine of passion of this time is turning into involuntary death, And every passion of the lusts of this time is turning into a judgement of torment. 19 And every artifice and craftiness of this time is turning into a proof of the truth, 20 And every sweetness of unguents of this time is turning into judgement and condemnation, 21 And every love of lying is turning to contumely through truth. 22 Since therefore all these things are done now, does anyone think that they will not be avenged? But the consummation of all things will come to the truth.]
84.  1 Behold! I have therefore made known unto you (these things) whilst I live; for I have said (it) that ye should learn the things that are excellent; for the Mighty One hath commanded me to δ᾽ instruct you: and I will set before you some of the commandments of His judgement before I die. 2 Remember that formerly Moses assuredly called heaven and earth to witness against you and said; 3 ‘If ye transgress the law ye shall be dispersed, but if ye keep it ye shall be kept.’ And other 4 things also he used to say unto you when ye the twelve tribes were together in the desert. And after his death ye cast them away from you: on this account there came upon you what had been 5 predicted. And now Moses used to tell you before they befell you, and lo! they have befallen you : 6 for ye have forsaken the law. Lo! I also say unto you after ye have suffered, that if ye obey those things which have been said unto you, ye will receive from the Mighty One whatever has been laid “7 up and reserved for you. Moreover, let this epistle be for a testimony between me and you, that ye may remember the commandments of the Mighty One, and that also there may be to me a defence 8 in the presence of Him who sent me. And remember ye the Jaw and Zion, and the holy land and 9 your brethren, and the covenant of your fathers, and forget not the festivals andthe sabbaths. And deliver ye this epistle and the traditions of the law to your sons after you, as also your fathers 10 delivered (them) to you. And at all times make request perseveringly and pray diligently with your whole heart that the Mighty One may be reconciled to you, and that He may not reckon the 11 multitude of your sins, but remember the rectitude of your fathers. For if He judge us not accord- ing to the multitude of His mercies, woe unto all us who are born. 85: pore ye, moreover, that boxy n former times and in the generations of old our fathers had helpers, BS Righteous men and holy prophets: 2 Nay more, we were in our own land [And they helped us when we sinned], : IT-BARUE€H 85. 2-i2} And they interceded for us with Him who made us, isa share ἢ ἐπ re Because they trusted in their works], a: nd the Mighty One heard their prayer and forgave us. vs oe 3 But now the righteous have been gathered And the prophets have fallen asleep, And we also have gone forth from the land, And Zion has been taken from us, : And we have nothing now save the Mighty One and His law. 4 If therefore we direct and dispose our hearts, We shall receive everything that we lost, And much better things than we lost by many times. 5 For what we have lost was subject to corruption, _ And what we shall receive shall not be corruptible. 6 [Moreover, also, I have written thus to our brethren to Babylon, that to them also I may attest these very things. ] ah 7 And let all those things aforesaid be always before your eyes, Because we are still in the spirit and the power of our liberty. 8 Again, moreover, the Most High also is long-suffering towards us here, And He hath shown to us that which is to be, And hath not concealed from us what will befall in the end. 9 Before therefore judgement exact its own, - And truth that which is its due, Let us prepare our soul That we may possess, and not be taken possession of, And that we may hope and not be put toshame, And that we may rest with our fathers, and not be tormented with our enemies. 1o © For the youth of the world is past, ‘ And the strength of the creation already exhausted, And the advent of the times is very short, cae Yea, they have passed by ; And the pitcher is near to the cistern, And the ship to the port, And the course of the journey to the city, And life to (its) consummation. ir And again prepare your souls, so that when ye sail and ascend from the ship ye may have rest 12 ae not be condemned when ye depart. For lo! when the Most High will bring to pass all these ings, There shall not there be again [a place of repentance, nor] a limit to the times, Nor a duration for the hours, Nor a change of ways, Nor place for prayer, Nor sending of petitions, Nor receiving of knowledge, Nor giving of love, trusted in their works. The dead righteous avail not, only the living. See xiv. 7, note; Ixiii. 3. II BARUCH 88. 12—87. 1 Nor place of repentance for the soul, Nor supplication for offences, Nor intercession of the fathers, Nor prayer of the prophets, Nor help of the righteous. 13 There there is the sentence of corruption, The way of fire, And the path which bringeth to Gehenna.


# 3 Baruch (The Greek Apocalypse)

2.  AQ revelation of Baruch, who stood upon the river ¢ Gel weeping over the captivity of
3.  Jerusalem, when also Abimelech was preserved by the hand of God, at the farm of Agrippa. And he was sitting thus at the beautiful gates, where the Holy of holies lays 1: Verily I Baruch was weeping in my mind and sorrowing on account of the people, and that 2 Nebuchadnezzar the king was permitted by God to destroy His city, saying: Lord, why didst Thou set on fire Thy vineyard, and lay it waste? Why didst Thou do this? And why, Lord, didst Thou not requite us with another chastisement, but didst deliver us to nations such as these, so that they 3 reproach us and say, Where is their God? And behold as I was weeping and saying such things, I saw an angel of the Lord coming and saying to me: Understand, O man, greatly beloved, and trouble not thyself so greatly concerning the salvation of Jerusalem, for thus saith the Lord God, 4the Almighty. For He sent me before thee, to make known and to show to thee all (the things) 5, 60f God. For thy prayer was heard before Him, and entered into the ears of the Lord God. And when he had said these things to me, 1 was silent. And the angel said to me: Cease to provoke
7.  God, and I will show thee other mysteries, greater than these. And I Baruch said, As the Lord God liveth, if thou wilt show me, and I hear a word of thine, I will not continue to speak any longer.
8.  God shall add to my judgement in thé day of judgement, if I speak hereafter. And the angel of the powers said to me, Come, and I will show thee the mysteries of God. PROLOGUE. 2. Gel. James suggests that Kedron is meant. ‘ Part of the word has gone and KEA- has passed into TEA-.’ Cf. 2 Bar. v. 5; xxi. 13 xxxi. 2. Abimelech was preserved. See 4 Bar. iii. 9-v. 30, where it is recorded that Abimelech fell asleep in the garden of Agrippa at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and did not awake for sixty-six years. the farm of Agrippa. Rendel Harris (Rest of the Words of Baruch, p. 12) identifies this with the fertile valley below Solomon’s Pools, known as Solomon's Gardens. See Josephus, “4712. viii. 7. 3, ‘There was a certain place about fifty furlongs distant from Jerusalem, which is called Etham, very pleasant it is in fine gardens, and abounding in - rivulets of water; thither did he (Solomon) use to go out in the morning.’ Cf. Eccles. ii. 5 f. III BARUCH 5. :--8. 5 The First Heaven. 2: And he took me and led me where the firmament has been set fast, and where there was a river 2 which no one can cross, nor any strange breeze of all those which God created. And he took me and led me to the first heaven, and showed me a door of great size. And he said to me, Let us enter 3 through it, and we entered as though dorne on wings, a distance of about thirty days’ journey. And he showed me within the heaven a plain; and there were men dwelling thereon, with the faces of 4 oxen, and the horns of stags, and the feet of goats, and the haunches of lambs. And I Baruch asked the angel, Make known to me, I pray thee, what is the thickness of the heaven in which we journeyed, 5 or what is its extent, or what is the plain, in order that I may also tell the sons of men? And the angel whose name is }Phamael} said to me: This door which thou seest is the door of heaven, and as great as is the distance from earth to heaven, so great also is its thickness ; and again as great as is the distance (from North to South, so great) is the length of the plain which thou didst see. And again the angel of the powers said to me, Come, and I will show thee greater mysteries. But 6, 7 I said, I pray thee show me what are these men. And he said to me, These are they who built the tower of strife against God, and the Lord banished them. The Second Heaven. 31 And the angel of the Lord took me and led me to a second heaven. And he showed me there 2 also a door like the first and said, Let us enter through it. And we entered, being borne on wings 3 ἃ distance of about sixty days’ journey. And he showed me there also a plain, and it was full of 4 men, whose appearance was like ¢hat of dogs, and whose feet were like those of stags. And I asked 5 the angel: I pray thee, Lord, say to me who are these. And he said, These are they who gave Michael and the Logos (Quis rer. div. haeres, xiii), it is probable that the Philonic powers correspond with the archangels. Pfleiderer (oὔ. c¢., p. 43) thinks that the six Philonic powers are ultimately derived from ‘the six Amesha Spentas which surround the throne of Ahura Mazda, among whom the three chief are Vohu Mano, the Divine Logos; Asha Vahista, the Highest Righteousness; and Kshathra Vairya, the kingdom of Good-will—representatives, that is, of creative intelligence, power, and goodness, just as the highest Powers of Philo are.’ II. 1. where the firmament has been set fast. Cf. 1 En. xviii. 5 ; xxxiii. 2. ariver. According to James this river is the Ocean (Apoc. Pauli xxi; xxxi; Test. Abr. B viii; 1 En. xvii. 5 f.). But Ginzberg (/£) holds that it is ‘shoya OD (the upper waters), and quotes in support Gen. R. iv. 3 and Chag. 15a. no one can cross. Cf. Zos. ii oὐ δύνασαι διελθεῖν δi᾿ ἐμoῦ" oὐ yap δύναται ὁ ἄνθρωπος tὰ ὕδatά μou διακόψαι... κaὶ εἶπεν ἡ neφέλη" Zooe . .. δi᾽ ἐμoῦ oὐ διέρχεται πετεινὸν ἐκ toῦ κόσμou τούτου, oὐδὲ πnoὴ ἀνέμου oὐδὲ aὐtὸς ὁ ἥλioς, oὐδὲ 6 πειράζων ἐn tῷ κόσμῳ τούτῳ δύναται διελθεῖν Ov ἐμoῦ. breeze. The above passage from Zos. makes it likely that πnoή is to be translated ‘ breeze’ here, and not ‘ living creature’ as in ch. viii, and in Ps. cl. 6 (LXX). ec Ege a III BARUCH 8. s—4. 8 counsel to build the tower, for they whom thou seest drove forth multitudes of both men and women, to make bricks ; among whom, a woman making bricks was not allowed to be released in the hour of child-birth, but brought forth while she was making bricks, and carried her child in her apron, and 6 continued to make bricks. And the Lord appeared to them and confused their speech, when they 7 had built the tower to ¢he height of four hundred and sixty-three cubits. And they took a gimlet, and sought to pierce the heaven, saying, Let us see (whether) the heaven is made of clay, or of 8 brass, or of iron. When God saw this He did not permit them, but smote them with blindness and confusion of speech, and rendered them as thou seest. The Third Heaven. 1 And I Baruch said, Behold, Lord, Thou didst show me great and wonderful things; and now 2 show me all things for the sake of the Lord. And the angel said to me, Come, let us proceed. (And I proceeded) with the angel from that place about one hundred and eighty-five days’ 3 journey. And he showed me a plain and a serpent, which appeared to be two hundred plethra 4in length. And he showed me Hades, and its appearance was dark and abominable. And I said, 5 Who is this dragon, and who is this monster around him? And the angel said, The dragon is he 6 who eats the bodies of those who spend their life wickedly, and he is nourished by them. And this is Hades, which itself also closely resembles him, in that it also drinks about a cubit from 7 the sea, which does not sink at all. Baruch said, And how (does this happen)? And the angel said, Hearken, the Lord God made three hundred and sixty rivers, of which the chief of gall are Alphias, Abyrus, and the Gericus ; and because of these the sea does not sink. And I said, I pray thee show me which is the tree which led Adam astray. And the angel said to me, It is the vine, which the angel Sammael planted, whereat the Lord God was angry, and He cursed him and his plant, while also on this account He did not permit Adam to touch it, and therefore a woman... child-birth. Ginzberg (/Z) refers to a similar Rabbinic legend about a woman in Egypt (Pirke R. El. xlviii). IV. 2. let us proceed. There is no mention here of entry into a third heaven, and when the next heaven is entered in ch. x, the scribe has changed its number from fourth to third, as is evident from the fact that in ch. xi the fifth heaven is mentioned. At what point in the narrative is the entry made into the third heaven? In ch. vii the angel says to Baruch, ‘All that I showed thee is in the first and second heaven, and in the third heaven the sun passes through, and gives light to the world.’ It would harmonize with this to place the entry into the third heaven at the commencement of ch. vi. But against this is the fact that Hades (ch. iv) is usually located in the third heaven (cf. 2 En.). It seems best therefore to follow James in placing the transition here. It should be noted that the Slavonic account of the third heaven shows fewer signs of mutilation than the Greek. III BARUCH 4. 9—6. 3
9.  the devil being envious deceived him through his vine. [And I Baruch said, Since also the vine has been the cause of such great evil, and is under judgement of the curse of God, and was the
10.  destruction of the first created, how is it now so useful? And the angel said, Thou askest aright. When God caused the deluge upon earth, and destroyed all flesh, and four hundred and nine thousand giants, and the water rose fifteen cubits above the highest mountains, then the water entered into paradise and destroyed every flower; but it removed wholly without the bounds the shoot
11.  of the vine and cast it outside. And when the earth appeared out of the water,and Noah came out
12.  of the ark, he began to plant of the plants which he found. But he found also the shoot of the vine ; and he took it, and was reasoning in himself, What then is it? And I came and spake to
13.  him the things concerning it. And he said, Shall I plant it, or what ska//Z do? Since Adam was destroyed because of it, let me not also meet with the anger of God because of it. And saying
14.  these things he prayed that God would reveal to him what he should do concerning it. And when he had completed the prayer which lasted forty days, and having besought many things and wept,
15.  he said: Lord, I entreat thee to reveal to me what I shall do concerning this plant. But God sent his angel Sarasael, and said to him, Arise, Noah, and plant the shoot of the vine, for thus saith the Lord: Its bitterness shall be changed into sweetness, and its curse shall become a blessing, and that which is produced from it shall become the blood of God; and as through it the human race obtained condemnation, so again through Jesus Christ the Immanuel will they receive in Him the
16.  upward calling, and the entry into paradise]. Know therefore,O Baruch, that as Adam through this very tree obtained condemnation, and was divested of the glory of God, so also the men who now drink insatiably the wine which is begotten of it, transgress worse than Adam, and are far from the
17.  glory of God, and are surrendering themselves to the eternal fire. For (no) good comes through it. For those who drink it to surfeit do these things: neither does a brother pity Azs brother, nor a father 47s son, nor children ¢heiy parents, but from the drinking of wine come all evé/s, such as murders, adulteries, fornications, perjuries, thefts, and such like. And nothing good is established by it. 5 1,2 "And I Baruch said to the angel, Let me ask thee one thing, Lord. Since thou didst say to me 3 that the dragon drinks one cubit out of the sea, say to me also, how great is his belly? And the angel said, His belly is Hades; and as far as a plummet is thrown (by) three hundred men, so great is his belly. Come, then, that I may show thee also greater works than these. 6 x And he took me and led me where the sun goes forth ; and he showed me a chariot and four, 2 under which burnt a fire, and in the chariot was sitting a man, wearing a crown of fire, (and) the chariot (was) drawn by forty angels. And behold a bird circling before the sun, about nine 3 cubits away. And I said to the angel, What is this bird? And he said to me, This is the the devil being envious. Cf. Wisd. ii. 24; 2 En, xxxi. 3. 9-15. The passage in brackets is clearly an interpolation by the Christian redactor, who felt it necessary to modify the condemnation of wine, on account of its use in the Eucharist. «t tn III BARUCH 6. 4—7. 3 4, 5 guardian of the earth. And I said, Lord, how is he the guardian of the earth? Teach me. And the angel said to me, This bird flies alongside of the sun, and expanding his wings receives its fiery 6rays. For if he were not receiving them, the human race would not be preserved, nor any other 7 living creature. But God appointed this bird thereto. And he expanded his wings, and I saw on his right wing very large letters, as /arge as the space of a threshing-floor, the size of about four 8 thousand modii; and the letters were of gold. And the angel said to me,Read them. And I read, 9 and they ran thus: Neither earth nor heaven bring me forth, but wings of fire bring me forth. And 101 said, Lord, what is this bird, and what ishis name? And the angel said to me, His name is called 11 Phoenix. (And I said), And what does he eat? And he said to me, The manna of heaven and 12the dew of earth. And I said, Does the bird excrete? And he said to me, He excretes a worm, and the excrement of the worm is cinnamon, which kings and princes use. But wait and thou shalt 13 see the glory of God. And while he was conversing w7th me, there was as a thunder-clap, and the place was shaken on which we were standing. And I asked the angel, My Lord, what is this sound ? And the angel said to me, Even now the angels are opening the three hundred and sixty-five gates 14 of heaven, and the light is being separated from the darkness. And a voice came which said, Light- 15 giver, give to the world radiance. And when I heard the noise of the bird, I said, Lord, what is this 16 noise? And he said, This is the dtrd who awakens from slumber the cocks upon earth. For as men do through the mouth, so also does the cock signify to those in the world, in his own speech. For the sun is made ready by the angels, and the cock crows. 71,2 And I said, And where does the sun begin its labours, after the cock crows? And the angel said to me, Listen, Baruch: All things whatsoever I showed thee are in the first and second heaven, and in the third heaven the sun passes through and gives light to the world. But wait, and thou 3 shalt see the glory of God. And while I was conversing with him, I saw the bird, and he appeared III BARUCH 7. 4—9. 8 4 in front, and grew less and less, and at /ength returned to his full size. And behind him I saw the shining sun, and the angels which draw it, and a crown upon its head, the sight of which we were 5 not able to gaze upon, and behold. And as soon as the sun shone, the Phoenix also stretched out his wings. But I, when I beheld such great glory, was brought low with great fear, and I fled and 6 hid in the wings of the angel. And the angel said to me, Fear not, Baruch, but wait and thou shalt also see their setting. 1 And he took me and led me towards the west; and when the time of the setting came, I saw again the bird coming before z¢, and as soon as he came I saw the angels, and they lifted the crown 2,3 from its head. But the bird stood exhausted and with wings contracted. And beholding these things, I said, Lord, wherefore did they lift the crown from the head of the sun, and wherefore is 4 the bird so exhausted? And the angel said to me, The crown of the sun, when it has run through the day—four angels take it, and bear it up to heaven, and renew it, because it and its rays have been defiled upon earth ; moreover it is sorenewed each day. And I Baruch said, Lord, and where- 5 fore are its beams defiled upon earth? And the angel said to me, Because it beholds the lawlessness and unrighteousness of men, namely fornications, adulteries, thefts, extortions, idolatries, drunkenness, murders, strife, jealousies, evil-speakings, murmurings, whisperings, divinations, and such like, which are not well-pleasing to God. On account of these things is it defiled, and therefore is it renewed. 6 But thou askest concerning the bird, how it is exhausted. Because by restraining the rays of the 7 sun through the fire and burning heat of the whole day, it is exhausted thereby. For, as we said before, unless his wings were screening the rays of the sun, no living creature would be preserved. 1 And they having retired, the night also fell, and at the same time came the chariot of the 2 moon, along with the stars. And I Baruch said, Lord, show me it also, I beseech of thee, how 3 it goes forth, where it departs, and in what form it moves along. And the angel said, Wait and thou shalt see it also shortly. And on the morrow I also saw it in the form of a woman, and sitting on a wheeled chariot. And there were before it oxen and lambs in the chariot, and a multitude of 4 angels in like manner. And I said, Lord, what are the oxen and the lambs? And he said to me, 5 They also are angels. And again I asked, Why is it that it at one time increases, but at another 6 time decreases? And (he said to me), Listen, O Baruch: This which thou seest had been written 7 by God beautiful as no other. And at the transgression of the first Adam, it was near to Sammael when he took the serpent as a garment. And it did not hide itself but increased, and God was 8 angry with it, and afflicted it, and shortened its days. And I said, And how does it not also shine always, but only inthe night? And the angel said, Listen: as in the presence of a king, the courtiers cannot speak freely, so the moon and the stars cannot shine in the presence of the sun; for the stars are always suspended, but they are screened by the sun, and the moon, although it is uninjured, is consumed by the heat of the sun. III BARUCH 10. 1—11. 8 The Fourth Heaven. Ox: And when I had learnt all these things from the archangel, he took and led me into a fourth 23heaven. And I saw a monotonous plain, and in the middle of it a pool of water. And there were in it multitudes of birds of all kinds, but not like those here on earth. But I saw a crane as great as 4 great oxen; and all ¢he birds were great beyond those in the world. And I asked the angel, What 5 is the plain, and what the pool, and what the multitudes of birds around it? And the angel said, Listen, Baruch: The plain which contains in it the pool and other wonders is the place where the 6 souls of the righteous come, when they hold converse, living together in choirs. But the water is 7 that which the clouds receive, and rain upon the earth, and the fruits increase. And I said again to the angel of the Lord, But (what) ave these birds? And he said to me, They are those which 8 continually sing praise to the Lord. And I said, Lord, and how do men say that the water which 9 descends in rain is from the sea? And the angel said, 7e water which descends in rain—this also is from the sea, and from the waters upon earth; but that which stimulates the fruits is (only) from to the latter source. Know therefore henceforth that from this source is what is called the dew of heaven. The Fifth Heaven. .1,2 And the angel took me and led me thence to a fifth heaven. And the gate was closed. And I said, Lord, is not this gate-way open that we may enter? And the angel said to me, We cannot enter until Michael comes, who holds the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; but wait and thou shalt see 3 the glory of God. And there was a great sound, as thunder. And I said, Lord, what is this sound Ὁ 4 And he said to me, Even now Michael, the commander of ¢he angels, comes down to receive the 5 prayers of men. And behold a voice came, Let the gates be opened. And they opened chem, and 6 there was a roar as of thunder. And Michael came, and the angel who was with me came face to 7 face with him and said, Hail, my commander, and λa of all our order. And the commander Michael said, Hail thou also, our brother, and the interpreter of the revelations to those who pass through life 8 virtuously. And having saluted one another thus, they stood still. And I saw the commander X. 1. afourth heaven. Text reads τρίτον. iv. III BARUCH 11. 8—15. 2 Michael, holding an exceedingly great vessel ; its depth was as great as the distance from heaven to 9 earth, and its breadth as great as the distance from north to south. And I said, Lord, what is that which Michael the archangel is holding ? And he said to me, This is where the merits of the righteous enter, and such good works as they do, which are escorted before the heavenly God. 12 1 And as I was conversing with them, behold angels came bearing baskets full of flowers. And 2 they gave them to Michael. And I asked the angel, Lord, who are these, and what are the things 3 brought hither from beside them? And he said to me, These are angels (who) are over the 4, 5 righteous. And the archangel took the baskets, and cast them into the vessel. And the angel 6 said to me, These flowers are the merits of the righteous. And I saw other angels bearing baskets which were (neither) empty nor full. And they began to lament, and did not venture to draw near, 7 because they had not the prizes complete. And Michael cried and said, Come hither, also, ye 8 angels, bring what ye have brought. And Michael was exceedingly grieved, and the angel who was with me, because they did not fill the vessel. 131 And then came in like manner other angels weeping and bewailing, and saying with fear, Behold how we are overclouded, O Lord, for we were delivered to evil men, and we wish to depart from 2them. And Michael said, Ye cannot depart from them, in order that the enemy may not prevail to 3 the end; but say to me what ye ask. And they said, We pray thee, Michael our commander, transfer us from them, for we cannot abide with wicked and foolish men, for there is nothing good 4 in them, but every kind of unrighteousness and greed. For we do not behold them entering [into Church at all, nor among spiritual fathers, nor] into any good work. But where there is murder, there also are they in the midst, and where are fornications, adulteries, thefts, slanders, perjuries, jealousies, drunkenness, strife, envy, murmurings, whispering, idolatry, divination, and such like, 5 then are they workers of such works, and of others worse. Wherefore we entreat that we may depart from them. And Michael said to the angels, Wait till I learn from the Lord what shall come to pass. III BARUCH 15. 2—17. 4 it away, reward our friends an hundredfold, and those who have laboriously wrought good works. 3 For those who sowed virtuously, also reap virtuously. And he said also to those bringing the half-empty baskets, Come hither ye also; take away the reward according as ye brought, and 4 deliver z¢ to the sons of men. [Then he said also to those who brought the full and to those who brought the half-empty baskets: Go and bless our friends, and say to them that thus saith the Lord, Ye are faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things; enter into the joy of your Lord. 6: Al turning he said also to those who brought nothing: Thus saith the Lord, Be not sad of 2 countenance, and weep not, nor let the sons of men alone. But since they angered me in their works, go and make them envious and angry and provoked against a people that ts no people, a 3 people that has no understanding. Further, besides these, send forth the caterpillar and the unwinged locust, and the mildew, and the common locust (and) hail with lightnings and anger, and 4 punish them severely with the sword and with death, and their children with demons. For they did not hearken to my voice, nor did they observe my commandments, nor do ¢hem, but were despisers of my commandments, and insolent towards the priests who proclaimed my words to them. 1,2 And while he yet spake, the door was closed, and we withdrew. And the angel took me and 3 restored me to the place where 7 was at the beginning. And having come to myself, I gave glory 4 to God, who counted me worthy of such honour. Wherefore do ye also, brethren, who obtained such a revelation, yourselves also glorify God, so that He also may glorify you, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.


# 4 Ezra

3.  inhabitants on the other. And my spirit was stirred profoundly, and in my agitation I began to address the Most High. II. iii. 4-36. THE FIRST QUESTIONS: WHENCE ARISE THE SIN AND MISERY OF THE WORLD? How CAN ISRAEL’S CONTINUED AFFLICTION BE RECONCILED WITH THE DIVINE JUSTICE?
4.  And I said: »O Lord my Lord," was it not thou who in the beginning, when ° thou didst form the
5.  earth—and that thyself alone—didst speak and commandedst the dust, so that it gave thee Adam °, a lifeless body? But yet it was both itself the formation of thy hands and thou breathedst into
6.  him the breath of life, so that he was made living before thee. And thou leddest him into Paradise,
7.  which thy right hand did plant before ever the earth came forward ; and to him thou commandedst 4 one only observance of thine’, but he transgressed it. Forthwith thou appointedst death for him *and for his generations ὃ, and from him were born nations and tribes, peoples and clans innumerable.
8.  And every nation walked after their own will, and behaved wickedly before thee, and were ungodly
9.  —but thou didst not hinder them. Nevertheless again in (due) time thou broughtest the Flood to upon the earth and‘ upon the inhabitants of the world, and destroyedst them. And δ their fate 5
11.  was one and the same; as death (overtook) Adam, so the Flood (overwhelmed) these. Nevertheless one of them thou didst spare—Noah with his household (and with him) all the righteous his
12.  descendants, And it came to pass that when the inhabitants upon the earth began to multiply, and there were born" children also and peoples and nations many, that they began to practise
13.  ungodliness more than former (generations). And it came to pass that when they practised
14.  ungodliness before thee, thou didst choose thee one from among them whose name was Abraham : him
15.  thou didst love, and unto him only didst thou reveal ithe end of the times: secretly by night ; and with him thou didst make an everlasting covenant, and didst promise him that thou wouldst never
16.  forsake his seed. And thou gavest him Isaac, and to Isaac thou gavest Jacoband Esau. And thou
17.  didst set apart Jacob for thyself, but Esau thou didst hate; and Jacob became a great host. And it came to pass that when thou leddest forth his seed out of Egypt, and didst bring them to the Mount Sinai,
18.  Thou didst bow down the heavens, didst make the earth quake a-a For the lacuna here see the discussion on the previous page. b-b 3. ; O dominator Domine (A.V. O Lord that bearest rule) = Δέσποτα κυριε (Hiilg.): = 7 IN —&-¢_yeading plasmasti terram . . . et imperasti pulveri et dedit tibi Adam with BJ and Violet: so 9 (cf. Ethiop. Ar.1): Lat. MSS. plantasti terram .. . et imperasti populo (so. SA: orbi CM) tuo et dedisti Adam (so SA: Cf. the rendering of A.V.) %4 Ψ diligentiam unam tuam: fhe Oriental Versions render commandment (for this sense of diligentia o΄. Bensly, ‘ Missing Fragment’,p.56) 59:9 so S (cf. other Oriental Versions): & et in nationibus eius ff so 3 and Ethiop.; % Ar! > s-s % casus eorum: & their destruction (cf Ethiop.) — »-* so Ethiop.: ἘΞ», multiplicaverunt (so S$) {tὶ reading temporum finem with C Y IV EZRA 3. 18-34 - and convulsedst the world— Thou didst cause the deeps to tremble and didst alarm the spheres.
19.  And thy glory went through the four gates of fire, earthquake, wind, and cold, To give Law to Jacob’s seed and Commandment to the generation of Israel. zo And yet thou didst not take away from them the evil heart, that thy Law might bring forth fruit 2tinthem. For the first Adam, clothing himself with the evil heart, transgressed and was overcome ;
22.  and likewise also all who were born of him. Thus the infirmity became inveterate ; the Law indeed was in the heart of the people, but (in conjunction) with the evil germ ; so what was good departed,
23.  and the evil remained. So the times passed away and the years came to an end; and (then) thou
24.  didst raise up for thyself a servant whose name was David ; and thou commandedst him to build the
25.  City (which is called) after thy name, and to offer thee * oblations therein of thine own*. And after
26.  this had been done many years, the inhabitants of the City committed sin, in all things doing even as Adam and all his generations had done: for they also 'had clothed themselves with! the evil
28.  heart: and so thou gavest thy city over into the hands of thine enemies, Then I said in my heart:
29.  Are their deeds any better™ that inhabit Babylon? Has he for this "rejected" Sion? It came to pass when I came hither and saw ungodly deeds innumerable, and myself saw many sinners ° these Ἷ 30 thirty years °, that my heart ? was perturbed”: for I have seen how thou dost suffer the sinners and dost spare the ungodly, how thou hast destroyed thy people and preserved thine enemies ; i. 341 and hast not made known at all unto any how this course of thine shall be abandoned. Have the ) 32 deeds of Babylon been better than those of Sion? [Has any other nation known thee beside Israel ?
33.  Or what tribes have so believed thy covenants as those of Jacob ?—whose reward (nevertheless) hath not appeared nor their labour borne fruit! For I have gone hither and thither through the nations
34.  and seen them in prosperity, although unmindful of thy commandments. Now, therefore, weigh _ thou our iniquities, and those of the inhabitants of the world, in the balance and so shall be found (SA >): oἱ 3 Ethiop. j $+and a house k-k yeading in ea de tuis oblationes so CM = S: of. Ar.)-? (¢hus et oblationes, o£ A.V. and Vulg., is a corruption) ἘῚ so $ Ethiop.: & utebantur (emend to induebantur with Hilg.) m Ethiop.+than ours (cf. Az.) an so S Ar): 30 corrupt: dominabit SA (? read damnavit with Violet, or abominavit with Gunkel) °° so Ar. (Ethiop.) : 3» hoc tricesimo anno (a misrendering of original Hebrew) pp © excessit (= efearn) IV EZRA 8. 35—4. 7 R 35 Ὑ which way the turn of the scale inclines’. Or when was it that the inhabitants of the earth did
36.  not sin before thee ? Or what nation hath so kept thy precepts? * Individual men of note* indeed thou mayst find to have kept thy precepts; but nations thou shalt not find.] III. THE DivINE REPLY ; GOD’s WAYS ARE INSCRUTABLE. (iv. I-v. 19.) (a) iv. 1-11. The human spirit can only hope to understand dimly and in part (S). S4r1,2 Thereupon the angel answered me who had been sent to me, [and whose name was Uriel]; and he said to me: Thy heart hath utterly failed thee regarding this world; and thinkest thou to comprehend the way of the Most High? 8 Then said I: Yes, my Lord. And he answered me, and said: Three ways have I been sent to show thee, and three similitudes 4 to set before thee: if thou canst declare me one of these I also will show thee the way thou desirest to see, and teach thee * whence comes® the evil heart. 5 And I said: Speak on, my Lord. Then he said unto me: Come, weigh me the weight of the fire ; Or measure me ‘the measure ὁ of the wind, Or recall me the day that is past. 6 Then answered I and said: Who of the *earth-born" could ‘do so” that thou shouldst ask me ‘about such matters ? » And he said to me: Had I asked thee How many dwellings are in the heart of the sea? Or * how many springs in the source of the deep? Or how many * ways * above the firmament ? ἡ Or where are the portals of Hades ? Or where the paths of Paradise ? 4-4 © momentum (zferior 77.5.5. nomen tuum) puncti ubi declinet rr & homines per nomina 8-8 read- ing unde sit (wth one Codex); quare sit SACM=S Ethiop. Ar? tt reading satum = ὁ (cf. Ethiop. Ar2) for flatuum SCM u-u % natorum V reading hoc facere (A* *); cf 3 Ethiop. Ar* Arm.; other Latin MSS. > hoc w-W so Ar} Ethiop. & quantae venae x-x emending venas of & Zo viae (cf. S Ethiop. Arm.) ¥-¥ so S$ and other Oriental VSS. > (by homoioteleuton ; cf. next clause) 2-2 so Oriental IV EZRA 4. 8-22 8 Perchance thou wouldst have said to me: Into the deep I have not descended, nor as yet *gone down” into Hades; Neither to heaven have I ever ascended, *nor entered Paradise *. But now I have only asked thee of the fire, the wind, and the day ” that is past ?,\—things without which thou canst not be; and yet thou hast vouchsafed me no answer about them! to He said moreover unto me: ° What belongs to thee "the things that have intermingled with thy 11 growth—thou art incapable of understanding ; how then should thy vessel be able to comprehend the way of the Most High? 4 For the way of the Most High has been formed without measure 4, * how, then, should it be possible for a mortal in a corruptible world to understand the ways of the Incorruptible ° ? (6) iv. 12-21. The dialogue continued: it is foolish and senseless to demand what is against nature (S). 12 ‘[And when I heard these things I fell upon my face]‘ and said unto him: It would have been better 5 that we had never been created 8 than having come [into the world] to live in sins and suffer, and not "to know " why we suffer. 13 And heanswered me and said: ‘ Once upon a time the woods of the trees of the field went forth; 14 and took counsel, and said : Come, let us go and make war against the sea, that it may retire before 15 us, and we will make us J more woodsj. In like manner also the waves of the sea took counsel, and said: Come, let us go up and wage war against the wood of the field, that there also we may win us 17 more territory. The counsel of the wood was in vain, for the fire came and consumed it ; likewise, 18 also, the counsel of the waves of the sea, for the sand * stood up* and stopped them, If thou, now, 19 hadst been judge between them whom wouldst thou have justified or whom condemned? I answered and said: Both have taken a foolish counsel ; for to the wood the land has been assigned, and ! to the sea a place! to bear its waves. zo Then he answered me and said: Thou hast judged aright ; but why hast thou not given judgement 21 in thine own case? For just as the earth has been assigned tothe wood, and ™ the place of the sea to bear its waves™; even so the dwellers upon earth can understand only what is upon the earth, » and they who are above the heavens” that which is above the heavenly height. (c) iv. 22-32. The dialogue continued: The seer protests that his perplexities are occasioned by the daily experiences of earth. He is told that the new age which is about to dawn will solve all difficulties (S). 22 Then answered I and said: I beseech thee, O Lord, wherefore have I been endowed with an ᾿ VSS. 2% > a-a so Ethiop. Arm. (cf. Ar); £3 > b-b so Ethiop. (cf Ar): & per quae (= S$; v. 1. quem) transisti c-e © quae tua sunt: S E¢thiop. (one reading) Arm. > d-d s9 3 oe (ff. Ar. Arm.): & > (by homoioteleuton) 9.9 so % substantially (nor is it possible, &c.): cf Ethiop. Ar: & et iam exteritus corrupto saeculo intellegere incorruptionem ? ff so Oriental Versions: & corrupt 8-8 so Ethiop.: & nos non adesse h-h reading intellegere (= 3 Ar} Arm.): for intellexi(SAC) 1 soS(f. Ethiop.): Lis corrupt 1} Walias silvas: 3 Ethiop. a new wood kk so & stetit (= earn) = S$ Ar.'; but Ethiop. and Arm. stayed (= εστησε) ἘῚ yeading mari locus (C, &c.); but S A maris locus = $ m-m s9 $: £ et mare fluctibus suis n—n 7% qui super coelos: Ar.? Arm. interpret as plural (they who are above the heavens): 3% as szmg. (he who is above, &c.) om g. things without which thou canst not be. Man cannot live apart from wind, warmth, and the passing day ; cf. for the thought Wisd. ix. 16. to. What belongs to thee—the things . . . thy growth. The ‘things’ referred to include fire and wind, two of the four primal elements (fire, wind, earth, and water); for these cf. Wisd. vii. 17, xiii. 1, xix. 18 (tὰ στοιχεῖα). There may be an allusion, as Gunkel suggests, to man’s living organism (the microcosm) being compounded of the elements (cf. viii. 8), This view is of Oriental origin. thy vessel. The body is the ‘ vessel’ of the soul or understanding. (6) iv. 12-21. In answer to Salathiel’s despairing interjection the archangel further enforces the point of the preceding paragraph by a parable, taken from the sea and the forest. The idea of the sea being held in check and kept within escribed bounds by the divine power is an ancient one, and forms the motive of some early mythological Creation πo re aad vii. 12, xxxviii. 8f.). The application of the idea to the wood seems to be original to the apocalyptist so Gunkel), 5 IV EZRA 4. 23-34 23 understanding to discern? For I meant not to ask ° about the ways above°® but of those things we daily experience ; Why is Israel to the heathen given over for reproach, thy beloved people to godless tribes given up ἢ The Law of our fathers ἢ has been brought to destruction ?, the written covenants exist no more ; 24 We vanish from the world as locusts, our life is 1 85 a breath % 25 We indeed are not worthy to obtain mercy ; but what will he do for his own name whereby we are called? It is about these things that I have asked. The Answer. 26 Then he answered me and said: * If thou survive* thou shalt see, and if thou livest long thou shalt marvel ; for the age is hastening fast to its end. 27 Because it is unable to bear the things promised * in their season * to the righteous ; for this age is full of sorrow and impotence. 28 For the evil ‘concerning which thou askest me is sown, but "the ingathering of it" is not yet 209 come. Unless, therefore, that which is sown be reaped, and unless the place where the evil is sown 30 Shall have passed away, the field where the good is sown cannot come. For a grain of evil seed was sown in the heart of Adam from the beginning, and how much fruit of ungodliness has it produced unto this time, and shall yet produce until the threshing-floor come ! 31 Reckon up, now, in thine own mind: ‘if’ a grain of evil seed has produced so much fruit of 32 ungodliness, when once the ears “of the good seed™ shall have been sown without number, how great a floor shall they be destined to fill ? (@) iv. 33-43. The dialogue continued. In reply to his question, When shall these things be? the seer receives the answer— When the number of the righteous is complete (S). 33 Then Ianswered and said: * How long and when* shall these things (be coming to pass)? ¥ For? our years are few and evil. 34 And he answered me and said: Thy haste may not exceed that of the Most High; for thou art hastening 5 for thine own self 5, but the Exalted One on behalf of many. °-° yeading de superioribus viis (C) = S$ Ethiop. Ar2: de superioribus tuis S A »-P veading in interitum (S A); C M in inritum (so B/) 9-4 yeading ut vapor = ὁ Ethiop.: ut pavor SAM rr so Ethiop. (= eav μenῃς) : © si fueris (= ἐan μen ns) s-s # in temporibus: S$ Ethiop. > tt reading de quo . . . de eo (cf 3 Ethiop.): de uibusSA = *"_yveading destrictio ipsius (S A*): v. 2. destructio -Y so Ethiof.: LS > -* so Ethiop.: > xX reading usquequo et quando (= S Ethiop, Arm.): quo (for usquequo) SA IY so 3 Ethiop.: 2X quare 5:5 reading propter temetipsum = 8 Ethiop. 3» corrupt. a8 so 3 Ethiop.: & usquequo spero sic reply that the present age is hastening to its close, and that the new age which is about to dawn will solve all difficulties (v. 26). It is further explained to him why the present state of things must go on fora time. The harvest of evil must first be reaped before something better can take its place (vv. 27-32). Cf. the reference in a similar connexion to the harvest of good and bad seed in 2 Baruch Ixx. 2. IV EZRA 4. 25-41 35 Were not these questions of thine asked by the souls of the righteous in their chambers ? ® How long are we (to remain) here?* When cometh the fruit upon the threshing-floor of our reward ?’ 36 And to them the archangel Jeremiel made reply, and said: Even when the number ἢ of those like yourself» is fulfilled ! ; For he has weighed the age in the balance,
37.  And with measure has measured the ¢ times °, And by number has numbered the ὃ seasons °: Neither will he move nor stir things, till the measure ‘appointed ἃ be fulfilled. 8,39 Then I answered and said: O Lord my Lord, ° but behold ® we are all full of ungodliness. Is it, perchance,’ on our account that 5 the threshing-floor of the righteous is kept back *—on account of the sins of the dwellers upon earth ?
40.  So he answered me and said: Go and ask the woman who is pregnant, when she has completed her nine months, if her womb can keep the birth any longer within her?
41.  Then said I: No, Lord, it cannot. And he said to me: "The underworld and the chambers of b-» reading similium vobis = S$ Ethiop. Ar.?: seminum SAC M (corrupt) c-e (6: 0) # tempora ... tempora: 5S times... hours (changing expression, prob. rightly) ἀ- ἃ & praedicta θtθ so Ethiop. (and 3 by an easy emendation): & sed et (? read ecce for et) tf so Ethiop.: & et ne forte (? vead num forte) 8-8 reading prohibeatur iustorum area (C Mὴ = Ethiop. (σ΄. $): v. /. impleatur (S A), non impleantur (iustorum areae) ἈΠE so S Ethiop. (hence Violet emends & infernum et promptuaria animarum): % (MSS.) in inferno promptuaria animarum IV EZRA 4. 42-52 S 42 souls" are like the womb: for just as she who is in travail makes haste to escape the anguish of the
43.  travail; even so do these places hasten to deliver what has been entrusted to them from the beginning. Then to thee it shall be showed concerning those things that thou desirest to see. (6) iv. 44-50. The dialogue continued. In reply to a further question, the seer is shown by a similitude that the End will come soon (S).
44.  Then I answered and said: If I have found favour in thy sight, and if it be possible, and if I be
45.  sufficient, show me this also: whether there be more to come than is past, or whether the more part
46.  is already gone by us? For what is gone by I know, but what is to come I know not. 41 And he said to me: Stand to the right, and I will explain the meaning of a similitude unto thee.
48.  So I stood, and saw, and lo! a blazing furnace passed by before me; and it happened that when the flame had gone by I looked and lo! the smoke remained still.
49.  Thereupon there passed by before me a cloud full of water, and sent down much rain with a storm ; and when the rain-storm was past the drops remained therein still. 5° Then said he unto me: Consider for thyself; for as the rain is more than the drops, and as the fire is greater than the smoke, so has the measure of what is past exceeded by far; but there are still left over—the drops and the smoke! (f) iv. 51-v. 13. The signs which precede the End (E) (R).
51.  Then I made supplication, and said: Thinkest thou that I shall live until those days? μoὶ shall be (live) in those days?
52.  He answered me, and said: [As for the signs concerning which thou askest me, I may tell thee (so B/) 11 D vel quis; so 3: but Ethiop. Ar Ar? What [shall happen in those days] 25} reading in excessu departed spirits]; xlviii. 16, lii. 6, lvi. 6). But in v. 35 the Zromptuaria are undoubtedly the chambers containing the souls of the righteous dead. It would be strange if a few verses later the same expression were used, without any limiting phrase, to denote something else. In this case the Ὁ Loe (underworld, Sheol) will be a general term for the abode of the souls of the wicked dead, where they await the final judgement. This is the meaning of Sheol (Hades), apparently, in the Johannine Apocalypse, where Hades and Death are always combined, and (like the wicked) are consigned to the lake of fire (cf. Rev. i. 18; vi. 8; xx. 13, 14; and see Charles, Eschatology, p. 352). (e) iv. 44-50. The seer now asks, but in a more subdued and less impatient manner, whether more of the drama remains to be enacted than what is already past. He is shown a vision of fire and storm, of which nothing remains, after they have gone by, but the smoke and the rain-drops, and is told that in a like manner the greater part of the world’s history that precedes the End is already past. IV EZRA 4. 52—5. 7 Sof them in part; but] concerning thy life I have not been sent to speak to thee, nor have I any knowledge (thereof). 1 Concerning the signs, however : Behold, the days come when the inhabitants of earth shall be seized } with great panic), And the way of truth shall be hidden, _ and the land be barren of faith. 2 And iniquity shall be increased above that which thou thyself now seest or that thou hast heard of 3 long ago, And the land that thou seest now to bear rule ‘shall be a pathless waste*; and men 4 shall see it forsaken: if the Most High grant thee to live, thou shalt see it after 'the third (period) in confusion '. Then shall the sun suddenly shine forth by night and the moon by day: 5 And blood shall trickle forth from wood, and the stone utter its voice: The peoples shall be in commotion, ™the outgoings (?) (of the stars) ™ shall change. 6 And one whom the dwellers upon earth do not look for shall wield sovereignty, and the birds shall take to general flight, Ἴ and “the sea” shall cast forth its fish. ot one °whom ° the many do not know will make his voice heard by night; and all shall hear is voice. multo = $ (cf. Ethiop.); Lat. MSS. incensu multo k-k yeading erit incomposita [et sine] vestigio with BJ ; (bracketed words not in Lat. MSS.): Violet reads et erit incomposito vestigio, ‘7 umordentlichen Triimmern’: 5S unstable and untrodden ll yeading post tertiam turbatam (C) [tubam A] m-m 7 gressus (egressos 5): 3 = dépes (so Ar} Ar): Ethiop. = ἀστέρες n-n 30, mare Sodomiticum (corrected text): so Oriental VSS.; but Sodomiticum 2γoό. to be deleted °° reading quem for quam in part. The description here is supplemented in vi. 11-28. v. 3. the land, &c. The Roman Empire is, of course, meant. shall be a pathless waste. Lit. ‘ shall be disordered and pathless’ (corrected text ; see crit. note). In EZRA 5. 8-19 8 P And the earth o’er wide regions shall open? and fire burst forth for a long period: The wild beasts shall desert their haunts, 4and women bear monsters 4. vi. 21 (And one-year-old children shall speak with their voices; pregnant women shall bring forth 22 untimely births at three or four months, and these shall live and *dance*. And suddenly shall the sown places appear unsown, and the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty.) v.9 Salt waters shall be found in the sweet ; friends shall attack one another * suddenly ". 10 Then shall intelligence hide itself, and wisdom withdraw to its chamber— by many shall be sought and not found. ti And unrighteousness and incontinency shall be multiplied upon the earth. One land shall also ask another and say: Is Righteousness—that doeth the right—passed through thee? And it shall answer, No. 12 And it shall be In that time men shall hope and not obtain, shall labour and not prosper. 13 Such are the signs I am permitted to tell thee ; but if thou wilt pray again, and weep as now, and fast seven days, thou shalt hear again greater things than these. IV. v. 14-19. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION (S). 14 [Then I awoke, and my body trembled greatly; my soul also was wearied even unto fainting. 15 But the angel who came and spake with me took hold of me, strengthened me, and set me up upon my feet. 16 And in the second night Phaltiel, the captain of the people, came unto me, and said: Where hast 17 thou been? And why is thy countenance sad? Or knowest thou not that Israel has been entrusted 18 unto thee in the land of their exile? Rouse thyself, then, and eat a morsel of bread, and do not desert us as a shepherd does (who leaves) his flock in the power of noxious wolves ! 19 Then said I unto him: Depart from me, and come not nigh me for seven days; then thou mayst come unto me tand I will explain matters unto thee‘. And when he heard what I said he left me. P-P = aὶ (χασμα or χασματα for xaos): & et chaus fiet per loca multa 1-4 so ᾧ (cf. Ethiop.): & et mulieres parient menstruatae monstra (menstruatae = a corrupt doublet of monstra) tt yeading scirtiabuntur (C) 8-8 so aὶ Ethiop.; & omnes tt so 3 (σ΄. Ethiop.): L> depart hence’, which he relates as a portent (Jew7sh War, vi. 5. 3 [299]; in the same context he relates other similar ‘portents’). Pe The aa o’er wide regions shall open, lit. ‘a fissure (reading xάσμa for xάoς : see crit. note) shall arise over wide regions’; cf. Zech. xiv. 4. The Armenian also supports this reading. The fissure starts and spreads over a widening area (fer loca multa). vi. 21-22. And one-year-old children, &c. These verses, which are obviously out of harmony with their present context in chapter vi, find an appropriate place here. For the feature referred to cf. Matt. xxiv. 19. v. 9. friends shall attack one another suddenly. Cf. vi. 24. IV EZRA 5. 20-30 THE SECOND VISION. (v. 2c—vi. 34.) I. v. 20-22. INTRODUCTION. 9 20,21 Sol fasted seven days, mourning and weeping, even as the angel Uriel commanded me. And _ 22 after the seven days the thoughts of my heart began to oppress me again grievously ; then my soul recovered the spirit of understanding, and I began once more to address the Most High. II. v. 23-40. THE PRAYER AND ITS ANSWER. (a) The prayer (v. 23-30.) 23 And I said: O Lord my Lord, "out of all the woods ἃ of the earth and all the trees thereof thou 24 hast chosen ‘thee’ one “vine ; out of all the lands of the world thou hast chosen thee one 25 planting-ground ; out of all the flowers of the world thou hast chosen thee one lily; out of all the depths of the sea thou hast replenished for thyself one river ; out of all the cities that have been built 26 thou hast sanctified Sion unto thyself; out of all birds that have been created thou hast called for thyself one dove ; out of all the cattle that have been formed thou hast provided thee one sheep ; 27 and out of all the peoples who have become so numerous thou hast gotten thee one people: and the law * which thou didst approve out of all (laws)* thou hast bestowed upon the people whom thou didst desire. 28 And now, O Lord, why hast thou delivered up the one unto the many, and dishonoured the one root above the rest, and scattered thine only one among the multitude? 29 And (why) have ¥ they who denied thy promises been allowed to tread under foot those that have 30 believed thy covenants’? If thou didst so much hate thy people they ought to have been punished with thine own hands. uu so aὶ (of. Ar): Hex omni silva (= Ethiop~.) —_Y-Y so Oriental VSS.: BΞ» —¥-* so Oriental VSS.: 3") vineam (vineyard) xx so Ethiop.: & ab omnibus probatam legem TῸ reading conculcaverunt qui contradicebant sponsionibus tuis eos qui tuis testamentis credebant (Lat. MSS. have quique for eos qui): so Oriental VSS. (see B/) THE SECOND VISION (n. 20-vi. 34). After a further fast of seven days the seer (Salathiel) again makes complaint to God. Why has God’s chosen and beloved people Israel been given up to oppressors? (v. 20-30). The angel answers, as before, by showing that man is unable to ad a the things nearest to himself; how then can he hope to fathom the judgements of God, or compass God’s love? (v. 31-40). The dialogue is continued by the seer asking what the lot of those shall be who have died before the End comes, and is told that their lot will not be worse or better than that of those who survive. The place of successive generations in the divine plan of the world is set forth in a series of striking analogies. The feebleness of age is, the angel declares, manifested in Mother Earth (v. 41-55). In the section that follows (v. 56-vi. 6) the prophet is assured that the End of the present age and the inauguration of the new order shall come by the agency of God alone. The present age of heathen (Roman) oppressors shall be succeeded by the glorious incorruptible age (vi. 7-10). A long passage detailing the signs of the last time and the End follows (vi. 11-28) and the vision concludes (vi. 30-34). The vision thus falls into the following divisions— i. Introduction (v. 20-22) (S). ii. The seer’s prayer and its answer (v. 23-40), viz. (a) The prayer (v. 23-30) and (Ὁ) the answer (v. 31-40) (S). j iii. The place of successive generations in the divine plan of the world (v. 41-55). , iv. Zhe End of the age shall come by God alone (n. 56-vi. 6). v. The parting asunder of the times (vi. 7-10) (S). vi. The signs of the last time and the coming of the End (vi. 11-28 (29)) (E). vii. Conclusion of the vision (vi. 30-34). v. 23-40. This section falls into two parts, viz. (a) the prayer of Salathiel (Ezra) (v. 23-30); and (4) the answer conveyed in a dialogue by the archangel Uriel (v. 31-40). (a) v. 23-30. THE PRAYER OF SALATHIEL (Ezra). Following on a carefully constructed exordium, which emphasizes in a variety of well-chosen figures Israel’s unique position as the chosen people of God, Salathiel (Ezra) appeals to God once more with the question, Why has the beloved people been given up to heathen oppressors? Why has it been allowed to go into exile and be scattered? IV EZRA 5. 31-41 (4) The answer: in spite of all God loves Israel now and always (v. 31-40). S 31 Now when 1 had spoken these words the angel who had before come to me on the previous night 32 was sent unto me: and he said to me: Hear me, and I will instruct thee: Attend unto me, and I will speak again before thee. 33 And I said: Speak on, my lord. And he said: Art thou in sore perplexity of mind touching Israel? Lovest thou him better than he that made him ? 34 And I said: No, lord: but of very grief have I spoken; for every hour I suffer agonies of soul in striving to comprehend the way of the Most High, and to seek out “the decree of his judgement *. 35 _ And he said unto me: Thou canst not. And I said: Wherefore, Lord? Why then was I born? Wherefore did not my mother’s womb become my grave that I might have been spared the sight of Jacob’s misery, and the distressful toil of the stock of Israel ? 36 And he said unto me: Number me * the days that are not yet come 4, gather me the rain-drops that are scattered, make me the withered flowers bloom again ; 37 Open me the chambers that are closed and bring me forth ἢ the spirits shut up in them ; [° Show me the image of faces thou hast never seen °] or show me the image of a voice; and then I will display to thee ‘the objective 4 thou askest to see. 38 And I said: O Lord my Lord, why who is able to understand such matters save he who has not his dwelling among men? 39 As for me, Iam unwise °and powerless*: how then should I essay to speak of these things of which thou questionest me ? 40 Then said he unto me: Just as thou art unable to do even one of these things that have been mentioned, even so thou art powerless to discover my judgement or the goal of the love that I have declared unto my people. III. THE PLACE OF SUCCESSIVE GENERATIONS IN THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE WORLD (v. 41-55). (a) v. 41-49. The succession of generations accords with the Divine plan ; God's judgement reaches all alike. 41 And Isaid: But lo, O Lord, ‘thou art ready to meet (with blessing)’ those who survive in the end ; but what shall our predecessors do, or we ourselves or our posterity ὃ Ethiop. Ar.): & > If reading praees = προφθαινεις (DPN): S thou hast promised (cf Ethiop.): Violet emends 2-2 © partem iudiciieius: cf. viii.18. tὸ so Ethiop, Ar’: & qui necdum venerunt (those who are not yet come) (cf.8): prob. taς npepas had fallen out ¥ the text rendered by & »-» so Ethiop. Ar: & flatos (Ξξ 3) “to so 3 (supported by Ethiop. Ar+): ἘΣ» d-d Ψ laborem (= κoπὸn : prob. a mistake for oxonov: cf. Ar2: so Hilg.) 9: so 3 (Ὁ. (4) v. 31-40, THE ANSWER TO THE PRAYER. The archangel Uriel is again sent to reason with him in answer to his complaint. As in iv. 1-11, Uriel, by a series of hard questions, demonstrates to the seer his inability to fathom God’s ti ad or comprehend the ‘ goal’ of the divine love for the chosen people. The dialogue form is here resumed. 3 ; IV EZRA 5. 42-55 42 And he said unto me: I will liken my judgement to a ring; just as there is no retardation of them that are last, even so there is no hastening of those that are first. 43 Thereupon I answered and said: Couldst thou not have created them all at once—those who have been, those who (now) exist, and those who are to be—that thou mightst display thy judgement the sooner ? 44 He answered me and said: The creation may not proceed faster than the Creator ; nor could the world hold all at once those created in it. 45 And Isaid: How then is it that thou hast (just now) said to thy servant that £thou wilt verily quicken all at once the creation created by thee? "TE then, they (i.e. all of the created) shall indeed be alive all at once," and ‘creation: shall be able to sustain them, it might even now support them (all) present at once. 46 And he said unto me: Ask the womb of a woman, and say unto it: If thou bringest forth ten children, why (dost thou bring them forth) each in its own time? Demand, therefore, that it produce ten all at once. 41 And I said: It cannot possibly, but (only each) in its own time. 48 Then said he unto me: J Thus have I also made the earth the womb for those J * who, in their own 49 time, are conceived by it*. For just as the young child does not bring forth, nor she that is aged any more, so have 'I also! disposed the world which I have created ™ by defined periods of time™. (0) v. 50-55. The Earth has grown old and its offspring degenerate. 50 Thereupon I asked "him® and said: Seeing thou hast now showed me the way, I would fain speak (further) before thee. °Is our mother,? of whom thou hast told me, still young? Or does she now approach old age? - 51,52 He answered me and said: Ask a woman who has borne (children), and let her tell thee; say to her: Why are (the children) whom thou hast lately brought forth not like the first, but inferior ? in
53.  stature®? And she also shall answer thee: Those that are born in vigorous youth are of one
54.  fashion, and those born in old age, when the womb fails, are otherwise. Consider, therefore, thou
55.  also that ye are inferior in stature in comparison with your predecessors ; and so, also, (will be) your posterity than yourselves: even as creation is already grown old, and is already past the strength of youth. zo promittis 8-8 reading vivificans vivificabis (so S Ethiop. Ar.'): vivificans vivificabit S A h-h yestoring si ergo viventes vivent in unum = S$: >S AC M (by homoioteleuton) i-i so iL: Ethiop. the world 4. so 3: % et ego dedi matricem terrae his k-k 3 qui seminati sunt super eam per tempus 1 so S$ Ethiop. (= κaγω) : Hego ™™ so Ethiop. (Ar): HS > πὰ so Oriental VSS.: & > °° reading num mater nostra (num for nam) = $ PP so ©: Lthiop.in strength: Ar.’ in stature and strength (so v. 54): S=HZ generations inferior to those who were born in their mother’s youth? [ἢ reply he is told that the Earth is now grown old—‘ past the strength of youth’—and that there is a corresponding degeneracy in the latest-born generations (v. 49-55). The eagerness of the seer that the End of the present world should be hastened is a striking feature. 5 5 I IV EZRA 4. 56—6. 5 IV. THE END OF THE AGE SHALL COME BY THE AGENCY OF GOD ALONE. (v. 56-vi. 6). Then said I: O Lord, I beseech thee, if I have found favour in thy sight, show thy servant 4 by whom ἃ thou wilt visit thy creation. And he said unto me: 'In the beginning of the terrestrial world" before ever *the heavenward portals * * were standing *, or ever the " wind-blasts " blew ; before the rumblings of thunderings did sound, or ever the lightning-flashes did shine ; When the foundations of paradise were not yet laid, nor ‘the beauty of its flowers yet seen ; Before ever ἡ the motive powers (of heaven)“ were established, or the numberless armies of angels were gathered ; Before ever the heights of the air were uplifted, ere the spaces of the firmaments were named ; ere the footstool of Sion * was appointed *. Before the years of the present ¥ were reckoned’, “ere the counsels of present-day sinners were spurned ὅ, or the gatherers of the treasures of faith were sealed— 9-4 so % (per quem) = S and Ethiop. (one reading): but Ethiop.(one reading) Ar onaccountofwhom Tὸn @ initium (v. 4. initio) terreni orbis: Oriental VSS. vary: 3 the beginning by the Son of Man, but the end by myself alone (for as before, &c.); cf. Ethiop. Ar# s-s % exitus saeculi Ἐπ i, (SAC) starent = Oriental VSS.; v. ὦ. statue- rentur (M) u-u % conventiones (Gunkel emends to convectiones) ventorum ΥΟΥ͂ so S$ Ethiop.: & decores flores w-w % motus virtutes (so BJ read); or motuum virtutes = S LEthiop. (so Violet) x-x % (5 A) aestimaretur (corrupt): 3 was established (= firmaretur): //g. suggests aedificaretur, Gunkel destinaretur yy @ investiga- rentur 5.2 & et antequam abalienarentur eorum qui nunc peccant adinventiones: $ before the follies of sinners v. 56-vi. 6. In this section God is directly addressed, and God is the speaker. In response to the prophet’s question, Through whom shall the End come? the answer is given, Through the God of Israel alone. A polemical aim is clearly to be detected in the passage. The apocalyptist will not allow any of the essentially divine attributes or functions to be assumed by any intermediate agency, therein agreeing with the view of orthodox Rabbinic Judaism. The polemic is directed against views which were held by early Christians, but which were probably not confined to Christian circles. At the same time it is possible that what the apocalyptic writer has in mind here is the Christian doctrine of the return of Christ in glory to judge the world. The burden of the passage is that just as Creation was brought into being at the beginning by God alone (without any intermediate agency), so the End of Creation will be brought about by God alone. It may be described as a splendid development of the theme expressed in Ps. xc. 2. The description of the works of Creation is one of great power and imaginative force. The conceptions of Creation underlying it are traditional and of great antiquity (cf. especially the Babylonian Creation-myths and see Gunkel, Schipfung, p. 401 n. and especially p. 419). It should be compared with the parallel passage in Prov. viii. 24-9. [Cf. also the description of the Day of Judgement in vii. 39 ff.] vi. 1. In the beginning of the terrestrial world. For the alterations introduced into the text of the Oriental Versions here under Christian influence see crit. note. the heavenward portals, i.e. the portals open to heaven ; cf. 1 En. xxxiv. ‘IV EZRA 6. 6-13 6 Even then had I these things in mind ; and through me alone and none other were they created ; as also the End (shall come) through me alone and none other. V. THE PARTING ASUNDER OF THE TIMES. (vi. 7-10) (S). 7 Then answered I and said: What shall mark the parting asunder of the times? When shall the End of the first (age) and the beginning of the second be? 8 And he said unto me: *From Abraham to Abraham.* For from him sprang Jacob and Esau,” 9 “but Jacob’s hand held the heel of Esau from the beginning.° * The heel of the first age is Esau ; to the hand of the second is Jacob. * The beginning of a man is his hand, and the end of a man is his heel. Between heel and hand seek naught else, Ezra! VI. THE SIGNS OF THE LAST TIME AND THE END. (vi. 11-28) (E) (R). (a) vi. 11-12. Redactional Introduction. 1,12 [I answered and said: O Lord my Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, ‘(I beseech thee) that thou show‘ thy servant the last of thy signs of which thou didst show me a part in the night that is past.] (ὁ) Description of the End (vi. 13-20, 23, 24) together with some misplaced verses describing the signs that precede the End (vi. 21-22). IV EZRA 6. 14-26 E 14,15 loud; and it shall be if the place whereon thou standest, * be greatly shaken δ, ® when it (i. e. the voice) speaks * ‘with thee! be not thou terrified; for the word is of the End, and the foundations of the 16 earth Jshall understand! that the speech is concerning themselves. They shall tremble and be shaken, for they know that their end is to be changed. 17 And it happened that when I had heard it I stood up upon my feet, and hearkened: and lo! a voice spake, and the sound of it was as the sound of mighty waters. 18 And it said: Behold the days come, and it shall be, When I am about to draw nigh to visit the dwellers upon earth, 19 And when I require from the doers of iniquity («the penalty of) their iniquity * ; [! And when the humiliation of Sion shall be complete 20 And when the Age which is about to pass away shall be sealed then [zl J show these signs]: the books shall be opened before the face of the firmament, and all see™ together. vv. 21-22 misplaced. 2x (And one-year-old children shall speak with their voices; pregnant women shall bring forth 22 untimely births at three or four months, and these shall live and dance. And suddenly shall the 23 sown places appear unsown, and the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty;) And the trumpet shall sound aloud, at which all men, when they hear it, shall be struck with sudden fear. 24 And at that time [ friends shall war against friends like enemies], the earth shall be stricken with fear [together with the dwellers even and the springs of the fountains shall stand still so that for three " hours” they shall not run. (c) vi. 25-28 (29). The felicity of those who survive the Messianic Woes. 25 And it shall be whosoever shall have survived all these things that I have foretold unto thee, he 26 shall be saved and shall see my salvation and the end of my world. And the men who have been taken up, who have not tasted death from their birth, shall appear. Then shall the heart of the inhabitants ° (of the world)° be changed, and be converted to a different spirit. &-8 reading commotione commovebitur (C M) h-b & in eo cum loquitur (= ev tῷ λαλειν) i-i so Oriental VSS Si so S$ (off. Ar): & intellegetur k-k so Ethiop. (= tὴn αδικιαν αὐτων): © iniustitia sua (= tῃ αδικιᾳ avtwr) Il this clause ἐς prob. due to R; of. EA, p. xxx. m $+my judgement on so, Sc. Ar years 9-9 so & (cf. other Oriental VSS.): £ > P-P OΞ, &c.: Ar.’ the evil heart q-4 so 3 (tantis IV EZRA 6. 27-35 EK 27 For P evil? shall be blotted out, and deceit extinguished ; 28 Faithfulness shall flourish, and corruption be vanquished ; And truth, which ‘for so long a time“ has been without fruit, shall be made manifest. 29 [And it came to pass while he spake to me, * behold, by little and little (2) the place whereon I stood rocked to and fro*.] VII. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION. (vi. 30-34) (S). 30,31 And he said unto me: These things came I to show thee ‘this night*. If therefore thou wilt petition yet again, and fast seven days more, I will tell thee yet again greater things than these *. 32 For thy voice has surely been heard before the Most High; for the Mighty One has seen thy rectitude, and marked also thy chastity which thou hast had ever since thy youth. 33 Therefore has he sent me to show thee all these things, and to say unto thee: Be of good cheer, and fear not! 34 "Be not over-solicitous" in the case of former times to indulge idle thoughts, ‘lest solicitude overtake thee” in the Jast times. THE THIRD VISION. (vi. 35—ix. 25.) I. INTRODUCTION. (vi. 35-37) (S). 35 And it came to pass after this that I wept again, and fasted seven days in like manner, that temporibus) : S$ for many years (so Ethiop. [some MSS.]; cf. Ar. Armt.) toῦ yeading ecce paulatim movebatur locus super quem stabam super eum = S$ E¢hiop. (cf. Ar. Arm.); Lat. MSS. corrupt 5:8 so S$: K', et ventura nocte (see further EA,p.80) * £+per diem: other VSS. (with possible exception of Ar) > πὰ Ψ et noli festinare v-v & ut non properes henceforth thou shalt remain with my Son’), Ezra is assigned a place among the immortal companions, as also is the case with Baruch (cf. 2 Bar. Ixxvi. 2). Jeremiah also appears in this réle in 2 Macc. ii. 1 ἔn, xv. 13; cf. Matt. xvi. 14, and see further ZA, p. 78. Then shall the heart . . . be changed, viz. by the preaching of the witnesses. This function was particularly associated with Elijah; cf. Mal. iv. 6 (= iil. 24 Hebr.). IN ΕΖΒΑ 6. 36-43 5.361 might fulfil the three weeks that had been commanded me. And in the eighth night my heart 37 was troubled within me again, and I began to address the Most High. For my spirit was greatly inflamed, and my soul was in distress. II. THE PROBLEM PROPOUNDED IN ITS FINAL FoRM: IF THE WORLD WAS CREATED FOR ISRAEL’S SAKE WHY IS ISRAEL DEPRIVED OF ITS INHERITANCE? (vi. 38-59) (S). 38 And I said: O Lord, of a truth thou didst speak at the beginning of the creation upon the first 39 day, saying: Let heaven and earth be made! and thy word perfected the work. Then was the spirit hovering ; darkness and “ silence ¥ were on every side; the sound of man’s voice was not yet 40 before thee. Then thou didst command *a ray of light * to be brought forth out of thy treasuries, that then thy works might become visible. 41 Upon the second day again thou didst create the spirit of the firmament, and didst command it **to make a division between (the waters and) the waters ** that the one part might go up, the other remain beneath. 42 On the third day thou didst command the waters to be gathered together in the seventh part of the earth; six parts thou didst dry up and preserve, ¥ in order that (issuing) from them there might serve before thee those who both plough and sow’. 43 But as soon as thy word went forth the work was done. w-w so ©: S=silentium soni x-x X (best reading) \umen aliquod luminis: v. 7. lumen luminosum: $ radiance of light xx-xx so S$: 3). = ut divideret et divisionem faceret inter aquas y-Y so partly 3: see further EA, p. 86 2-2 following 3: & et concupiscentia gustus multiformis a8 so % vi. 35-37. 35. the three weeks that had been commanded me. So far only two fasts of seven days have been mentioned, viz. one before the second vision and another here before the third. The author evidently is thinking of another before Vision I, which in the present form of the text is not mentioned, but doubtless was there originally. The three successive weeks of fasting culminate in the most important and the longest of the three visions. Cf. Dan. x. 2, which has served as a model for this passage: ‘In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three weeks’ (then follows a description of the fasting). This long fast preceded the vision which was highest in the scale of importance (Dan. x. 4f.). vi. 38-59. Salathiel first enumerates the works of Creation in their order, and then proceeds to ask how it is that the chosen race, for whose sake the world has been created, are dispossessed of their inheritance. The problem, which has already formed the theme of the first and second visions, is here propounded in its final form. In the first vision the question assumed the form : How will the Divine Name be vindicated when the only people that bears it (viz. Israel) is prostrate before the heathen? In the second vision the seer asks: Why, if the people that has been chosen above all others must be punished, has it been handed over to be oppressed and down-trodden by those who scorn the divine covenants? Why did not God Himself undertake the task of disciplining His elect? Here, in the third vision, the question is: If the present world is in such evil case (cf. iv. 26f.) why is it not subjected to Israel, for whose sake the world has been created? The discussion of the question is taken up at the point reached in the previous vision (vi. 8-10). Why is this world Esau’s, and only the future world Israel’s, if it is indeed the case that this world was created for Israel’s sake? In the account of Creation which is here given the original writer betrays his acquaintance with the haggadic exegesis of the Rabbis. See further £4, p.83. For the various works of Creation that follow on different days cf. Gen. i, Jub. ii, &c. IV EZRA 6. 44-59 44 For immediately there came forth Fruits in endless abundance, in pleasure of taste exquisitely varied ”, Flowers of inimitable colour (trees infinitely varied in form) ἢ, and odours of scent indefinable >. This was done the third day. 45 But on the fourth day thou didst command that there should come into being the brightness of 46 the sun, the light of the moon and the order of the stars ; and didst command them that they should 47 do service unto man, ° who was about to be formed*. Upon the fifth day thou didst bid the seventh part, where the water was gathered together, to bring forth living creatures, birds, and fishes; and 48 so it came to pass. The dumb and lifeless water produced living creatures that for this the nations 49 might declare thy wondrous works‘. Then didst thou preserve ὃ two living creatures®; the name of 50 the one thou didst call ‘ Behemoth’ and the name of the other thou didst call Leviathan. And thou didst separate the one from the other; for the seventh part’, where the water was gathered 51 together, was unable to hold them (both). And thou didst give Behemoth one of the parts which 52 had been dried up on the third day to dwell in, (that namely) where are a thousand hills: but unto Leviathan thou gavest the seventh part, namely the moist: and thou hast reserved them to be devoured by whom thou wilt and when. 53 But upon the sixth day thou didst command the earth that it should bring forth before thee cattle 54 beasts, and creeping things ; and over these Adam, whom thou didst ordain lord over all the works’ that »thou didst create before him"™: of him we are all sprung, whom thou hast chosen (to be) (thy) people. 55 All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou hast said that for our sakes thou hast
56.  created ithis world‘. But as for the other nations, which are descended from Adam, thou hast. said that they are nothing, and that they are like unto spittle; and thou hast likened the abundance of
57.  them to a drop on a bucket. And now, O Lord, behold these nations which are reputed as nothing
58.  Jlord it over usJ and *crush* us. But we, thy people whom thou hast called thy first-born, thy
59.  only-begotten, !thy beloved [most dear]', are given up into their hands. If the world has indeed been created for our sakes ™ why do we not enter into possession of our world™? How long shall this endure? (f. Ethiop. Ar2): & Arm. > b-b & investigabiles c-e & futuro plasmato ἃ #+quod ei iubebatur: du¢ all other VSS. > 9: reading duo animalia (= 3, &c.): Lat. MSS. duo animas (S AC M) Ef yeading Behemoth (so $ Ethiop.): Enoch (S A) 5. $+the moist h-h so 3 Ethiop.: & fecisti it “Ὁ 51 @ primogenitum saeculum 11 reading dominantur nostri (S dominari: A quaerunt dominari) k-k so Oriental VSS.: & devorant 1 © aemulatorem carissimum (? a double rendering of tὸn ἀγαπητὸν cov): see Surther EA, p. 96 m-m yeading quare non haereditatem possidemus nostrum saeculum 46. ...do service unto man. The apocalyptic writer here especially emphasizes the thought that the stars are man’s servants, because by all the rest of the world they were regarded as gods. 8. ἢ I IV EZRA 7. 1-12 III. THE DEBATE RENEWED: THE CORRUPTION OF THE PRESENT WORLD MAKES THE PATH TO THE FUTURE WORLD OF FELICITY NARROW AND DIFFICULT (vii. 1-25) (S). (a) vv. 1-16. 1 And when I had finished speaking these words, there was sent unto me the angel who had been 2 sent unto me “on the former nights®. And he said unto me: Up, £zra, and hear the words that 3 I have come to speak unto thee. And I said: Speak on, my lord. And he said unto me: There 4is a sea lying in a wide expanse so that it is °broad’° and vast; but the entrance thereto ” lies 5 in a narrow space so as to be like a river. He, then, that really desireth to go upon the sea to behold it or to “navigate it ®, if he pass not through the narrow part, how shall he be able to come into 6the broad? Again, " another (illustration)*. There is a builded city which lies on level ground, 7 and it is full of all good things; but its entrance is narrow and lies *on a steep *, having fire on the 8 right hand and deep water on the left; and there is one only path lying between them both, that is between the fire and the water, (and so small) is this path, that it can contain only one man’s 9 footstep at once. If, now, this city be given to a man for an inheritance, unless the heir pass o through the danger set before him, how shall he receive his inheritance? And I said: It is so, lord! 1 Then said he unto me: Even 50, also, is Israel’s portion; for it was for their sakes I made the world; but when Adam transgressed my statutes, ‘then that which had been made was judged‘, 2 and then "the ways" of this world became narrow and sorrowful and painful ἡ few and evil," n-n ® primis noctibus = 3: Ethiop.. before on the night that was past: Ar.' > °° reading \atum for altum P-P so ᾧ (cf. Ethiop.) & erit . . . positus (= eorae [for ἐσti] . . . κειμενη) a-a & dominari eius = 5: (Ethiop. to attain it): 2γoὖ., as Gunkel suggests, the original Hebr. nad = to go down on, z.e. to navigate, was misread nid rr @ aliud (cf Hebr. phrase WS 137) s-s @ in praecipiti: S in the height tὸ @ judicatum est quod factam est wu so Ethiop. (also in t. 13) = a οδοι : © introitus (so 3) = aἱ εισοδοι v-Y prob. a gloss (see EA, p. 102) vii. 1-25. The archangel Uriel now intervenes for the third time, and in this and the following sections of the third vision, which belong to S, sets forth the definitive solution of the problem, the answer to which had only been given in a partial and incomplete form in the earlier part of the Apocalypse (cf. iv. 1-21, iv. 26f., v. 31 f.). Uriel begins by comparing the present world to the narrow entrance which leads to a wide and open sea. Only through the narrow is it possible to come into the broad. Or, again, to a narrow and dangerous road, flanked by fire on one side and deep water on the other, which is the only means of entrance to a splendid city ‘full of good things’ and set in a spacious plain. The present world is the narrow and difficult way along which the righteous must pass in order to gain the spacious freedom of the future world of happiness (cf. v. 14). The present world was originally created for Israel, but through Adam’s transgression has become the vale of misery and suffering for the righteous which they now endure. It will be seen that the following results are implicit in this answer: (1) Israel has no part or lot in the present world; its inheritance of light and felicity will only be attained after the thornful path of the present world has been traversed ; (2) the heathen enjoy and possess the present fleeting and corruptible world (so far as they actually do so) in accordance with God's will; they at the same time are being used by God as instruments for the discipline of the chosen people (cf. v. 30); this will continue till the present world comes to its predestined end, and meanwhile Israel has necessarily - Ὃ endure the present evil with its consequences of mortality and death ; (3) the future world is for Israel alone. The promises "Pade to God’s people can only be fulfilled by the extinction of the present evil, i.e. by the destruction of the present world, When this has been accomplished the future world will 2250 facto have come into view. In t. 17}. aD question is propounded by the apocalyptist. Are ‘these things’ (i.e. the felicity of the future world) destined for Israel as such, or only for the righteous members of the nation? Salathiel’s question can only refer to Israel. And Since: even in the case of Israel, the cor malignum militated against any personal claim to justifying right ἐouξδέςς the answer to the question should be that Israel, the people which owes its choice by God purely to an act of diving. 5tᾶςς, and not to any merit of its own, is destined to participate in the future blessings. his: jn fick: seems-c6 be yhe significance of the answer given in v. 19f. Here the angel, it would appear, replies to Salathi aie qu estion only in directly: He ignores the distinction between righteous and transgressors within Israel—all Israel, judged by the strict recuirements of the divine Law, are transgressors—and proceeds to emphasize the heinous ROE theaheathen wold 4a cenly despising and scorning the divine Law (v.20f.). Israel, however imperfect in obedience and performance had at least recognized the obligation of accepting the divine Law, and acknowledging the supremacy of the Divine eae of ne Law; it had not been guilty of open blasphemy. ᾿ ἈN Mierensarell: ac ees at v. 16, where the author, having demonstrated the reality and significance of the future world, turns to consider the nome : Who will be found worthy of inheriting it? To mark this division the section ries as ὴ ety ay δ, 17-25. 5 Seep iene it, lit, Wise oe upon it’ (see crit. note); for the phrase cf. Ps. cvii. 23. wt IV EZRA 7, 13-25 13 and full of perils coupled with great toils. But the ways “ of the future world are broad and safe, 14nd yield the fruit of immortality. If, then, the living shall not have surely entered into these 15 narrow and vain things, they will not be able to receive what has been reserved for them. But now Why disquietest thou thyself that thou art corruptible ? Why art thou moved because thou art mortal ἢ 16 Why hast thou not considered what is to come, rather than what is now present ? (ὁ) vv. 17-25. 17 Then answered I and said: O Lord my Lord, lo, thou hast ordained in thy Law that the righteous 18 shall inherit these things, but that the ungodly shall perish. The righteous, therefore, can endure the narrow things because they hope for the wide ; those, however, who have done wickedly endure 19 the narrow things, but yet *shall not see* the wide. And he said unto me: ¥ Thou art not’ a judge above God Nor wise above the Most High. 20 Yea, rather, *let the many that noware perish 5 than that the law of God which is set before them 21 be despised! For God did surely command them that came (into the world), when they came, what 22 they should do to live, and what they should observe to avoid punishment. Nevertheless they were disobedient, and spake against him ; They devised for themselves vain thoughts, they proposed to themselves * wicked treacheries ὃ; 23 They even affirmed the Most High exists not, and ignored” his ways! 24 His law they did despise, and his covenants they denied ; In his statutes they have put no faith, °and have set at naught his commandments °: 25 Therefore, O Ezra, For the empty, empty things, And for the full, full things! w-w so & (cf. Ethiop.): & maioris saeculi x-x reading non videbunt (M) = S$ Ethiof.: non viderunt (S A C) YῸY reading non es (C*) = Oriental VSS.: non est (A C** M) 2-8 yeading pereant .. . neglegatur (soSC): 3 shall perish a-a ® circumventiones delictorum b-b @ non cognoverunt c-e so Ar; % have set at naught his works = E¢hiop.: & et opera eius non perfecerunt R 26 : 27, 28 IV EZRA 7. 26-31 IV. THE TEMPORARY MESSIANIC KINGDOM AND THE END OF THE WORLD. (vii. 26-44) (R) (E). (a) vii. 26-30. The sudden revelation of the Messiah: his 400 years reign and death: the End of the Age (R). For behold the days come, and it shall be when the signs which I have foretold unto thee shall come to ? [2 Then shall the city that now is invisible appear‘, and the land ° which is now concealed ° be seen ; j Neg whosoever is delivered from the predicted evils, the same shall see my wonders. For ‘ my Son the Messiah‘ shall be revealed, together with those who are with him, and &shall rejoice® the 29 survivors "four hundred years". And it shall be, after these years, that imy Son‘ the Messiah 30 shall die, and alljin whom there is human breathJ. Then shall the world be turned into the w primaeval silence seven days, like as at the first beginnings; so that no man is left. (ὁ) vii. 31-44. The General Resurrection and Final Fudgement; the Day of Fudgement described (R). And it shall be after seven days that the Age which is not yet awake shall be roused, and * that which is corruptible * shall perish. ἀnὰ so Arm,: Ar.' and the city which was not shall appear: E¢thiop. (misplacing negative) and the city which now appears shall be hidden: 30 (misreading ἡ νυν pn φαινομενὴ πoλiς as ἡ nuμφη φαινομενὴ πoλiς) et apparebit sponsa [et] apparens (so C M; S apparescens) civitas = 3 e-e % quae nunc subducitur ff so S$ Ar: Ethiop. my Messiah: Av.? the Messiah; dAvm. the Messiah of God; @ filius meus Jesus 8-8 reading iocundabit (S) = Oriental VSS.; iocundabuntur (A C M N) h-h so © Ar); & thirty; Av? one thousand; L¢hiop, Arm. > ii so © 3; Ethiop. my servant 11 reading qui spiramentum habent hominis (S homines) k-k 3. corruptum (sc. saeculum) 1) s0 3: Land other VSS. > m-m so 3 (cf. Ethiop.):& > vii. 26-44. The eschatological description which was broken off at vi. 28 is here resumed. The present section, however, seems to be partly the work of R, who has utilized older material. For a full discussion of the reasons for this view reference must be made to £A, pp. 108-112. The section falls into two subdivisions, (4) vii. 26-30 and (6) vii. 31-44. (a) vii. 26-30. This subsection, as we have seen, may be assigned to R, who, however, depends upon an inde- pendent Rabbinical tradition, which he here summarizes. But in v. 26 ὁ R has introduced a feature which is here incongruous—the appearance of the ‘heavenly’ Jerusalem and Paradise. These belong to the future age; whereas the temporary Messianic kingdom belongs to the present age and terminates with it. A similar confusion—probably also due to an interpolation by R—occurs in ch. xiii, where v. 36 does not harmonize with the context. The confusion might easily arise at a time when the earthly Jerusalem lay in ruins and when it would be natural to seek consolation in directing the thoughts to the more glorious city in heaven. The purification of the ‘earthly’ city would be the natural preparation for a ‘temporary’ Messianic age; but as the city had been destroyed this had been made impossible. Hence the necessity of introducing the heavenly Jerusalem—for a Messianic age without Jerusalem as a centre would have been inconceivable. In face of conflicting views as to whether Jerusalem was to be restored or no, R takes a mediating view. The End is not yet—a temporary Messianic age is to dawn; but the earthly city is not ae restored ; instead, the heavenly city is to appear. Primaeval chaos and the End will only follow after this interlude. The redactor has thus woven together two sets of mutually irreconcilable ideas. This is equally true of his representation of the Messiah himself. The Messiah is to be ‘revealed’—suddenly, as it seems—‘ together with those who are with him’. As the latter must be the immortal companions ‘who have never tasted death’ it is clear that a heavenly pre-existence for the Messiah himself is implied, as in fact appears in other passages (cf. 4 Ezra xii. 32, xiv. 9; 2 Bar. xxx, &c.). At the close of his reign, therefore, the Messiah ought to return in glory to heaven, as he is made to do in 2 Bar. xxx. But according to R he and his immortal companions share the common fate with the righteous, and die with all men! See further A, pp. 112-13. ᾽ Ὁ 40 IV EZRA 7. 32-40 And the earth shall restore those that sleep in her, and the dust those that are at rest therein, [and the chambers shall restore those that were committed unto them]. And the Most High shall be revealed upon the throne of judgement : 1(and then cometh the End)! and compassion shall pass away, ™(and pity be far off,)™ and longsuffering ® withdrawn ἢ; But ° judgement ° alone shall remain, truth shall stand, and faithfulness triumph. And ? recompense? shall follow, and the reward be made manifest ; « Deeds of righteousness ἃ shall awake, and deeds of iniquity shall not sleep. And then shall ‘the pit of torment* appear, *and over against it the place of refreshment ° ; The furnace of Gehenna shall be made manifest, and over against it the Paradise of delight. And then shall the Most High say to the nations that have been raised [from the dead] : Look now and consider whom ye have denied, whom ye have not served, whose commandments ye have despised. * Look, now, before [you]*: here delight and refreshment, there fire and torments ! Thus "shall he speak" unto them in the Day of Judgement, For thus shall the Day of Judgement be’: ual P| day] whereon is neither sun “, nor moon, nor stars ; neither clouds, * nor thunder, nor lightning * ; neither wind, nor rain-storm, nor ¥ cloud-rack¥ ; neither darkness, nor evening, nor morning ; nn @ congregabitur °° so Ethiop.: S my judgement P-» & opus (= 8; cf. Lthiop.) = Heb. nbye 2-4 & iustitiae tt rveading lacus tormenti = 3 (emended) Ethiop. (cf. Ar.) 8-8 reading et contra illum erit locus requietionis (or requisitionis) = $ Ar. t-t = βλέπετε ov κατεναντιον (so Oriental VSS.+ you): & videte contra et in contra (dittography) u-a so Oriental VSS.: & shalt thou speak vv yeading dies enim iudicii talis qui [neque solem habet]; cf. 3 (for that day of Judgement is thus; cf Z¢hzop.): & haec talis quae (this is such a day as) ὙΠ cf. 3 there is no sun in it: # quae neque solem παραὶ (? pointing to a text ἡ oὐκ ἥλioς eotat ev aὐtῇ = 12 wow mm xd σὴn) x-X so & (cf. Ar3): but 9. Ethiop. invert the order y-y &] aerem = anp = ΓΓ representation in v. 33, according to which the Most High is revealed ‘upon (i.e. seated upon) the throne of judgement’ ; cf. Dan. vii. 9, 1 En. xc. 20, xxv. 3; and in the similitudes (of the Elect One), 1 En. xlv. 3, lv. 4, lxi. 8, ixix. 27. In all these passages the Divine Judge is spoken of as seated on the judgement throne (sedes czudicii, his royal throne’ (Ass. Mos. x. 3), this is the formula for the execution of retributive judgement (cf. Volz, p. 261). According to 7: B. Pesah. 54a and Ned. 39 ὁ, this throne was one of the seven things created before the world. Both in this section and the preceding, clauses which R seems to have derived directly from S have been enclosed in square brackets. The long fragment which is missing from most of the Latin codices, and which was recovered by Bensly, begins after v. 35 ; it finds its place between vv. 35 and 36 of the ordinary Vulgate text. These additional verses are numbered consecutively in the following translation (as in R.V.), and form vv. 36-105. The remaining verses (Vulg. 36-70) now appear as 106-140. IV EZRA 7. 41-45 Re oat * neither summer, nor autumn, nor winter ; neither heat, nor frost, nor cold #; neither hail, nor rain, nor dew ; 42 neither noon, nor night, nor *dawn ®*; neither shining, nor brightness, nor light, save only the splendour of the brightness of the Most High, whereby all shall be destined to see 43, 44 what has been determined (for them). And its duration shall be as it were a week of years. Such is my Judgement and Pits prescribed order”: to thee only have I showed these things. V. THE DEBATE CONTINUED (from vii. 25): ISRAEL’S ELECTION AND THE PROBLEM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. (vii. 45-ix. 22.) (1) vii. 45-74. THE FEWNESS OF THE SAVED JUSTIFIED: THIS FOLLOWED BY A LAMENT OVER MAN’sS En, CASE (5). (a) vii. 45-61. The fewness of the saved. S 45 And I answered and said: O Lord, I said even then and say now: Blessed are *they who come (into the world) ° and keep 4thy commandments ἃ. 2-2 so substantially 3; U& neque aestatem neque verem neque aestum neque hiemem neque gelum neque frigus aa ® ante lucem (? for an original antelucium: so Bensly) b—» & constitutio eius (= ὃ 7 συνταξις αὐτου = NPN): S its law e-e cf, § (all they who come): % qui praesentes 4 % quae a te constituta sunt (? ta cov διατε- IV EZRA 7. 46-61 46 But concerning those for whom my prayer (was offered): who is there of those who have come (into the world) that has not sinned? Or who of the earth-born is there that has not transgressed 47 “tῆn covenant®? And now I see that the coming Age shall bring delight te few, but torment unto 48 many. For the evil heart has grown up in us which has estranged us ‘ from God‘, and brought us into destruction ; And ‘fhas made known to us* the ways of death, and showed us the paths of perdition, and removed us far from life; and that not a few only, but well nigh all that have been created ! 49 And he answered me and said: Hear me and I will instruct thee, and a second time will admonish thee: 51 For this cause the Most High has made not one Age but two. And whereas thou hast said that the righteous are not many but few, » while the ungodly abound »—' hear (the answer) to this: 52 Suppose thou have choice stones, in number exceeding few ; J wilt thou set (place) with them lead and clay J? 53 And I said: Lord, how should it be possible? 54 And he said unto me: Not only so, but Ask the earth, and she shall tell thee; k Speak to her*, and she shall declare it unto thee. 56 Say to her: Thou bringest forth gold and silver and brass—and also iron and lead and clay: but silver is more abundant than gold, and brass than silver, and iron than brass, lead than iron, and 57 Clay than lead. Do thou, then, consider which things are precious and to be desired: that which is abundant or that which is rare? 58 And I said: O Lord my Lord, that which is plentiful is of less worth, but that which is more rare is precious. 59 And he answered me and said: ! Weigh within thyself! what thou hast thought! For he that has ™ what is rare™ rejoices beyond him that has what is plentiful.
60.  ™Soalso shall be my promised judgement ; I will rejoice over the few that shall be saved, inas- much as they it is °that make my glory prevail now already°® and through them my name is now already named (with praise).
61.  And I will not grieve over the multitude of them that perish: for they it is who now are made like vapour, EN Taypeva) e-e so & Ar.*: 3S commandment; L¢hiop. statute (? diferent readings in Greek, διαθηκην, Siataynv) ff Ψ ab his (sc commandments) = $ Ethiop.: perhaps, as Violet suggests, in original Hebrew “πon Π ΠO (ἡ. ὁ. onbsn-jn) was misunderstood ‘sop 3 Ars: ἘΣ 5 S+Ewzra bb so (cf. Art Ar2Arm.): 5.» i Haudi adhaec=S 27:1 so Ar.‘ (cf. 5): 3 si habueris paucos valde, ad numerum compones eos tibi . . . plumbum autem et fictile habundat ( 2γoό. Spee et fictile have fallen out in dotted space: then the last clause will be a gloss: see further EA, p.123) BK soS Ethiop.: Wadulareci |! so 3 (cf. Ethiop, Ars): & corrupt ™—™ so 3 Ar.' (cf. Ethiop. Ar?): & quod difficile est un so substantially Oriental VSS.; & sic et a me repromissa creatura (confusion of κρισις with κτισις) °° s0 8 (of. Ethiop. Ar’): ἘΞ qui gloriam meam nunc dominationem (4. domina- tiorem) fecerunt rule that the most precious things are the rarest. Therefore the few that are to be saved, inasmuch as they have made the divine glory to prevail, shall be a cause for rejoicing, and the multitude of the lost is not a subject for grief (vv. 45-61). If so, the apocalyptist replies, man's lot is indeed a terrible one: it had been better for him to have been like the beasts that perish. ‘ For it is far better with them than with us; they look not for judgement, neither do they know of torments or of salvation promised to them after death.’ We perish conscious of the doom awaiting us! The angel answers: Man brings the doom upon himself—he has deliberately transgressed the divine commandments ; and, moreover, the Most High has been very longsuffering (wv. 62-74). The section falls into two subdivisions, (a) vii. 45-61 and (δ) vii. 62-74. IV EZRA 7. 61-74 » counted as smoke, are comparable unto the flame ": They are fired, burn hotly, are extinguished ! (ὁ) vii. 62-74. The apocalyptist’s lament over man’s evil case.
62.  And I answered and said: O thou Earth, what hast thou brought forth, if the mind is sprung
63.  from the dust as every other created thing! It had been better if the dust itself had even been unborn, that the mind might not have come into being from it.
64.  But, as it is, the mind grows with us, and on this account we are tormented, because we perish and know it.
65.  Let the human race ‘lament 4, but the beasts of the field be glad ! Let all the earth-born “ mourn 2, but let the cattle and flocks rejoice !
66.  For it is far better with them than with us; for they have no judgement to look for, neither do they know of any torture or of any salvation promised to them after death.
67.  For what doth it profit us that " we shall be preserved alive’, but yet suffer great torment ἢ
68.  For all the earth-born : 8 are defiled with iniquities °, full of sins, laden with offences.
69.  And if after death we were not to come into judgement, it might, perchance, ἢ have been * far better for us! 7° And he answered me and said: When the Most High made the world, and Adam, and all that came “of him®, he first prepared the Judgement, and the things that pertain unto the Judgement.
71.  But, now, from thine own words understand: for thou hast said that the mind grows with us.
72.  For this reason, therefore, shall the sojourners in the earth suffer torture, because having under- standing they yet wrought iniquity, and receiving precepts they yet kept them not, and having obtained the Law ‘they set at naught ’ that which they received. IV EZRA 7. 75-79 (2) vii. 75-101. THE STATE OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH AND BEFORE THE JUDGEMENT (S).
75.  And I answered and said: If I have found favour in thy sight, YO Lord, show this also to thy servant : whether after death, even now when every one of us must give back his soul, we shall be kept in rest until those times come in which thou shalt renew the creation, or shall we suffer torture * forthwith = ? 476 And he answered me, and said: I will show this also unto thee ; but do not thou mingle thyself with them that have scorned, nor number thyself with those that suffer torment. 7 For thou hast a treasure of works laid up with the Most High, but it shall not be showed thee until the last times.
78.  And concerning death the teaching is: When 9 the decisive decree has gone forth from the Most High that the man should die, as *the soul” from the body departs *that it may return * to him who gave it,
79.  to adore the glory of the Most High, first of all: if it be one of those that have scorned (C MV): Δ ὃ frustraverunt wow so DX, &c.: S O Lord my Lord x-x % amodo = am’ ἀρτι y-y & terminus sententiae (= D2W27 pn) 2-2 % inspiratione a-a so Ethiop. Ar): & ut dimittatur (f. 3) (2) vii. 75-101. The following section describes the state of the soul immediately after death. It is introduced between parts of the Apocalypse which have for their theme different aspects of the last Judgement. [{ is, therefore, in the nature of a digression: but the subject is one that logically arises from previous allusions, and comes in at this point quite naturally. In answer to the apocalyptist’s inquiry he is told that the spirit, after leaving the body, first of all adores the glory of the Most High and then enters into a state of misery or bliss, corresponding to its ultimate destiny, according as it belongs to the ungodly or righteous. The spirits of the wicked are destined to a wandering existence in torment, in seven degrees: (a) They shall be consumed with remorse ; (4) they will recognize that the past is irrevocable ; (c) they shall see the reward laid up for the righteous; (4) they shall catch a glimpse of the torment reserved for them after the last Judgement; (4) ‘ they shall see the dwelling-places of the others guarded by angels with great quietness’ ; (f) they shall see the torment henceforth reserved for them; (g) in the light of the vision of God they shall be consumed with agonizing remorse, confusion, and shame (vii. 78-87). On the other hand, the spirits of the righteous ‘shall be filled with joy (2) because they have striven to overcome the cogitamentum malum ; (6) because they see the perplexity and punishment of the ungodly ; (c) because they see the divine witness to their righteousness ; (4) because they understand the rest and quiet of their intermediate state, and the glory that awaits them in the final Judgement ; (e) because they realize the painful corruption from which they have been delivered, and cherish the hope of immortality; (/) because of the incorruptible radiance and glory that await them; (g) *‘ because they shall rejoice with confidence, and be bold without confusion, and shall be glad without fear, for they hasten to behold the face of him whom in their lifetime they served, and from whom they shall receive their reward in glory ”’ (vii. 88—98).* These descriptions, which are psychological in character, apparently portray the emotional experiences of the soul, through which it passes during the entire period of the intermediate state. In its subtle delineation of the soul- life the whole section is remarkable, and by the elevation and refinement of its conceptions affords a striking contrast to similar descriptions in other parts of the apocalyptic literature (e.g. 1 En. xxii). No such detailed description of the state of the soul occurs in the Baruch-Apocalypse. At the end of the section (vii. 100-101) one other detail is added. The souls shall be free for seven days immediately after death that they may realize the things which have been described, after which they enter into their habitations. Apparently this only applies to the souls of the righteous, as it is explicitly stated in v. 80 that the souls of the wicked do not enter into habitations at all, but wander to and fro in torment. How the souls pass from the states here described to the final Judgement is not told. In 2 Bar. xxx this is accomplished by means of the resurrection, which is there described in detail. See further Volz, p. 135 f.; Charles, Lschatology, p. 294f. 81, 99, IV EZRA 7. 79-95 and have not kept » the ways” of the Most High, *that have despised his law,° and that hate those who fear God—
80.  Such souls shall not enter into habitations, but shall wander about henceforth in torture, ever grieving and sad, in seven ways.
82.  The first way (is) that ἃ they have scorned ὁ the Law of the Most High ; the second way, that they
83.  are now unable *to make a good repentance for life®; the third way (is): they shall see the
84.  reward laid up for those who have believed ‘the covenants of the Most High’; the fourth way,
85.  that they shall regard the torture laid up for themselves in the last days*; the fifth way, that they
86.  shall see how the habitations ἢ of the other souls" are guarded by angels in profound quietness ; the
87.  sixth way, that they shall see ‘how from now henceforth they must pass over into torture‘. The seventh way, which exceeds all the aforesaid ways, (is) : that they shall pine away for shame, and be consumed } with confusion J, and withered * with fear *, in that they see the glory of the Most High, before whom they have sinned in life, and before whom they are destined to be judged in the last times.
88.  Of those, however, who have kept the ways of the Most High this is } the order!, when they shall be separated from this vessel of mortality.
89.  ™What time they dwelt therein” they painfully served the Most High, and were in jeopardy every hour, that they might observe the Law of the lawgiver perfectly.
91.  Wherefore the matter as it relates to them is as follows: First of all they shall see with great joy
92.  the glory of him who receives them ; and they shall rest ?in seven orders". The first order (is): that they have striven much and painfully to overcome ° the innate evil thought °, that it might not
93.  lead them astray ?from life? unto death. The second order (is): that they see “ἐπe round® in
94.  Which the souls of the ungodly wander, and *the punishment that awaits them’. The third order (is): they see the witness which their Fashioner attests concerning them, that while they were alive
95.  they faithfully observed the Law which was given to them’. The fourth order (is): they under- stand the rest which they now, being gathered in their chambers, enjoy in profound quietness D> so 3 Ethiop. Ar’: Dviam °&¢ sol Lthio~.: S> 4-4 so, (= ηθετησαν) : S they have resisted (= ηπειθησαν) : see EA,p.145 9:9 Hreversionem bonam facere ut vivant: S = emtarpeew κai ἀγαθοποιειν (Bensly adopts) tt sot (Ethiop. Ar.): 3 > 8 here 3 adds a verse which is not original: see EA, p. 146 b-h so At (cf. Ethiop.): Haliorum +t yeading quam amodo pertransient in cruciamentum (see ZA, p. 146) 7} so 3 Ethiop. Ar}: Lin honoribus (= ey τιμίαις [ for ατιμιαις] : read ev ατιμιᾳ) k-k so aὶ Ethiop.: & in timoribus 1 & ordo (= ἡ rakis): S way m-m so S: Hin eo tempore commoratae u-n % per septem ordines: & here and in following verses uses ordo consistently; so Ethiop. Ar): but 3 Ar? Arm. use way (= oδoς) throughout o-o % cum eis plasmatum cogitamentum rb 9503 S Ar’; but Ethiop. in their present life 4- 3. complicationem (= συμπλοκὴν: Hebr. MEST; see EA, p. 149) rT reading quae eis (for in eis) manet punitio s-s 3. servaverunt quae per fidem sense that the soul of man after death appears before God for a certain limited time only, and for a certain purpose. This follows from his belief as to the intermediate state. ἕo. Such souls. For zwspirationes = here disembodied souls, cf. v. 78 above (vecedente inspiratione). TΩΣ is used of the disembodied soul in Rabbinic Hebrew: cf. e.g. 7. B. Shabd. 152 ὁ DPS by jn), ‘ the souls of the righteous’ (in reference to the souls being deposited beneath the throne of glory). For the theological controversies regarding inspiratio in this connexion cf. Bensly, 2725, p. 64. but shall wander about henceforth in torture. In 7. Δ. Shadd. 152 ὁ the souls of the wicked are said to be given no place of rest until the Judgement, while the souls of the righteous are given their resting-place (M319) soon after death. in seven ways, i.e. seven modes or kinds (= Hebr. derek). The arrangement of the sufferings and joys in seven kinds would appear somewhat artificial to us. According to Gunkel, it is derived from the old Babylonian tradition (which passed over to Judaism) of the existence of seven heavens and seven hells (this tradition appears in late Jewish literature ; cf. Eisenmenger, ii, p. 328, for a description of the seven nid2n of Hell). Our passage may be a refinement of this idea. See further ZA, p. 145. § IV EZRA 7. 96-102
96.  guarded by angels, and the glory which awaits them ‘at their latter end*. The fifth order (is): they rejoice that they have now escaped what is corruptible, and that they shall inherit that which is to come; and moreover that they see the straitness and " painfulness" ¥ from which’ they have been delivered, and the spacious liberty which they are destined “to receive with enjoyment and im-
97.  mortality ἡ. The sixth order: *that* it is shown unto them how their face is destined to shine as the sun, and how they are destined to be made like the light of the stars, Y henceforth ¥ incorruptible.
98.  The seventh order, which exceeds all the aforesaid, (is): that They shall rejoice with boldness, be confident without confusion, be glad * without fear”, for they are hastening to behold the face of him whom in life they served, and from whom they are destined to receive their reward in glory.
99.  This is the order of the souls of the righteous as from now henceforward * is announced *, (ἢ and) the aforesaid ways of torture (are) those which they suffer henceforth who” ὁ would not give heed °. oo And I answered and said: Shall time, therefore, be given unto the souls, after they are separated from the bodies, that they may see what thou hast described to me? ot And he said to me: Seven days they have freedom, that during these seven days they may see‘ the things aforesaid 4, afterwards they shall be gathered together in their habitations. (3) vii. 102-115. NO INTERCESSION ON THE Day OF JUDGEMENT (5). 1o2 And I answered and said: If I have found favour in thy sight, show me, thy servant, this also: _whether in the Day of Judgement the righteous shall be able to intercede for the ungodly, or to data est lex (per fidem may have been intended to qualify observed in original) Ὑπὸ 3.0. in novissimis eorum u-« yeading labore plenum (MSS. plenum oz/y); cf. S (the much toil) E¢hiop. Y-Y reading a quo (M)=8: quoniam (A C V) w-w @ recipere fruniscentes et immortales x-x so Ethiop. (= on): 39. quando (= ore); 50 3 ¥-Y reading amodo (for quomodo) ; cf 3 Ethiop. 2-2 reading non reverentes (for revertentes): Oriental VSS. etther omit or obscure the clause aa yeading adnuntiatur (for annuntientur) b-b reading (et) praedictae viae (sunt) cruciatus quas (so A) patiuntur amodo qui (the bracketed words being supplied) c-e 9, neglexerint ἀ-ὰ % qui praedicti sunt sermones IV EZRA 7. 103-115 S 103 intreat the Most High in their behalf: fathers for sons, sons for parents, brothers for brothers, kins-
104.  folk for their nearest, friends for their dearest. And he answered me and said: Since thou hast found favour in my sight, I will show this alsounto thee. The Day of Judgement is “ decisive , and displays unto all the seal of truth. Even as now a father may not send a son, or a son his father, or a master his slave, or a friend his dearest, that in his stead *he may be ill*, or sleep, or eat, or be
105.  healed; so shall ‘none then‘ pray for another on that Day, neither shall one lay a burden on
106.  another ® ; for then every one shall bear his own righteousness or unrighteousness. And I answered and said: How is it that we now find that first Abraham prayed for the people of Sodom, and
107.  Moses for our fathers who sinned in the wilderness ; and Joshua after him for Israel in the days " of
108.  Achar®; and Samuel iin the days of Saul‘, and David Jfor the plague Jj, and Solomon * for those rog that (should worship) in the sanctuary*; and Elijah for those who received the rain, and for the ττο dead, that he might live ; and Hezekiah for the people in the days of Sennacherib, and (others) many
111.  for many? If, therefore, now when corruption is grown up, and unrighteousness increased, the righteous have prayed for the ungodly, why shall it not be so then also ?
112.  And he answered me and said: The present age is not the End!; ™the glory of God abides not
113.  therein continuously ™: therefore have the strong prayed for the weak. But the Day of Judgement shall be the end of this age and the beginning of the eternal age that is to come ; wherein
114.  corruption is passed away, ἢ weakness” is abolished, infidelity is cut off; while righteousness is grown, and faithfulness is sprung up.
115.  50 shall no man then be able to have mercy on him who is condemned in the Judgement, nor °overwhelm® him who is victorious. dd-dd s9 3S (-- συντομος): Ethiop. suddenly (=? συντομως): H audax (=? evrodpos a corruption of ovvropos) °° so 3 Ethiop. Arm. (= ua noσῃ) : & intellegat (= wa voy) ff so 3 (cf. Ar.') = ouδὲ τοτε : H nunquam (= ουδεποτε) E- sod (of. sia oe “> ἈΠE so % (MN A)=S&: Achaz (S) itso $ Ethiop. Ar): & (SAC M) > "2 & pro confractione -k & pro eis qui in sanctificationem (= ὑπep tῶn ev tῷ Lepo): S Ethiop. for the sanctuary (= ὑπep του ιερου) ἘῚ so & (non est finis): cf Ethiop.; S has an end m-m so ὁ Ethiop.: & gloria in eo (supply non) frequens manet un so Ethiop. (=n ασθενεια) : & intemperantia =?n ασελγεια: cf. 8) o-o & demergere (= καταποντιζειν) P-Ῥ 3 coercere (= κατεχειν) : 85 instructed (= κatη- distinctions between race and race, are left behind: the individual soul comes to view, and the personal responsibility of each individual soul is asserted with the utmost emphasis. Between God and the departing soul no mediatorial or mitigating agency is allowed to stand. Here we may detect the influence of Alexandrine theology which tended to lay all stress upon the present life as determining the eternal fate of every man (cf. Bousset, R/*, p. 337 f.). It is apparently against some such conceptions as have been described above that our passage is directed. It definitely excludes the entire cycle of such ideas. Probably at the time when our Apocalypse was written these ideas had assumed an exaggerated form in certain circles. It is curious to note that this passage of 4 Ezra gave offence to Christian theologians. Its citation as scriptural proof against the efficacy of intercessions for the dead evoked a severe reproof from Jerome (Zz . . . proponis mihi librum apocryphum, qui sub nomine Esdrae a te et similibus tuis legitur; tὲ scriptum est, quod post mortem nullus pro aliis audeat deprecari: guem ego librum nunguam legi: [contra Vigilant. c. vii]). This objection doubtless accounts for the disappearance of the section from the Latin Cod. S, and nearly all later copies—the lacuna only being made good by the discovery of the missing Fragment by Bensly. [See, on the section, Volz, pp. 92, 136; Kéberle, p. 662 f.; Bousset, p. 339 f.; and cf. ZA, pp. 153-6.] IV EZRA 7. 116-132 (4) vii. 116-131. WHAT AVAILS THE PROMISE TO MAN WHO IS BORN TO SIN ἢ YET, THOUGH TRAGIC, THE SINNER’S DOOM IS DESERVED (S).
116.  And I answered and said: This is my first and last word ; better had it been that the earth had not produced Adam, or else, having once produced him, (for thee) ? to have restrained” him from 3117sinning. For how does it profit us all that in the present we must live in grief and after death look
118.  for punishment? O thou Adam, what hast thou done! For though it was thou that sinned, “the
119.  fall was not thine alone, but ours also‘ who are thy descendants! For how does it profit us that
120.  the eternal age is promised to us, whereas we have done the works that bring death? And that there is foretold to us ‘an imperishable hope’, whereas we so miserably are brought to futility Ὁ 22 And that there are reserved habitations of health and safety, whereas we have lived wickedly ? And that the glory of the Most High is to defend them who have led a pure life, whereas we have walked 23 in ways most wicked? And that Paradise whose fruit endures incorruptible, wherein is delight and 24 healing, shall be made manifest, but we cannot enter it because we have passed our lives *in unseemly 25 manners*? And that the faces of such as have practised abstinence shall shine above the stars, 26 whereas our faces shall be blacker than darkness? For, while we lived and committed iniquity we considered not what we were destined to suffer after death! 12 And he answered me and said: This is tthe conditiont of the contest which (every) man who is
128.  born upon earth must wage; that, if he be overcome, he shall suffer as thou hast said: but if he be
129.  Victorious, he shall receive what I have said. For this is the way of which Moses, while he was
130.  alive, spoke unto the people, saying: Choose thee life, that thou mayst live! Nevertheless they
131.  believed not him, nor the prophets after him, no nor yet me who have spoken unto them. " Therefore" shall there not be such grief at their perdition, as there shall be joy over the salvation of those who have believed. (5) DoubsTs AS TO HOW THE PERDITION OF SO MANY CAN BE JUSTIFIED FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF GOD’s CHARACTER AND ATTRIBUTES: THE DIVINE REPLY (S). (vii. 132—viii. 62.) (a) vii. 132—Wviii. 4. Wall God—so merciful and compasstonate—suffer so many to perish 7 (S.)
132.  And I answered and said: I know, Lord, that the Most High is now called compassionate in that xew) (= Ethiop.) 4-4 yeading non est factum solius tuus casus sed et nostrum (cf 8) ir @ perennis spes 5- ἐκ Ethiop.: & ingratis locis (confusing τρόποις and τόποις): so 55 tt © cogitamentum = 0 diadoyiopos = PN (law, condition) ua so S$: & quoniam (4) vii.116-131. Itthus having been demonstrated that no possibility of escape from eternal punishment exists for the doomed race of sinners, the seer now bursts forth into a passionate lamentation over the fate of the mass of humanity. It would have been better if Adam had not been created with freedom of will to sin, than that his descendants should be born only to be doomed. To promise them happiness and immortality on conditions which they must almost inevitably fail to keep is but to mock their misery. To this the archangel can only reply that such are the conditions of the fight; there will be more joy in heaven over those who attain salvation than sorrow over the many who perish. IV EZRA 7. 133—8. 3
133.  he compassionates those who have not yet come into the world ; and gracious, in that he is gracious
134.  towards those * who return to his law‘: and longsuffering, because he shows longsuffering to sinners . 136 “as his creatures *; and * bountiful *, since he is ready to bestow favour rather than exact; and of ᾽ great mercy, because he multiplies mercies so greatly to those who are in existence, and who have
137.  passed away, and who are to come:—for if he did not multiply »mercy” the world with its
138.  inhabitants could not attain unto life—*and good (9), for if in his goodness he were not gracious”, so that evil-doers might be eased of their iniquities, the ten thousandth part of mankind could not attain
139.  unto life; and * forgiving, for if he did not pardon® those that were created by his word, and blot
140.  out the multitude of their iniquities, there would, perchance, be very few left of an innumerable multitude. 81 And he answered me and said: This age the Most High has made for many, but the age to come 2 for few. I will tell thee, now, a similitude, Zzra: as, when thou askest the earth, it shall say unto thee that it produces much more mould from which earthen vessels are made, but little dust from 3 which gold comes; so also is ° the course® of the present age. Many have been created, but few shall be saved! v-v so $ Ethiop. & [illis] qui faciunt conversionem in lege eius *-w @ quasi suis operibus x-x reading munificus: 3S (cf Ethiop.) giver IY so $ (gy. Ethiop.) & > 2-4 reading et donator quoniam si non donaverit (see L.A, p. 167 f.) ἅt 3. et iudex (quoniam) si non ignoverit: Simonsen reads: and the righteous judge who hath no respect of persons, but who, if he did not pardon (see LA, p. 169) b-b ZH contemptionum = tῶn αθετηματων: S of their sins (= tωn αδικηματων) c-e &@ actus (= πραξις: them and for himself he utters a beautiful prayer, appealing to God to have compassion on those who are destitute of good works (viii. 20-36), The angel briefly replies (viii. 37-40), and proceeds to compare man on the earth to seed. As the husbandman sows much seed, but only part comes up, so out of the multitude of created men only a part shall be saved. The seer answers that much seed perishes for lack or because of excess of rain, and once again appeals to the divine compassion (viii. 41-45). The divine reply that follows (viii. 46-62) constitutes a general answer to what precedes. The seer is told that his love falls far below God’s for God's creature ; his (the seer’s) humility is, however, commended, and he is assured of felicity with the righteous. He is bidden to ask no more questions regarding the fate of the lost, who have brought their doom upon themselves. (a) vii. 132-viii. 3. The seer, in his fine appeal to the divine attributes of compassion and forgiveness, obviously has in mind the passage of Scripture which has become classical in this connexion, Exod. xxxiv. 6-7 (‘Jahveh . . . a God compassionate and gracious, longsuffering and of great mercy and faithfulness ; keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving ~ iniquity and transgression and sin’). This had already become a stereotyped formula of address to or description of God when the later books of the O. T. were written, and many reminiscences of the language used occur (cf. e.g. Neh. ix. 17, Joel ii. 13, Jonah iv. 2, Ps. Ixxxvi, 15, &c.; also Sirach ii, 11 and Wisd. xv.1). The passage is doubtless based upon, or interweaves, a Midrash on Exod. xxxiv. 6-7, as Prof. Simonsen holds ; see further ZA, pp. 164-165. IV EZRA 8. 4-15 (6) viii. 4-19. Can God’s creature, who has been fashioned with such infinite skill and labour, perish finally ? (S.) s 4 And I answered and said: 40 my soul, drink thy fill of understanding 4, And, 5 O heart °, feed on wisdom?! 5 8Involuntarily thou camest (into the world), and when thou willest not departest §: 6 for » permission" has been given to thee only to live a brief time. ‘OQ Lord above us‘, if thou wouldst but suffer thy servant to pray before thee; and wouldst give unto us the seed of a new heart and culture to our understanding, whence fruit may come, whereby every corruptible one may 7 be able to live, who bears jthe form of mani! For one art thou ¥and we are all one fashioning, 8 the work of thine hands*, as thou hast said. 1And when! thou quickenest ™the body which thou fashionest in the womb™, and endowest it with members, thy creature is preserved in fire and water, and nine months does that which thou hast fashioned (i. e. the womb) bear thy creature ἢ which thou 9 hast created within it®. But °that which keeps and that which is kept® are both kept P by thy to keeping?. And when the womb gives up again 4 what has been created in it 4, thou hast commanded that out of the members themselves, * that is out of the breasts’, milk, the fruit of the breasts, should 11 be provided, that what has been fashioned may be nourished for a time. 12 And afterwards thou sustainest it in thy mercy and nourishest it in thy righteousness ; Thou disciplinest it through thy law, and reprovest it in thy wisdom. 13 Thou wilt kill it—as (it is) thy creature, and quicken it—as (it is) thy work! 14 If, then, *with a light word*® thou shalt destroy him who with such infinite labour has been 15 fashioned by thy command, ‘*to what purpose was he made*? But now I will say: Concerning man in general, "thou knowest best ἅ, but concerning Heb, T7171) 4-4 so $ =absorbe anima mea sensum: Lat. MSS. absolve e-e cf. S my heart: E£thiop. = ro ouς (? for tὸn vouv): Z > ff @ devoret quod sapit (Greek ? karapaye ro φρονουν) 8-8 so 3: LL (misreading axovoa as axovoat) convenisti enim obaudire et profectaes nolens ἘΠῚ & spatium (=? συγχώρησις (cf S power) iO Domine super nos (so v. 45): S O Lord my Lord (so v. 45) 7:1 so S: & locum hominis (confusing τόπον and τυπον) kK oὔ: ἫN una plasmatio nos sumus manuum tuarum ἘῚ &@ et quoniam (= κaὶ ort: for ote m-m #% nunc in matrice plasmatum corpus (= 2γoῦ. 1223 AY ANNY AwWIN—Lhe two middle words being misread N᾽ ANYY) nn so $3: H quae ineocreataest 99 reading ipsum [quod servat et] quod servatur (C)=S 4A C > words in brackets P-P reading servatione tua = S$ Ethiop. 94 veading quae in ea creata fuerint 1 & [membris] hoc est mamillis: 3 > [clause may be a gloss} ** & facili ordine (= κouφῃ rate: Hed.? bp Ὁ [Gunkel]) : S suddenly and quickly tt @ et ut quid (= wa ti κai : Hed. ΠP.) : so Oriental VSS. u-u % tu magis scis (= σu paddor οιδας) (4) viii. 4-19. IV EZRA 8. 16-21 16 Thy people, on whose account I grieve, and thine inheritance for which I mourn, And Israel for whom I am sad, and Jacob’s seed for whom I am dismayed— 17° Therefore I would fain pray before thee for myself and for them! For I see “the falls of us 18 that dwell in the land, * and now also* have heard the decree of judgement’ that is to come! 19 Therefore hear my voice, and * consider my words, and let me speak before thee! (c) viii. (19 4) 20-40. The seer’s prayer for compassion on his people, and the divine reply (S). (i) The Prayer. 19 *[ The beginning ” of the words of the Prayer” of Esra before he was taken up. And he said :|* 20 O Lord ° that dwellest eternally °, 4 whose are the highest heavens 4, whose chambers are in the air, 21 Whose throne is beyond imagination, whose glory inconceivable ; v KΞ for behold w-w 30. lapsos (= lapsus: ? ra mrwpara) x-x to $: L sed y-Y soS: & celeritatem iudicii (= ἀποτομιαν κρισεως: Heb. [1 “Wi: cf. partem iudicii, v. 34) 2- % intellege sermonum meorum (Greek construction): 3 accept the words of my prayer a~a This superscription is no part of the original text of the book; but it must have come into the text very early, as it is attested by 3 and Ethiop. Its presence shows clearly that the passage was early singled out for separate use for liturgical or devotional purposes % so 9 (cf. Ethiop.): & (6) verbi orationis (2) verborum c-e s9 $: © qui inhabitas (ὁ habitas) saeculum a-d so Lh (4) cuius altissimi celi (=caeli) sunt: cf 3S whose heights (= heavens) are exalted: 39 (a) cuius oculi elati γ 22 30 IV EZRA 8. 21-30 ® before whom (heaven’s) hosts stand trembling °, f and at thy word change to wind and fire ‘ ; whose word is sure, and behest constant, whose commandment is strong and enactment terrible ; whose look drieth up the depths, whose indignation melteth the mountains ; whose faithfulness 5 standeth eternal 5— Hear * the voice ® of thy servant, give ear to ‘thy creature’s petition’, and attend to my words! For so long as I live must I speak, and while I possess understanding, answer— O look not on the sins of thy people, but on them that have served thee in truth ; Regard not the deeds of the godless, but (rather) them that have kept thy covenants in tortures ; i Think πoῖ᾽ upon those that have walked in devious ways before thee, but remember them that have willingly recognized thy fear ; Will not to destroy those that have lived like cattle, but regard them that have gloriously taught thy Law; Be not wroth with those that are deemed worse than the beasts, but love them that have always put their trust in thy glory— e-© % (a) cui adstat exercitus angelorum cum tremore: (4) cui adsunt (v. 1. assistunt) milicie (militiae) cum pavore f-f % (4) et dicto tuo in ventum et ignem convertuntur (= %; cf Ethiop.): &% (a) quorum servatio in vento et igni convertitur 8-8 so Ar2 (rightly): & testificatur = 3 (cf Ethiop.): The Greek translator wrongly rendered the Heb. Wyo nWwy (which = standeth for ever) as standeth as a witness ἰψάῤηt 4 sd as YP): apparently the mistake was corrected in the Codex used by Ar. b-h 59 & (ὁ) = 5 Ethiop. Ar): & (a) and Ar? prayer tὸ so & (a): 3» (6) deprecationi meae tui plasmati = other VSS. i © neque cogites (= μηδe λογιζου): so BS: Ethiop. be not angry (= μη opy:fov): so Ar. and at thy word change to wind and fire. The meaning is that the angelic watchers serve before God by changing at His word into wind and fire. Cf. for the representation Ps. ciii. (Heb. civ.) 4 in the LXX, which renders : ‘who makes his angels winds (πνεύματα) and his ministers a flaming fire’. The Heb. text of the passage can be rendered in this way, though it is not usually so rendered (cf. Driver, Hed. Tenses?, p. 262 f.); our passage, therefore, is an interesting addition to the ancient authorities (LX X, Targ. substantially) for so understanding it. The reference here to angelic agency must not, however, be unduly pressed. One of the most remarkable features of 4 Ezra (and especially of S) is its practical ignoring of angelic and demonic agencies. Our present passage is in a poetical context and implies little more than that behind physical phenomena there is to be seen the activity of agents in the service of God, Of the crude popular angelology, with its distinct orders and personal names, there is here no trace. IV EZRA 8. 31-45 S 31 For we and our fathers * have passed our lives in ways that bring death*: but thou, because of 32 us sinners, art called compassionate. For if thou. hast a desire to compassionate us who have no 33 works of righteousness, then shalt thou be called ‘the gracious One’. For the righteous, who have many works laid up with thee, shall out of their own deeds receive their reward— 34 But what is man that thou shouldst be wroth with him? Or what is a corruptible race that thou canst be so bitter towards it ? 35 For in truth There is none of the earth-born who has not dealt wickedly, and !among those that exist’ who has not sinned. 36 For in this, O Lord, shall thy righteousness and goodness be declared, if thou wilt compassionate them that have no wealth of good works. (ii.) The Divine Reply 37 Then he answered me and said: Some things thou hast spoken aright, and according to thy 38 words so shall it come to pass. For indeed I will not concern myself about the creation of those 39 who have sinned, or their death, judgement, or perdition ; but I will rejoice (rather) ™ over the creation 40 of the righteous, (over) their pilgrimage also and their salvation and their reeompense™. ” As thou hast spoken ®, then, so shall it be! (d) viii. 41-45. Mankind is like the seed sown by the husbandman (5). [The speaker here is still the angel.)
141.  For just as the husbandman sows much seed ° upon the ground ° and plants a multitude of plants, and yet not all which were sown shall be saved in due season, nor shall all that were planted take
142.  root; so also they that are sown in the world shall not all be saved. And I answered and said: If
143.  I have found favour before thee, let me speak?. 4*The husbandman’s seed, if it come not up— because it has not received thy rain in due season*—or if it be ruined by too much rain, * perishes ;
144.  but the son of man*® who has been fashioned with thine own hands, tand is made like thine own image t, for whose sake thou hast fashioned all things—"hast thou likened him to the seed of the husbandman " ?
145.  YNay, Lord God!¥ but spare thy people, compassionate thine inheritance, for thou compassionatest thine own creation! k-k yeading (1 text a) mortalibus moribus egimus (# (ὁ) corruptum locum egimus = ῴθαρτον romoy for tporov] διηχθημεν)ὴ: see further EA, p. 182 11 & (a) de confitentibus (vead confientibus = συνεστηκοτων) : see further EA, p. 184) m-m #% super iustorum figmentum peregrinationis quoque et salvationis et mercedis receptionis (for explanation of wrong construction see EA, p. 185) aa 59 Ethiop.: & and other VSS. as I have said °-9 so, = Ar.; 5. Ethiop. > P $+before thee (cf Ethiop.) a & gr. quoniam (= ort introducing direct Speech, and therefore not to be translated: R.V. wrongly forasmuch) rr so@: S will then the husbandman’s seed, if it does not receive thy rain in its season, live? 8-8 reading (with Gunkel) sic patitur ; et filius homo (XL corrupt: M sic pat et filius: SA C hic pater et filius: see further EA, p. 187) t-t 9. et tuae imagini [nomi- natus quoniam] similatus est: the bracketed words are to be omitted with 8 (cf. Ethiop. Aro): see further EA, p- 187 uu 70 be taken as a question: so Oriental VSS. v-Vv yeading non Domine super nos IV EZRA 8. 46--52 (e) viii. 46-62. The final divine reply: The seer is assured that his lot is with the blessed, and is bidden to contemplate their felicity, and not to think of the fate of sinners (S). S 46 And he answered me and said: Things present (match) them of the present, Things future them of the future! 41 For thou comest far short of being able to love my creation more than I! Thou, however, hast many times t ranged thyself with * the ungodly. * This must not be! * 48,49 But even on this account thou shalt be honourable before the Most High; because thou hast humbled thyself, as it becomes thee, ¥ and hast not assigned thyself a placeY among the righteous ; 5° and so thou shalt receive the greater glory. *For* with many afflictions shall they be afflicted that 51 inhabit the world in the last times, because they have walked in great pride. But do thou (rather) *think of thine own case, and of them who are like thyself search out the glory. 52 For for you is opened Paradise, planted the Tree of life ; the future Age prepared, plenteousness made ready ; w-w % te et ipsum proximasti [iniustis] x= so S$ (= μη ovras): H numquam (= μηποτε) y-y © et non iudicasti te 2-2 so 3 (=or): & propter quod (= dior) a-a % pro te intellege (e) viii. 46-62. In the reply that follows the angel lightly brushes aside the seer’s objection to the comparison of mankind to seed sown in the field, by reminding him that the simile suits the present corruptible order; with the future it will be different. Moreover, God’s love of His creatures far exceeds that of any other being. A remarkable passage follows in which the seer’s self-identification with sinners is partly rebuked and partly commended. He is told not to range himself with the ungodly, but his humility in doing so is commended. Many shall be brought to ruin in the last times by the sin of pride. But let the seer contemplate the glory that awaits him with other righteous—the delights of Paradise, and the abolition of evil, death, and corruption. Let no more questions be asked as to the lost, who have deserved their fate, because they have defied the Most High, and scorned the benefits preperes for them. The con- clusion of this section, which follows in ix. 13-22, sets forth the almost total corruption of the world as due to man’s sin, Only a remnant of the sinful mass has been rescued with difficulty and by the grace of God. Here we have the apologia of orthodox Judaism as S conceived it. It is the best answer that can be furnished, from the orthodox standpoint, to meet the objections and difficulties that have been raised ; and with it the seer has, perforce to be content. But, at the best, his doubts and perplexities can only have been stilled, they cannot have been really satisfied, by such a reply. 55: 56 57, 58 61, 62 R 63 IV EZRA 8. 52-63 a City builded, a Rest appointed ; >’ Good works established ἢ, © wisdom preconstituted ° ; The (evil) root is sealed up from you, infirmity from your path extinguished ; And Death is hidden, 4 Hades fled away °; ὁ Corruption forgotten °, sorrows passed away ; and in the end ‘the treasures of immortality‘ are made manifest. Therefore ask no more concerning the multitude of them that perish; for having received liberty they despised the Most High; scorned his Law, and 8 forsook 8 his ways: Moreover "his saints" they have trodden under foot; and have said in their heart that there is no God—yea, though knowing full well that they must die. ‘Therefore as‘ the things aforesaid jJabide for you), so thirst and anguish ‘await them*. For the Most High willed not that men should come to destruction; but they—his creatures—have themselves defiled the Name of him that made them, and have proved themselves ungrateful to him who prepared 'life for them} Therefore my judgement is now nigh at hand; and this I have not made known unto all men, but only unto thee and to a few like thee. (6) THE SIGNS OF THE END REVIEWED AND APPLIED TO THE AUTHOR’S OWN TIMES (R) (E). (viii. 63-ix. 12.) Then I answered and said: Behold, O Lord, thou hast already shown me a great number of the signs which thou art about to do in the last times, but at what time thou hast not shown me. b-» perfectaest bonitas °° H anteperfectasapientia 4-4 Hinfernum fugit 9: so$: Let corruptio in oblivionem, which joined with the previous clause infernum fugit has led to the rendering ‘hell and corruption are fled into forgetful- ness’(R.V.) *fso0S: Uthesaurusimmortalitatis 8-8 so Ethiop. (= κατελιπον) : S they made to cease (= κατελυον) h-h s9 Ka (= τους οσιους avrov): 3", iustos eius (= toὺς δικαίους αὐτου) : so Ethiop. i+ so 8 (cf. Ethiop.): & sicut enim Ji so $3: & vos suscipient k-k 3 quae parata sunt which prob, disguises a verb (=? μελλει Heb, NY) a City builded, i.e. the heavenly Jerusalem which will more than compensate for the loss of the earthly city. Apparently S did not contemplate a restoration or rebuilding of the earthly Jerusalem. See further, ZA, p. 198f. a Rest appointed. The ‘rest of God’ is the final sabbath-rest (σαββατισμός, Heb. iv. 9) which awaits the people of God. Good works established (founded). Cf. Eph. ii. 10. wisdom preconstituted. Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 7. IV EZRA 9. 1-12 9: And he answered me and said: Measure (the matter) carefully in thy mind, and when thou seest 2 that ™a certain part™ of the predicted signs are past, then shalt thou understand that it is the very 3 time when the Most High is about to visit the world which he has made. When in the world there shall appear Ἢ quakings of places *, tumult of peoples, °schemings of nations °, P confusion of leaders”, , disquietude of princes, (E) 4 then shalt thou understand that it is of these things the Most High has spoken since the days that 5 were aforetime from the beginning. For just as ‘with respect to all that has happened in the world 4 6 * the beginning is obscure (?), but the end (issue) manifest", so also are the times of the Most High: the beginnings ‘are [visible]* tin portents and secret signs*, and the end "in effects and marvels". 7 And every one that shall (then) be saved, and shall be able to escape on account of his works or his 8 faith t by which he has believed ¥, “ such shall survive from the perils aforesaid, and shall see my 9 salvation in my land, and within my borders which I have sanctified for myself eternally. Then shall they be amazed that now have abused my ways; they shall abide in the torments which they tὸ have spurned and despised. For *all who* failed to recognize me in their lifetime, 7 although 11 I dealt bountifully with them”; and all who have defied my Law, while they yet had liberty, and, 12 while place of repentance was still open to them, gave no heed but scorned (it) ; these must be brought to know after death by torment. 1-1 & eis nunc vitam m-m yeading pars quaedam (so S Ethiop.) n-n % motio locorum (= κινησις τοπων) °-o & gentium cogitationes (ἢ ead coagitationes) P-P 3» ducum inconstantia (= ἡγεμονων ακαταστασια) rad omne quod factum est in saeculo (casus Pendens) tr & corrupt: & the beginning is known and the end manifest : perhaps Greek had en apava .. . ev ἐεμφανει : see further EA, p. 202 s-s % manifesta: so S$ ὑπὸ Ψ in prodigiis et virtutibus = ἐn τέρασι κai δυναμεσι (δυναμις = nodyn Job xt.6 LXX: see further EA, P. 203) u-u so Ethiop.: & in actu et in signis (reading σημασιοις for θαυμασιοις) v-Y yveading in qua credidit w-w reading is relinquetur == Z quotquot (= ovo) TY so S: © beneficia consecuti tῷ Se with the theology of S, whereas the older view is that punishment only comes completely after the resurrection ; while it is y effected by the destruction of the ungodly in the wars and tumults which precede the Messianic Age, and which the righteous survive. The inconsistency of the section, as a whole, with S can easily be shown (see ZA, p. 200). The whole section is a compilation from the hand of R, who has drawn partly upon E (ix. 3, 7, 8), and partly upon S (ix. 9, 12). It thus exhibits phenomena essentially the same as vii. 26-44. t 14 IV EZRA 9. 13-22 (7) THE DivINE REPLY CONCLUDED: FINAL JUSTIFICATION OF THE FEWNESS OF THE SAVED (S). (ix. 13-22.) 13 So, then, be thou no longer curious as to how the ungodly shall be punished, but inquire (rather) how the righteous " shall be saved *—they to whom the world (belongs) and for whose sakes, also, the 15 world has come into existence*. And I answered and said: I have already said, and say now, and 16 shall say (it) again: There are more who perish than shall be saved, even as the flood is greater than a drop! 17 And he answered me and said: As is the ground, so the sowings ; as are the flowers, so are the colours ; As is the workman », so is the work ; as is the husbandman, so is the threshing-floor— 18 °¢For there was (a time) in the eternal ages when I prepared for those who now exist—before they had come into being—a world wherein they might dwell°; and then none gainsaid me—for none 19 existed. But now they that have been created in this world—(a world) made ready with both an unfailing table and an enexplorable pasture—have become corrupt in their manners. 20 Then I considered my world, and lo! it was destroyed ; and my earth, and lo! ‘it was in peril *— on account of °the tumults ὃ f of those who are (living) in it ‘. 2: And I saw, and spared (some) 8 with very great difficulty 5, and saved me a grape out of a cluster, 22 and a plant " out of a great forest». Perish, then, the multitude which has been born in vain; but let my grape be preserved, and my plant, which with much labour I have perfected ! 2-8 so Ars: but 3 Ethiop. live (as often elsewhere) ®H+et quando: but other VSS.> b-b & opera (= εργασια: Heb, 2912: the latter = workman or work) c-¢ 59 3; of. Ethiop.: & quoniam tempus erat saeculi et tunc cum essem parans eis qui nunc, antequam fieret illis saeculum in quo inhabitarent a-d % erat peri- culi 9. yeading coagitationes (for cogitationes); o£ S ὁ f-f of. Ethiop.: & quae in eo advenerunt s-s & vix valde (= πανυ poyts) b-h 59 & Ethiop. (cf. Ar) = ah uλης πoλλης : 3. de tribu multa (φuλης for aφuλης) (7) ix. 13-22. The first verse of this section forms the immediate continuation of viii.62. The seer had been assured that the Judgement was near at hand, and had been revealed only to him and a few like him. Now he is once again told not to concern himself with the fate of the ungodly, but to fix his attention, rather, on the salvation which the righteous attain (cf. viii. 55). This declaration is not, as Volkmar and, later, Gunkel have supposed, the enunciation of a new subject for discussion in the visions that follow, but merely a recapitulation of what has already been discussed in the former part of the present vision. The seer’s reply is also a repetition of former complaints about the large number of those who perish (ix. 15-16). The final form of the divine reply follows (vv. 17-22). The evil of the present world is due to man’s sin. There was a time—before the generation of men had been created—when none defied the Most High; but now those who have been placed in the world, which has been provided and furnished for their needs, have degenerated and become corrupt. In order that the purpose of Creation shall not be entirely frustrated a few have been spared—‘a grape out of a cluster, a plant out of a great forest’: ‘Perish, then, the multitude which has been born in vain; but let my grape be preserved, and my plant, which with much labour I have perfected.’ It should be noted that the preservation of a small remnant from the corrupt mass is due entirely to special efforts on God’s part. In other words, it must be attributed entirely to the divine grace. od IV EZRA 9. 23-27 VI. ix. 23-25. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION (S). 23 + But if ‘thou wilt separate thyselfi yet seven more days—thou shalt not, however, fast in them, 24 but shalt go into a field of flowers, where no house has been built, and eat only jof the fruit of the 25 fieldi; and thou shalt taste no flesh and drink no wine, but (eat) only the fruit—and pray unto the Most High continually, then I will come and talk with thee. THE FOURTH VISION. (ix. 26-x. 59.) I. ix. 26-28. INTRODUCTION (S). 26 9801 went, as he commanded me, into the field which is called * Ardat*, and there I sat among 27 the flowers, and did eat of the herbs of the field; 'and the eating thereof satisfied me’ And it ii so S$: & [si] intermittas Fi so Ethiop. & de floribus campi k-k so Ὁ (S**); = Ar.2(?); v. 2. Adar, Ardad, Ardas, Ardaf: 3 Ethiop. Arpad (cf. 2 Kings xviii. 34); Ar.’ Araab or Araat ; Arm. Ardab 1-l Ψ et facta est esca earum mihi in saturitatem ix. 23-25. This short section forms the conclusion of the long third vision and the transition to the fourth. The seer is bidden to wait another seven days, when a further revelation shall be vouchsafed to him. He is, however, expressly told not to fast—as he had done in preparation for former visions—but to go into a field of-flowers, and eat only flowers (?) or herbs of the field; he is, moreover, to abstain from tasting flesh and wine, and is bidden to pray continually. The field is to be destitute of any building. As the following vision makes clear, this locality is to be the scene of a vision of the Heavenly Jerusalem. The direction as to eating only of the produce of the field is remarkable. What is its significance? It is clearly not to be regarded as on a par with the strict fast, from which it is expressly distinguished. Moreover, in the introduction to the third vision (vi. 35) the seer says that he fasted seven days in order to complete the three weeks of fasting that had been commanded him (i.e. a week of fasting before each of the first three visions). Thus this form of preparation had reached its climax at the beginning of the third vision, and it is curious to note that no further direct mention of fasting is met with in the remaining chapters of the book (x-xiv), though contexts occur in which such might have been expected (cf. xi. 1, xiii. 1, xiv. 1). Is, then, the direction as to eating herbs or flowers here to be regarded as a substitute for fasting proper—as a form of half-fasting? This is possible, as abstinence from flesh and wine is decidedly in the direction of a mild asceticism. But it may be argued that more probably what is intended is rather in the nature of an antithesis to strict fasting. It should be remembered that the destruction of the Holy City—and, above all, of the Temple—in A. Ὁ. 70 gave rise to a widespread ascetic movement among the Jewish people who survived, especially in Palestine. Many ve expression to H as grief in severe and regular forms of fasting. It is this situation which is contemplated here. seer is about to receive a vision in which grief at the desolation—bitter as it is—of the earthly Sion is to be transcended by a vision of the heavenly City. He is bidden, therefore, not to fast, but, in solitude, and far from human habitation and proximity, to prepare himself by partaking of the simplest food of nature, and by prayer, for the coming revelation. The food most appropriate in the circumstances would be that of the primaeval age and the age of man’s innocence. See further ZA, p. 209 f. 5 IV EZRA 9. 28-37 28 came to pass after seven days, as I lay upon the grass, that my heart was again troubled as before. Then 1 opened my mouth”, and began to address the Most High. II, ix. 29-37. THE ABIDING GLORY OF THE LAW, AND ISRAEL: A CONTRAST (S). 29 And I said: "O Lord”, thou didst verily reveal thyself unto our fathers ὃ in the wilderness” when they went forth out of Egypt, and when they walked through the untrodden and unfruitful wilder- 30 ness ; and thou didst say : O Israel, hear thou me; O seed of Jacob, attend unto my words! 31 For, behold, I sow my Law in you, and it shall bring forth fruit in you, and ye shall be glorified in it for ever. 32 Butour fathers, who received the Law, observed it not, and the statutes they did not keep, and yet 33 the fruit of the Law did not perish, nor could it—because it was thine; but they who received it 34 perished, because they kept not that which had been sowninthem. Now, it is a general rule ἃ that, when the ground has received seed, or the sea a ship, or any other vessel food or drink, * and when it happens that what is sown’, or * what is launched ", or the things that have been taken in come to 35 an end,—these come to an end, while the receptacles remain: but with us it has not been so. 36 We who have received the Law and sinned must perish, together with our heart, which has taken 37 it in: the Law, however, perishes not, but abides in its glory. mm so Ethiop. Ar: Hapertum estosmeum: soSAr2 2% so: but 3 Ethiop. O Lord my Lord (= Δέσποτα κυριε) ° + in nobis ( prob. a gloss): other VSS.> Ῥ 95: oὗ Sinai %4 = Sand thisis the rule (Hed, bban nn): & et ecce consuetudo *tsoH: 5.» 55 3 quod missumest +t so 9 Ar} Arm, & et respexi oculis meis ὅtὰ reading adii- ‘ desert’) is a symbolical name for the Holy Land generally, which might have been represented at the end of the first century A.D, as a veritable wilderness to the Jews (Volkmar), may be at once dismissed. More plausible is the suggestion put forward by Mr. Rendel Harris (Zhe Rest of the Words of Baruch (Cambridge, 1889], pp. 35-39) that the locality intended is the neighbourhood of Abraham’s oak, near Hebron. This would be a highly suitable place for a divine revelation ; and, moreover, Hebron is mentioned in 2 Baruch as one of the seats of prophetic inspiration (xlvii. 1). Prof. Harris concludes that the scene of the fifth vision in 4 Ezra (ch. xi) is Hebron, and that this is identical with the scene of the fourth vision, i. 6. ‘ the field of Ardat’. But in this view no account has been taken of the different sources which appear in these chapters; the connexion of the scene of the two visions is a purely artificial one, and is due to the compiler. Nor is it at all certain that the ‘oak’ mentioned in 4 Ezra xiv. 1 as the place where Ezra received the revelation is ‘ Abraham’s oak’, as Prof, Harris supposes. It may have been some well-known tree in Jerusalem (). Thus the attempt to locate ‘the field of Ardat’ at Hebron cannot be regarded as successful. Whatever may be the true explanation of the name ‘ Ardat ’, it seems clear that its significance must be mainly of a symbolical character. The repeated statement that the mysterious place was one ‘where no house has been built’ (ix. 24, x. 51) not only excludes the actual site of the ruined earthly Jerusalem, but also points to a place which was still untouched by human hand, and so fit to be the spot where the heavenly city could (temporarily) rest. Presumably the reader was expected to think of this locality as in the immediate neighbourhood of Babylon, where Salathiel is represented as residing at the beginning of the Apocalypse (4 Ezra iii. 1). One slight indication (cf. x. 58) suggests that the time when this revelation took place was during the day, and not by night, as is the case with the dream-visions. See further ZA͂, p. 212f. ; ix. 29-37. After seven days’ meditation in ‘ Ardat’ the seer gives characteristic expression once again to the thoughts which have agitated his heart. This takes the form of a soliloquy on the relation of Israel to the Law. At the Exodus from Egypt—when Israel became a nation—God had sown the Law in the heart of His people, with the promise: ‘ It shall bring forth fruit in you, and ye shall be glorified in it for ever’ (ix. 31). But the fathers observed it not; yet ‘the fruit of the Law did not perish ’—it could not—because it was essentially divine. But ‘they who received it perished, because they kept not that which had been sown in them’. The law that obtains in the natural world is that the receptacles remain after that which they have received has passed away—for instance, the ground remains after the seed that has been sown in it has sprung up and been gathered, the sea remains after the ship that has been launched in it has come to an end,and so on. But with Israel it is different. For ‘we who have received the Law and sinned must perish, together with our heart, which has taken it in: the Law, however, perishes not, but abides in its glory’. The application of the moral remains. The divine element is eternal—the corruptible vessel that receives it perishes. Even so the eternal reality which was partially and imperfectly expressed by the earthly Jerusalem remains ; but the vessel that mediated it has perished. The earthly vessel (i.e. the earthly Jerusalem) has been destroyed—it has perished: how foolish and perverse to look for its revival! Hope should rather be fixed on the eternal City which exists—and has always existed—in the incorruptible world, and which is to be enjoyed by those who pass into the blessed immortal life of the age that is tocome. The confirmation of the truth of these hopes—and the answer to any lingering doubts that may remain—is the burden of the vision that follows (ix. 38f.). IV EZRA 9. 38—10. 9 III. ix. 38-x. 24. THE VISION OF THE DISCONSOLATE WOMAN (5). 38 And when I spake thus in my heart ‘I lifted up my eyes‘, and saw a woman upon the right ; and lo! she was mourning and weeping with a loud voice, and was much grieved in mind, and her clothes 39 were rent and there were ashes upon her head. Then I dismissed my thoughts in which I had been 40 preoccupied, and turned to her and said: Wherefore weepest thou? And why art thou grieved in _ 41thy mind? And she said unto me: Suffer me, my lord, to indulge my sorrow and “continue my grief’, for I am embittered in soul and deeply afflicted. 42 And I said unto her: What has befallen thee? tell me. 43 She said unto me: I, thy servant, was barren, and bore no child, though I had a husband thirty 44 years. Both hourly and daily during these thirty years I besought the Most High night and day. 45 And it came to pass after thirty years God heard thy handmaid and looked upon my affliction ; He considered my distress, and gave me a son. And I rejoiced in him greatly, I and my husband and ‘all my fellow townsfolk ἡ, and we gave great , 47 glory unto “the Mighty One’. And I reared him with great travail. So when he was grown up, I came to take * him * a wife, and made ‘a feast day’. 1 And it came to pass when my son entered into his wedding chamber, he fell down and died. 2 Then 7I removed the lights’, and all my fellow townsfolk rose up to comfort me; but I remained 3 quiet *until the night of the next day*. »And it came to pass when they were all quiet (and desisted) from consoling, as I remained quiet’, I rose up by night, and fled, and came to this field, 4 as thou seest. And I purpose ‘never again® to return to the city, but here to stay and neither eat 5 nor drink, but continually to mourn and to fast till I die. Then I left the thoughts in which I was 6 still occupied, and answered her in anger, and said: O thou above all other women most foolish ! 7 Seest thou not our mourning, and what has befallen us? How Sion, the mother of us all, is in great 8 grief and deep affliction? ‘It is right now to mourn 4, seeing that we all mourn, and to grieve, seeing 9 that we are all grief-stricken ; thou, however, art grief-stricken for one son®. But ask the earth, and i ciamdolere ~-¥ so $ (/#t. all the sons of my town) E¢hiopf. Ar Ar2: Lomnescivesmei *-¥ &% Fortem (= tὸn + ἐσχυρον = dsm in LXX) x= reading ei y-y & diem epuli: S+and great rejoicing 2-8 of, % (1st pers. sing.): & evertimus omnes lumina (everti = ? καθειλον = Heb. VDA) a-a so Ethiop. & usque in alium diem usque in noctem b-b & et factum est cum omnes quievissent ut me consolarentur ut quiescerem (orzginal Heb, text perhaps was: WMD ING sed pm DvD ΠO oN TN: see EA, p. 221) ee so S (= μηκετι) ; of. Ar Ar? : © iam non (=? μη apr) 4-4 s9 $ Ar) = & (Violet) : lugere validissimum est nunc (B/ lugete validissime [end of v. 7]. Et nunc) © $+but we the whole world for our mother Rom. vii. 14): cf. also 2 Cor. iii. 7f. [With vv. 36, 37 cf. 2 Bar. xiv. 19: ‘And now I see that as for the world which was made on account of us, lo! it abides, but we, on account of whom it was made, depart.’] ix. 38—x. 24. We now reach the final sections of the Salathiel-Apocalypse. It is altogether fitting that the close of the (Salathiel) book should contain a revelation of the realities of the future world where, according to the theology of 5, the felicity and blessedness of the righteous can alone be consummated; and it accords with what would be expected that this revelation should be concerned with that part of the heavenly realities (viz. the heavenly City) whose earthly counterpart (viz. Jerusalem), in its humiliation and ruin, had formed the starting-point of the debates of the Apocalypse (cf. iii. 27). It has already been declared (cf. viii. 52) that the heavenly Sion is one of the things which belong to the eternal order, and which should be made freely available for the enjoyment of the righteous after the final Judgement. It is this heavenly reality which is now manifested to the seer. An examination of this section and the following makes it clear that the disconsolate woman who appears to the seer, mourning the death of her : only son, must be the heavenly Sion: she cannot be identified with the earthly Jerusalem, as Kabisch justly points out, without making the story meaningless. See further ZA, p. 216f. 17 IV EZRA 10. 9-22 she shall tell thee, that it is she who ought to mourn ‘ the fall of so many‘ that have sprung into to being upon her. % Yea, from the beginning all who have been born, and others who are to come— 11 lo! they go# almost all into perdition, and the multitude of them comes to destruction. Who, then, should mourn the more? Ought not she that has lost so great a multitude? or thou who grievest 12 but for one? But if thou sayest to me: My lamentation is not like the earth’s, for I have lost the fruit of my womb which I bare with pains and brought forth with sorrows— 13 but as regards the earth, (it is) according to the course of nature"; the multitude present in it is 14 gone as it came: then I say to thee: Just as thou hast borne (offspring) with sorrow, even so also the earth has borne (given) her fruit, namely man, from the beginning unto him that made her. 15 Now, therefore, keep thy sorrow within, and bear gallantly the misfortunes that have befallen thee. 16 For if thou wilt acknowledge God’s decree to be just, thou shalt receive thy son again in (due) time, 18 and shalt be praised among women. Therefore go into the city to thy husband. And she said unto 19 me: ‘I will not do so?: I will not enter the city, but here will I die. So I proceeded to speak further 20 unto her, and said: ἡ No, woman! no, woman!i do not do so; but * suffer thyself to be prevailed upon by reason of Sion’s misfortunes *, be consoled by reason of Jerusalem's sorrow. 21 For thou seest how our sanctuary is laid waste, our altar! thrown down; our Temple destroyed, our harp laid low; 22 our song is silenced, our rejoicing ceased ; the light of our lamp is extinguished, the ark of our covenant spoiled ; our holy things are defiled, the name that is called upon us ™is profaned ™ ; © reading tantorum casum (77.5.5. > casum): so Ethiop. Ar} 8-8 XL (Violet) et ex ipso initio omnes nati et alii venientes, ecce, S-c.; f. S h-h © terra autem secundum viam terrae i so 3 (ff. Ethiop. Ar): % non faciam 11 so 3: other VSS. > k-k 50 3 Arm.: & consenti persuaderi quid enim casus Sion Ms> m-m so % (cf. Ethiop. Ar): & paene profanatum est - i = Sama IV EZRA 10. 22-29 our nobles are dishonoured, our priests burnt, our Levites gone into captivity ; our virgins are defiled, our wives ravished ; "our righteous are seized, [our saints scattered, ] our children are cast out ἢ, our youths are enslaved, our heroes made powerless: 23 and, what is more than all— Sion’s seal °is now sealed up dishonoured °, and given up into the hands of them that hate us. 24 Do thou, then, shake off thy great grief, abandon thy much sorrow, That the Mighty One may again forgive thee, and the Most High give thee rest, a respite from thy troubles! IV. x. 25-28. SION’s GLORY: THE VISION OF THE HEAVENLY JERUSALEM (S). 25 And it came to pass, while I was talking to her, lo! her countenance on a sudden shone exceedingly, and P her aspect became brilliant as lightning ”, so that I was too much afraid 4(to approach her, and my heart was terrified exceedingly) 4: and 26 while I was debating what this might mean, she suddenly uttered a loud and fearful cry, so that the 27 earth shook at the noise. And when I looked, lo! the woman was no longer visible to me, * but there was a City builded*, and a place showed itself of large foundations. Then I was afraid, and 28 cried with a loud voice, and said: Where is Uriel, the angel who came unto me at the first? For he it is who has caused me to fall into this great bewilderment ; and so * my prayer " is made futile, and my request disappointed ! V. x. 29-57. INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION (S). -29 And while I was speaking thus, lo! the angel came to me, who had come to me at the first ; and n-n AI VSS. give only two clauses here, except Ar.” which has three; clauses 1 and 3 are attested by & Ethiop. Ar): S (in an emended form) supports clause 2 and omits clause 3; see for details EA, p. 228f. o-o & resignata est de gloria sua nunc P-p % species coruscus fiebat vultus eius 14 so S$ Ethiop. Ar): but © ad eam rr so Oriental VSS.: & sed civitas aedificabatur ss @ finis meus=S L£thiop. Ar. (cf R.V. mine end): prob., as Violet suggests, there was a corruption in the Hebr. text here, snban being misread ‘NIA our priests burnt. An allusion to the destruction of the Temple by fire. Josephus (Wars, vi. 5.1) specially mentions two priests of eminence, who threw themselves into the fire ‘and were burnt together with the holy house’. S 30 33. 34 40, 41 42 48 IV EZRA 10. 30-45 when he saw that I lay on the ground as one dead, ‘ my understanding being confused‘, he grasped my right hand and strengthened me, and set me on my feet, and said to me: What aileth thee? Why art thou so disquieted ? Wherefore is thy understanding confused, and the thoughts of thy heart ? And I said: Because thou hast forsaken me! Yet I did as thou commandedst, and went into the field, and lo! I have seen—"and yet see"—that which I am unable to express. And he said unto me: Stand up like a man, and I will advise thee. Then said I: Speak on, my lord; only forsake me not, lest I die to no purpose. For I have seen what I did not know ‘and heard what I do not understand. Or is my mind deceived, and my soul in a dream? . Now, therefore, I beseech thee to show thy servant concerning this perplexity ! And he answered me, and said: Hear me, and I will teach thee, and tell thee concerning the things thou art afraid of; for the Most High hath revealed many secrets unto thee. For he hath seen “ thy righteous conduct n᾽, how thou hast sorrowed continually for thy people, and mourned greatly on account of Sion— * The matter, therefore, is as follows.* The woman who appeared to thee a little while ago, whom ¥thou sawest Y mourning and begannest to comfort: whereas now thou seest no likeness of a woman any more, but 7a builded City * hath appeared unto thee: and whereas she told thee of the misfortune of her son—this is the interpretation: This woman, whom thou sawest, is Sion, whom thou now beholdest as a builded City ; And whereas she said unto thee that she was barren thirty years: the reason is that there were * three thousand years * in the world before any offering was offered ” in (it) t-t % et intellectus meus alienatus erat (=? κaὶ o vous pou ἡλλοτριωθὴ) tὰ Het video; so 9 : but Ethiop. Ar Arm.> v-v veading audivi (C M) = Ethiop. Ar.’ Ar? Arm.: & 1 hear = audio (S A) w-w H rectam viam tuam: 3% (of. Ethiop.) = tὴn ευὐθυτητα σou X-X 50 35. (-- ovros ουν ἐστιν o λoγoς: IAIN MN): oὐ Ethiop. Arm.: & hic ergo intellectus visionis A ise ὅt» t so Oriental VSS.: & civitas aedificari (R.V. a city in building) a-a so all the Versions except the Arm. (which has many years) and & (best MSS.) anni... tres b-b reading in eo (for in that the mother represents the heavenly, and the son the earthly Sion. For a full discussion of alternative views see EA, p. 2336. "The original meaning of the vision has been obscured by two slight alterations in the text from the pen of R; in v. 45, ‘in it’ (= ἐn aὐtῷ, 1.6. in the world) has been changed to ‘in her’ (= ἐn aὐtῇ, i.e. in Sion), thus producing the meaning that for 3,000 years no oblation was offered in Sion, i.e. the earthly Sion; and in v. 46 ‘ David’ has been altered into ‘Solomon’. In this way R secures the interpretation that the woman = the earthly Sion; the son = the Temple (the son’s birth = the founding of the Temple by Solomon), &c.; while the transfiguration of the woman is a prophecy of the future glory of the earthly Sion. But this destroys the original significance of the vision, and cannot be harmonized with the theology of S. See further ZA, oc. cit. 29-30. and when he saw that I lay on the ground as one dead. For the representation cf. Dan. viii. 17, 18; X20; 10, 16... on tς 175 026. and set me on my feet. Cf. v. 15; vi. 13, 17. IV EZRA 10. 46-55
146.  (1.6. ἴπ the world)®. And it came to pass after “ three thousand years that ° ὅ (David) ὦ built the City,
147.  and offered offerings: then it was that the barren bare a son. And whereas she told thee that she
148.  reared him with travail: 5 that was the (divine) dwelling in Jerusalem®. And whereas she said unto thee: ‘My son entering into his marriage-chamber died,’ ‘and that misfortune befell her ‘—this was
149.  the fall of Jerusalem that has come to pass. And lo! thou hast seen 5 the (heavenly) pattern of her§, how she mourned her son, and thou didst begin to comfort her for what had befallen ®.
150.  Now, the Most High seeing that thou art grieved ‘deeply: and art distressed whole-heartedly on account of her ; hath showed thee the brilliance of her glory, and ἡ Πoῦ majestic beauty j. 52 Therefore I bade thee remain in the field where no house has been builded ; for I knew that the 53 Most High was about to reveal all these things unto thee. *[{Therefore I bade thee come into the 54 field where no foundation of any building is, for in the place where the City of the Most High was about to be revealed no building-work of man could endure ¥.] Therefore be not thou afraid, and let not thy heart be terrified; but go in and see the brightness tand! vastness of the building, as far as it is possible for thee with the sight of thine eyes to see! ea) ce read Solomon; see exegetical note e-e X haec erat habitatio Hierusalem {-f so © Ar: Ethiop. has direct speech (this grief befell me): 3 > s-s & similitudinem eius h % +haec erant tibi aperienda = Ar.?: ofher VSS. > (doubtless a gloss) ‘tit B@exanimo 7} 30 pulchritudinem decoris eius (Hebr. ? 777 NNSN) k-k yy, 51-52 and 53-54 are doublets: perhaps 53-4 are more original ἘῚ so all VSS. except & which has vel world’s history in ch. iii ignores all previous sacrifices and offerings till he reaches the name of David. The earthly Jerusalem became the holy city—the c¢#vztas Dei—when David offered sacrifices in it. Cf. ili. 24. IV EZRA 10. 56-60 5 56 Then shalt thou hear as much as the hearing of thine ears can hear.
151.  For thou art blessed above many, ' and art named before the Most High as but few! (The true sequel should be xii. 39 ὦ, xiii. 57-58, and xii. 40-48 (xiv. 29-35); see introductions to the two latter sections. The sequence ts shown by the following verses :) [(xii. 39 6) And he departed from me. (xiii. 57) And I went forth and walked in the field greatly magnifying and praising the Most High on account of the marvellous acts which he performs in due season ; (xiii. 58) and because he governs the times, and the things which come to pass in due time. (xii. 40 f.) And it came to pass when all the people heard, &c.] VI. x. 58-59. REDACTIONAL TRANSITION TO THE FIFTH VISION (R). R 58,59 But ™on the night of to-morrow™ thou shalt remain here ; so will the Most High reveal to thee 59 ™in dream-visions™ what the Most High will do unto the dwellers upon earth in the last days. THE FIFTH (EAGLE) VISION. (x. 60-xii. 35) (A). I. THE VISION. (x. 60-xii. 44) (A) (R). A 60 SolIslept that night and the following as he had commanded me. m-m nocte ... quae in crastinum futura est n-n % eas visiones somniorum (= ταυτα ta opayata tῶn ενυπνιων : ? ravta a corruption of κατα : so Volk.) (see next verse) much more than is told in the vision. As Gunkel remarks, this statement (obviously natural and unforced) makes it clear that the vision is the record of an actual experience. In the end what the seer saw and heard was so overpowering and marvellous that his powers of describing it all failed. Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 4. With vv. 55-56 cf. 1 Cor. ii. 9 and Isa. Ixiv. 9. It should be noted that the City is conceived as still standing before the seer’s eyes. 58-59. The seer is bidden to remain where he is (i.e. in the field of Ardat) for another two nights, in order that he may receive in dream-visions a revelation of what shall happen to the dwellers upon earth in the last days. It is obvious that these verses, which form the transition to the visions that follow, are the work of R. The situation presupposed is hardly a possible one for S. The seer had been bidden to resort to Ardat—the field untouched by any work of human hand—in order to receive a vision of the heavenly City. This has been accomplished, and to represent him as still remaining there in order to receive further revelations in dream-visions is in the nature of an anti-climax. Moreover the burden of the dream-visions, the revelation of what is to happen in the last days, has already formed the subject of long debates in the former visions of S. The dream-visions that follow, as we shall see, belong to other sources; and the transitional verses have been inserted by R in order to fit in and link together these other elements with the Salathiel-Apocalypse. IV EZRA 11. 1-5 11: And it came to pass the second night that I saw a dream: and lo! there came up from the sea oe ee ee ἀon. - Ὁ 2 an eagle which had twelve (?) feathered wings, and three heads. And I beheld, and lo! he spread his wings ° over ° the whole earth, and all the winds of heaven blew on him, and ? (the clouds) were 3 gathered together (unto him)”. And I beheld, (and lo!) out of his wings there grew ‘anti-wings® ; 4and they became wings petty and small. But his heads were at rest ; the middle head was greater 5 than the other heads, yet it rested with them. And I beheld, and lo! the eagle flew with his wings °° s9 Ar? Arm.: Lin = 5. Ethiop. P-P so Oriental VSS. (except Arm.) & colligebantur (> nubes ad eum) 4-4 & contrariae pennae (= ὃ αντιπτερυγια) : other VSS. = πτερυγια which, with a man’s voice, upbraided the Eagle for his tyranny and cruel oppression, and announces his coming destruction : ‘ Therefore shalt thou disappear, O thou Eagle, and thy horrible wings, and thy little wings most evil, thy harm-dealing heads, thy hurtful talons, and all thy worthless body ! And so the whole earth, freed from thy violence, shall be refreshed again, and hope for the judgement and mercy of him that made her ’ (xi. 45-6). While the Lion spoke, the last head disappeared; the two little wings which had detached themselves and gone over to it rose up to reign, but their reign was short and full of uproar. Then they, too, vanished, the whole body of the Eagle was consumed in flames, and the earth was greatly terrified. On awaking from his dream-vision the seer, much perturbed by what he has seen, prays that the interpretation of it may be granted him. He is told that the Eagle is the fourth kingdom which appeared to Daniel. The twelve wings represent twelve kings who shall reign in it one after the other. The second reign shall be longer than any of the other twelve. The voice proceeding from the midst of the body signifies that in the middle period (xii. 18, ‘in the midst of the time of that kingdom,’ according to the true text) great commotions shall arise, and it shall stand in peril of falling ; but it shall recover, and regain its stability. The interpretation of the eight under (little) wings is: there shall arise in this kingdom eight kings ‘ whose times shall be transient and years swift’; two of these shall perish when the middle time of the kingdom approaches ; four are to be kept for the time ‘ when its time for dissolution shall approach ’; but two are to be reserved for the End. The interpretation of the three heads is: in the last days of the kingdom the Most High will raise up three kings who shall renew many things in the kingdom, and shall rule over the earth with much oppression above all that were before them. They are called the heads of the Eagle, because they shall bring its wickedness to a head and consummate its end. The disappearance of the largest (i.e. the middle) head signifies that the first of these three kings shall die upon his bed, but yet with torment. The other two are destined for the sword—one is to fall by the sword of the other, and the latter shall perish himself by the sword in the last days. The two wings that passed over to the right-hand head are reserved for the End, They shall reign for a brief time after the disappearance of the last head; but their reign shall be full of trouble and uproar. The Lion is the Messiah whom the Most High has reserved for the End. Such is the vision and its interpretation as they lie before us in our present text. At first sight all seems clear ; but a closer examination of the details reveals, as will appear, many grave difficulties. For a discussion of these see the introduction to the interpretation of the vision (xii. 3 6-39) below. The vision must thus be regarded as an independent writing. It apparently belongs to a series of dream-visions, of which it forms the last, and which already existed in written form in a book when our vision was excerpted by R (cf. xii. 37). As in similar cases elsewhere R has inserted harmonistic additions designed to bring the matter into accord with other elements in our Apocalypse. Such are clearly xii.g and 34. But further, there seems to have been a revision of a more far-reaching character, as will appear when the details of the interpretation come to be examined. The whole vision is clearly much influenced by, if it is not actually based upon, Dan. vii. The identification of the Eagle with the fourth kingdom of Dan. vii is an interesting case of the reinterpretation of prophecy. With the Eagle-Vision should be compared the fountain and forest vision of 2 Baruch (xxxvi-xl), which remarkably enough is a dream-vision of the fall of the Roman power. As in our vision, this is effected by the Messiah; the last leader of the hostile host is taken captive to Mount Sion, where the Messiah, after upbraiding him with his wickedness, destroys him. For a fuller discussion cf. HA, pp. 244-9. The vision in its original form appears to have been composed some time in the reign of Vespasian (A. D. 69-79) or possibly later (A. D. 96-97). xi. 1. Isaw adream. Cf. Dan. vii.1. A dream-vision (not merely a dream) is meant. from the sea. Cf. Dan. vii. 3; Rev. xiii. 1. In the latter passage, as here, the monster that ascends out of the sea = the Roman Empire. The latter, for the Orientals, came up, as a matter of historical fact, from the sea (i.e. the Mediterranean), and it is this fact that is doubtless present in the apocalyptist’s thought here. [It is clear that the (perhaps contemporary) apocalyptic writers of Rev. xiii and our chapter both identified the fourth beast of Dan. vii with Rome: cf. esp. 4 Ezra xii. 10 ty aneagle. The eagle of the following vision undoubtedly represents the Roman Empire. The symbolism was particularly appropriate to Rome, whose military emblem was the eagle. three heads, i.e. according to the probable original meaning of the vision the three Flavian Emperors (Vespasian and his two sons, Titus and Domitian). Cf. the four wings and four heads of the leopard in Dan. vii. 6. A 21, 27 IV EZRA 11. 6-29 6 to reign over the earth and over them that dwell therein. And I beheld how all things under heaven were subject unto him, and no one spake against him—not even one of the creatures upon 7 earth. And I beheld, and lo! the eagle rose upon his talons, and uttered his voice to his wings, 8, 9 saying t, Watch not all at once: sleep every one in his place, and watch by course: but let the heads 10 be preserved for the last. And I beheld, and lo! the voice proceeded not from his heads, but from 11 the midst of his body. And I numbered his anti-wings, and lo! there were eight. 12 And I beheld, and lo! [ox the right side] there arose one wing, and reigned over the whole earth. 13 And it came to pass that, after it had reigned, it came to its end and * disappeared ", so that the place 14 of it was not visible. Then arose the second and reigned, and this bare rule for a long time. And it came to pass that, after it had reigned, it also came to its end, so that it disappeared even as the , 16 first. And lo! a voice sounded which said to it: Hear, thou that hast borne rule over the earth so 17 long a time: ‘this I proclaim * unto thee before thou shalt disappear—After thee shall none bear 18 rule (the length of) thy time, nay not even the half of it! Then the third lifted itself up and held 19 the rule even as the former, and it also disappeared. And so it fell to all the wings ee turn"] to 20 rule and then disappear. And I beheld, and lo! in process of time ἡ the little wings ¥ also were set up [* upon the right side“| that they also might hold the rule; and some of them bare rule but 22 disappeared suddenly : and some of them were set up but did not hold the rule. After this I beheld, 23 and lo! the twelve wings disappeared, and two little wings ; and nothing was left in the eagle’s body 24 save only the three heads that were at rest, and six little wings. And I beheld, and lo! from the six little wings two detached themselves, and remained under the head that was upon the right side: 25 but four remained in their place. And I beheld, and lo! these under-wings thought to set themselves 26 up and to hold the rule. And I beheld, and lo! one was set up, but immediately disappeared ; 28 a second also, and this disappeared more quickly than the first. And I beheld, and lo! the two 29 that remained thought also in themselves to reign ; and * while they were thinking thus*, lo! ¥ one t $ (against all the other VSS.)+Go, rule over the whole earth: but remain quiet now (ἢ aὐ exflan. gloss “δ : , ‘ ; mnS 5: 5.8 3, non apparuit t-t reading hoc (v. 1. haec) adnuntio u-u % singulatim v-Vv so 3 Ar; & sequentes ennae wow so 3 Ethiop. Arm.: but Ar} Ar* > xx Z in eo cum cogitarent (= ev tῷ λογίζεσθαι aὐtὰ P : d : ἜΞΧΤΕ tς H 5 Ey y-y % unum de quiescentium capitum (¢mtating Greek construction) IV EZRA 11. .29-45 of the heads that were at rest Y—it, namely, that was in the midst —awoke ; for this one was greater 31 than the two [other] heads. And I beheld how it allied with itself the two other heads; and lo! the head was turned with them that were with it, and did eat up the two under-wings that thought 32 to have reigned. This head *bare rule over the whole earth’, and exercised lordship over the dwellers therein with much oppression ; [and it wielded more power over the inhabited world than 33 all the wings that had been.] And after this I beheld, and lo! the middle head * suddenly * 534 disappeared, even as the wings’. But there remained the two heads which also reigned over the 35 earth, and over the inhabitants therein. And I beheld, and lo! the head upon the right side 36 devoured that which was upon the left. Then [ heard a voice, which said unto me: Look before 7 thee, and consider what thou seest. And I beheld, and lo! as it were a lion, roused out of the wood, roaring ; and I heard how he uttered a man’s voice against the eagle; and he spake, saying : 9 Hear, * thou Eagle ‘—I will talk with thee; the Most High saith to thee: Art thou not it that remainest of the four beasts which I made to reign in my world, that the end of ¢my times? might ocome through them? ° Thou, however, the fourth, who art come, hast overcome ° all the beasts that are past ; * Thou hast wielded power over the world‘ with great terror, and over all the inhabited earth with grievous oppression ; ® Thou hast dwelt 5 so long in the civilized world with fraud, 41 and hast judged the earth, (but) not with faithfulness : 42 For thou hast afflicted the meek, and oppressed the peaceable ; Thou hast hated * the upright 5, and loved liars; Thou hast destroyed ‘the strongholds j of the fruitful j, and laid low the walls of such as did thee no harm— 43 And so thine insolence hath ascended to the Most High, jl and thy pride to the Mighty One. 44 Then the Most High regarded his times— And lo! they were ended ; . And his ages— Ὶ (and) they were fulfilled. 45 Therefore * shalt thou disappear *, O thou Eagle, and thy horrible wings, and thy little wings most evil, 'thy harm-dealing heads}, “thy hurtful talons™, and all thy worthless body ! 2-8 reading percontenuit omnem terram ὅ- 9 3, 3: other VSS. > b-b Ψ et hoc sicut alae (= κaὶ rovro κaθὼς at πτερυγες) ee so S$: but other VSS. (including 3.) > 4-4 so: other VSS. of the (Ar. all) times 9- reading et quartus veniens devicisti: cf. 3 Ar Ar2 Arm.: Ethiop. Lat. MSS. have 3rd person ff s0 % (¢f. Ar} Ar? Arm. 8-8 so 5 (σ΄. Ar Ar? Arm.): ¥& inhabitabant fo be emended to inhabitabas (Violet) h-h 59S (σ΄. Ar’: Ar? the pious): 3, verum dicentes (cf. Ethiop. Arm.) i-i s0 Oriental VSS. (= ta οχυρωματαὶ) : & habi- tationes (? dependent upon variant Hebr. readings: YO and "N\Y'2) 71 & qui fructificabant: 3 of the prosperous (= tωn εὐυθηνουντων : εὐθηνουσα = ΠPῚΞ Ps. cxxviii. [cxxvii] 3) k-k % non apparens non appareas (= αφανισθεις adhavirnon) 1-1 et capita tua maligna m-m }% ungues tui pessimi 32. [and it wielded . . . that had been]. This clause is somewhat tautologous after the two preceding, and is πon an addition of R, who identified the middle head with Trajan. The statement, as applied to Trajan, would ave special point in view of his conquests and vast additions to the Roman empire. Volkmar supposes that in the first clause omnem terram (‘ over the whole earth’) should be rendered ‘ over all the land’, i.e. the land of Palestine, and that ordem terrarum in the last clause stands in contrast with this. IV EZRA 11. 46—12. 4 46 And so the whole earth, freed from thy violence, "shall be refreshed again", and hope for the judgement and mercy of him that made her. 12:1,2 And it came to pass, while the lion spake these words unto the eagle, I beheld, and lo! the head A(R) 3 that remained disappeared. And the two wings, which went over unto it, set themselves up to reign ; and their rule was short and full of uproar. And I beheld, and lo! these also disappeared, and the whole body of the eagle was burnt ; and the earth was terrified greatly. II. xii. 30-39. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION (A) (R). Then I awoke °by reason of great perplexity of mind°® and from great fear, and said unto 4my spirit: Lo! this hast thou brought unto me because thou searchest out the ways of the Most High. n-n } refrigeret et revertetur (Hedr. WDIN 212) °° yeading a multo (for tumultu) excessu mentis IV EZRA 12. 5-21 5 Lo! Iam yet weary in my soul, and very weak in my spirit, , nor is there (left) the least strength in me on account of the great fear wherewith I have been 6 affrighted this night. Therefore will I now beseech the Most High, that he will strengthen me unto 7the end. And I said: O Lord my Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, if I am justified with 8 thee above many, if my supplication in truth be come up before thy countenance—Strengthen me, and show me, thy servant, the interpretation and ἢ distinct explanation” of this fearful vision, that 9 thou mayst completely comfort my soul! [For thou hast judged me worthy to show ime ἃ the end of the times and the last of the periods *.| tr And he said unto me: This is the interpretation of the vision which thou hast seen. The eagle which thou sawest come up from the sea is the fourth kingdom which appeared in vision to thy 13 brother Daniel; [but it was not interpreted unto him as I now interpret it unto thee or have interpreted it]. Behold, the days come when there shall arise a kingdom upon the earth, and it shall be* more 15 terrible‘ than all the kingdoms that were before it. [J 1} twelve kings shall reign, one after the other 3} 16 And the second that shall reign, he shall bear rule a longer time * than (any of) [the twelve]*. This is the 17 interpretation of the twelve wings which thou didst see. And whereas * thou didst hear‘ a voice which 18 spake, going out not from his heads, but from the midst of his body, "this is the interpretation*. In the midst ¥ of the time of that kingdom there shall arise no small contentions, and it shall stand in peril 19 of falling ; nevertheless it shall not then fall, but shall be restored again“ to rule¥. And whereas thou 20 didst see eight under-wings grow up with his wings, this is the interpretation: In it there shall arise eight 21 kings, whose times shall be transient and years swift: and two of them shall perish when the middle time (of the kingdom) approaches ; and four shall be kept for the time when its time for dissolution P-P & distinctionem (= tὴn σαφηνειαν) 4-4 % temporum finem et temporum novissima: other VSS. = tωn χρονων To τελος κai tῶn καιρων Ta ἐσχατα tr reading timoratior s-s @ prae xii (prae = υπερ) tt so Arm.: but S Ethiop. Ar} thou didst see u-u Ψ δoς est interpretatio: but 3 Ethiop. Ar tῷ ουτος ἐστιν o doyos (Hebr. 3275 A) VV so 3 (of. Ethiop.) and Arm. (= μεταξυ): & post (= pera: a mistake) wow so Ethiop. (cf. Ar?) Arm.: & in suum initium (mzsunderstanding eἰς ἀρχὴν avtns) heads we read: ‘ And whereas thou didst see that the great head disappeared—[one of them shall die upon his bed, but yet with pain. But as for the two who remain the sword shall devour them. For the sword of the one shall devour him that was with him; nevertheless this one also shall fall by the sword in the last days’). This description would suit admirably the circumstances of Trajan’s end. He died in Cilicia in the year 117, upon his bed, it is true, but mortified by his half-successes and by the unrest in the East. It need hardly be added that ‘the sword of the one shall devour him that was with him’ suits the identification of right and left heads with Hadrian and Lusius Quietus admirably. Further, if, as is suggested in the note on xii. 21, the four wings (or anti- wings) that are kept for the time when the dissolution of the Empire approaches can be identified with the four senators who were executed by Hadrian at the beginning of his reign, we have a further confirmation of the correctness of the hypothesis of reinterpretation already set forth. IV EZRA 19. 22-37 A(R) 22 shall approach: but two shall be kept for the end. And whereas thou didst see three heads resting, 23 this is the interpretation: In the last days thereof the Most High will raise up * three kings* ; and ¥they shall renew’ many things therein, and shall exercise lordship over the earth and over the 24 dwellers therein with much oppression, above all those that were before them. Therefore are they 23 called the heads of the eagle: for these are they that shall bring to a head his wickedness, * and 26 consummate his last end*. And whereas thou didst see that the great head disappeared—one of 27 them shall die upon his bed, but yet with pain. But as for the two who remain the sword shall devour 28 them. For the sword of the one shall devour him that was with him; nevertheless this one also 20 shall fall by the sword in the last days. And whereas thou didst see two under-wings * passing over 30 to the head * that is upon the right side; this is the interpretation: These are they whom the Most High hath kept for his (i.e, the eagle’s) end; and their rule shall be short and full of uproar, as thou 31 hast seen. And as for the lion whom thou didst see roused from the wood and roaring, and speaking 32 to the eagle and reproving him for his unrighteousness and all his deeds, as thou hast heard: This is the Messiah whom the Most High hath kept unto the end (ἢ of the days, who shall spring from the seed of David, and shall come and speak ”) unto them ; he shall reprove them for their ungodliness, © rebuke them ° for their unrighteousness, “reproach them to their faces with their treacheries 4, 33 For at the first he shall set them alive for judgement ; and when he hath rebuked them °he shall 34 destroy them’. [But my people who survive he shall deliver with mercy, even those who have been saved throughout my borders, and he shall make them joyful until the End come, even the Day of 35 Fudgement, of which I have spoken unto thee from the beginning.| This is the dream that thou 36 didst see, and this is its interpretation. Thou alone hast been found worthy to learn ‘this mystery 37 of the Most High—Therefore write all these things that thou hast seen in a book, and put them in XX = tpets βασιλεις : so all the VSS. except &, which has tria regna (= tpets βασιλειας) y-¥ so 3 Ethiop. Arm.: & renovabit 2-2 ¥& et qui perficient novissima eius 8-8 so 3: (= μεταβαντα eἰς tὴn κεφαλὴν): Ὁ traicientes super caput b-b so 3 (and the other Oriental VSS. substantially): & > ce so 3 (of. Arm. x> a-d ¥ et infulciet coram ipsis spretiones eorum (= ? κaὶ ἐπιπληξει evwmoy αὐτῶν ta καταφρονηματα fils S set in order (=? επιταξει) before them, &c.: Ethéop. heap up (=?emuAnoe) before them, &c. 9: yead- ing corrumpet eos: so S$ Ethiop. Arm. (inferior reading corripiet eos = A.V. correct them) ft @ secretum hoc two shall be kept for the end, i.e. till after the disappearance of the third head ; cf. xi. 24. IV EZRA 12. 38-51 R) 38 ἃ secret place ; and thou shalt teach them to the wise of the people, whose hearts thou knowest are 39 able to comprehend and keep these mysteries. [Put do thou remain here yet seven days more, that there may be shown unto thee whatsoever it may please the Most High to show thee.| 111.. xii. 39 3-48. CONCLUSION OF THE VISION (5). 39 And he departed from me. 40 And it came to pass when all the people heard that the seven days were past and 1 not returned to the city, they assembled themselves together, 5 4115 from the least unto the greatest; and they came unto me and said: 41 How have we sinned against thee, or how have we dealt iniquitously with thee that thou hast forsaken us and sittest in this place ? 42 For of all the prophets thou "alone™ art left to us, as a Cluster out of the vintage, as a lamp in a dark place, las a haven of safety for a ship in a storm’. 3,44 Are not the evils that have befallen us sufficient i(that thou shouldst forsake us also)i? If thou shalt forsake us, how much better had it been for us if we also had been consumed in the burning of 45 Sion! For we are not better than they who died there. And * they wept * with a loud voice. 46 And I answered them and said: Take courage, O Israel ; be not sorrowful, O House of Jacob! 41 For you are remembered before the Most High, the Mighty One hath not forgotten you ! for ever}, 48 But ἐπ for me, I have not forsaken you, neither will I depart from you; but I have come to this place to pray for the desolation of Sion and to supplicate mercy for ™our™ sanctuary’s humiliation. _LOriginall it ἐς probable that xiv. 29-35 immediately followed xii. 48 (see introductory section to xiv. 27-36). ~ Tere © IN. xii. 49-51. REDACTIONAL TRANSITION TO THE SIXTH VISION (R). - 49,50 And now go every one of you to his own house, and after these days I will come unto you. So 51 the people went into the city as I had told them. But I sat in the field seven days, as he had commanded me: and I did eat only "of the flowers of the field"; my food was of the herbs in those days. 8-2 so (omnis): S Ethiop. Ar.’ Arm. all the people ih s0 Ethiop. Arm.: && (best MSS.) > 1 % Ar) which = κaθως λiμὴn σωτηριας nηi ev χειμωνι (Cf. Arm.): Sas a haven of life to a ship that is set in the tempest: sicut portus navis (v. /. navi) salvatae a tempestate Ji cf. 5. (Ar?) : & Ethiop. Ar. Arm. > k-k σoῦ Ethiop. Ar? Arm.: but % Ar. 1 wept Il s9 3 (= ets atwva): & in contentione (= eἰς aywva) mm so 3 Ethiop. (cf. Arm.): & vestrae on so iL S$: Ethiop. of the fruit of the field [vv. 36-38 clearly form the conclusion of the original vision.] xii. 39 6-48, The section that now forms the conclusion of the fifth vision is plainly a fragment of 5, and has been transposed to its present position by R. It forms the true conclusion to the former vision, that of the heavenly Sion. For a discussion of the reasons for this analysis reference must be made to ZA, p. 276f. The passage is parallel to v. 14-16, which is also a misplaced fragment of S. IV EZRA 18. 1-5 THE SIXTH VISION. (THE MAN FROM THE SEA.) (xiii. 1-58) (M) (R). I. xiii. 1-13 a. THE VISION (M). M13 1,2 And it came to pass after seven days that I dreamed a dream by night: °(and I beheld,)° and lo! 3 there arose "8 violent wind” from the sea, and stirred all its waves. And I beheld, and lo! 4(the wind caused to come up out of the heart of the seas as it were the form of aman. And I beheld, and lo!)* this Man * flew* with the clouds of heaven. And wherever he turned his countenance to 4 look everything seen by him trembled ; and whithersoever the voice went out of his mouth, all ‘that 5 heard his voice " ‘melted away‘, as the wax melts when it feels the fire. And after this I beheld, and lo! there was gathered together from the four winds of heaven an innumerable multitude of men °° sod (Gf. Arm.): but 3 Ethiop. Ar. Ar? > PP so S (= peyas avepos) Ethiop. Ar} Arm.: & a wind 9-4 s0 3 (of. Ethiop. Ar) Ar? Arm.): & > (by homoioteleuton) tr reading convolabat (for convalescebat) : so Oriental VSS. δ. reading qui audiebant vocis (77.5.5. voces, vocem) eius = oὐ ἤκουσαν tῆς φωnης αὐτου tt so S$ (cof. Ar} Arm.) = eraxnoav: @ ardescebant = εκαηῆσαν xiii, 1-58. “THE SIXTH [SON OF MAN] VISION. A fresh dream-vision reveals a storm-tossed sea, a violent wind having arisen. The wind brings up from the midst of the sea the figure of a Man, who flies with the clouds of heaven. Everything trembles at his look ; whoever hears his voice is consumed with fire. From the four quarters of the world a multitude of men presently gather to wage war against him. He carves out—whence, it is not stated—an immense rock, which he mounts and from which he annihilates the hostile host with a stream of fire and tempest which proceeds out of his mouth. His weapons, it is to be noticed, are not sword and spear, but fire and storm. When the hostile multitude has been consumed the Man descends from the mountain, and summons to his side a peaceable host, all who—whether from friendliness or fear—had not attacked him. The seer, awaking from his dream, prays that the vision may be interpreted to him. The interpretation follows. The Man from the Sea is the Messiah ; his enemies are the nations of the world ; the graven rock, whose origin was so mysterious, is the heavenly Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven. The annihilation of the hostile powers is effected by the fire of the Law. Then the Messiah gathers the ten tribes out of alien lands, and with the joint aid of these and of the others who are already in Palestine, he establishes a kingdom of peace and glory. A careful examination of the vision proper and the interpretation that follows it reveals certain incongruities between what is explained and the explanation. This is a common phenomenon in apocalyptic, and shows that the apocalyptic writers were handling traditional material which was already extremely old when they wrote. Thus the first point to be noted is that when the vision first assumed a written form (i.e. probably some considerable time before the redactor (R) compiled our present book) the real significance of many features in the original vision was already lost, and was obscured by a more or less artificially adjusted interpretation. In other words religious thought and outlook had long outgrown those of the fixed tradition. It had become necessary to reinterpret the latter to suit later conditions. For a full discussion of ‘ the original significance’ of the vision reference must be made to ZA, pp. 282-4. Here it can only be noted that the term ‘the Man’ (or ‘one like unto a son of Man’ in Dan. vii) apparently denoted, in the earlier stages of the tradition, an angelic being who was invested with attributes, proper only to Jahveh Himself, and ultimately developed into the heavenly Messiah. In the earliest stage of all this ‘ Man’ was the Cosmic Man—the ‘Urmensch’— who, endowed with supernatural gifts, fights and overcomes the monster of chaos (see further, Volz, pp. 214f,, 216f.). THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION. As has already been pointed out, the written source used by R included not only the Vision proper (vz. 1-13 a), but also its interpretation (vv. 25-53). Here the details of the Vision have been forced to adjust themselves to a later eschatological scheme. The Man from the Sea = the pre-existent Messiah, who shall deliver creation (vv. 25-26); he will first of all destroy with wind, fire, and storm the hostile powers that assemble against him (vv. 27-28 and 33-35 [vv. 29-32 may be an interpolation by R]), after rebuking them for their offences (vv. 37-38) ; the fire with which he destroys them is the fire of the Law (v. 38). The assembly of the hostile nations and their destruction thus described correspond to the ‘ wars of Gog and Magog’, which is a regular feature in the eschatological scheme. After the destruction of his enemies the Messiah gathers his subjects—the peaceable multitude of v. 12. These, it is significant to notice, are identified (v. 4of.) with the Ten Tribes (=Israel’s exiles), who now are led back and, together with the two tribes already in Palestine (v. 48), enjoy the Messianic kingdom of peace. Nothing is said in the interpretation of the vision of any heathen nations being included in the peaceable multitude, though such were certainly included in the representation of the vision itself (v.12). Possibly, however, proselytes were intended to be included. A number of considerations, which cannot be discussed here, show that the vision and its interpretation (i.e. M) form an independent source ; and the historical situation presupposed clearly points to a date anterior to A.D. 70 (see further ZA, p. 285 f.). THE REDACTION QF M. The redactional readjustments made by R are mainly by way of supplement from the other sources of the book. The most considerable of his additions is in the section xiii. 13 6-24 (see introduction to this); his hand is also apparent in xiii. 26 ὁ, xiii. 29-32, xiii. 36, xiii. 48 ( The vision and its interpretation fall naturally into the following divisions: i. Zhe Viséon (xiii. 1-13.) ; ii. Zhe Apocalyptist’s reflections on the Vision (xiii. 13 6-24) ; iii. The interpretation of the Vision (xiii. 25-53 2). IV EZRA 18. 6-21 6 to make war against the Man that came up out of the sea. And I beheld, and lo! he cut out for 7 himself a great mountain and flew up upon it. But I sought to see the region or place from whence the 8 mountain had been cut out; andI couldnot. And after this I beheld, and lo! all who were gathered together against him to wage war with him were seized with great fear ; yet they dared to fight. 9 And lo! when he saw the assault of the multitude as they came he neither lifted his hand, nor held Io spear nor any warlike weapon; but I saw only how he sent out of his mouth as it were “a fiery stream ἢ, and out of his lips ‘a flaming breath’, and out of his tongue he shot forth “a storm of 11 sparks”. And these were all mingled together—the fiery stream, the flaming breath, and * the . .. storm *, and fell upon ¥ the assault of the multitude’ * which* was prepared to fight, and burned them all up, so that suddenly nothing more was to be seen of the innumerable multitude save only 12 dust of ashes and smell of smoke. When I saw this I was amazed. Afterwards I beheld the same Man come down from the mountain, and call unto him another multitude which was peaceable. 13 Then drew nigh unto him the faces of many men, * some of whom were glad, some sorrowful*; while some were in bonds, some brought others who should be offered. M 30 IV EZRA 18. 22-39 22 thou hast spoken. Whereas thou hast spoken of those who survive “(and of those who do not 23 survive) —this is the interpretation: He that shall bring the peril in that time * will himself keep ° them that fall into the peril, even such as have works and faith toward ‘(the Most High and)‘ the 24 Mighty One. Know, therefore, that those who survive (to that time) are more blessed than those that have died. III. xiii. 25-52, 53@. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISION (M) (R). 25 These are the interpretations of the vision: Whereas thou didst see a Man coming up from 26 the heart of the Sea: this is he whom the Most High is keeping 5 many ages 5. [(and) » through whom 27 he will deliver his creation*,| and the same shall order the survivors. And whereas thou didst see 28 that out of his mouth there came wind, and fire, and storm ; and whereas he held neither spear, nor any warlike weapon, but destroyed the assault of that multitude which had come ‘to fight against 20 him‘—this is the interpretation: [Aehold, the days come when the Most High is about to deliver them 31 that are upon earth. And there shall come astonishment of mind upon the dwellers on earth: and they shall plan to war one against another, icity against cityi, place against place, people against 32 people, and kingdom against kingdom. And it shall be when these things shall come to pass, and the signs shall happen which I showed thee before, then shall my Son be revealed whom thou didst see as 33 a Man ascending.| It shall be, when all the nations hear his voice, every man shall leave his own 34 land and the warfare which they have one against another ; and an innumerable multitude shall be 35 gathered together, as thou didst see, desiring to come and to fight against him. But he shall stand 36 upon the summit of Mount Sion. [And Sion shall come and shall be made manifest to all men, 37 prepared and builded, even as thou didst see the mountain cut out without hands.| But he, my Son, shall reprove the nations that are come for their ungodliness—which things (i.e., the rebukes) are 38 like unto a storm—; and shall reproach them to their face with their evil thoughts and with the tortures with which they are destined to be tortured—which are compared unto a flame—; and then 39 shall he destroy them without labour * by the Law * which is compared unto fire. And whereas thou didst see 'that he summoned and gathered to himself! another multitude which was peaceable— d-d 59 3 Ar) (ff. Ethiop.): & > e-e yeading ipse custodibit ΓE so 3 (oἱ Ethiop. Ar}): Ὁ» 5-8 © multis temporibus (= πoλλoῖς xpovors) —-h & qui per semetipsum (a misunderstanding of \A-VWS = os δὲ αὐτου): the correct translation ts given by Ar+ (cf. 3 Ethiop. Arm.) +i Lad (so S, &c.) expugnare eum (= πpoς ro ἐκπολεμειν αὐτο JJ B civitatis (a false nom. = civitas) civitatem *-* so3: Letlegem [1 so 3 (cf Ar): © eum colli- (R -- IV EZRA 18. 40-54 40 These are ™the ten tribes™ which were led away captive out of their own land in the days “of Josiah™ the king, ° which (tribes)®° Salmanassar the king of the Assyrians led away captive; he 41 carried them across the River, and (thus) they were transported into another land. ? But they took this counsel among themselves”, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth 42into a land further distant, where the human race had never dwelt, there at least to keep their 43 statutes which they had not kept in their own land. And they entered by the narrow passages 44 of the river Euphrates. For the Most High then wrought 4 wonders® for them, and stayed the 45 springs of the River until they were passed over. And through that country there was a great way 46 to go, (a journey) of a year and a half; and that region was called Arzareth. There they have dwelt 47 until the last times ; and now, when they are about to come again, the Most High will again stay the springs of the River, that they may be able to pass over. Therefore thou didst see a multitude 48 gathered together in peace. [But the survivors of thy people, even those who are found within my holy 49 border, * (shall be saved)*.| It shall be, therefore, when he shall destroy the multitude of the nations 50 that are gathered together, he shall defend the people that remain. And then shall he show them 51 *very many wonders*. And I said: O Lord my Lord, show me this: wherefore I have seen the
152.  Man coming up from the heart of the sea. And he said unto me: Just as one can neither seek out nor know what is in the deep of the sea, even so can no one upon earth see my Son [or those that
153.  are with him], but in the time tof his day*. Such is the interpretation of the dream which thou hast seen. IV. xiii. 530-58. EPILOGUE AND TRANSITION TO THE SEVENTH VISION (partly ἘΠ, partly S R). 534 +... Therefore "has this been revealed to thee", and to thee alone,
154.  because thou hast forsaken ἡ the things of thyself’, and hast applied thy diligence unto mine and searched out my Law ; gentemadse ™-™soH: Sthenineand a halftribes = Ethiop. (some MSS.: but others nine) Ar.’ Arm.: Ar? the rem- nant ofthenine tribes ™™ H (best MSS.) Josiae; soS Ar?: L(M)Oseae °° sod Ethiop. Ar’: Lquem (due to misunderstanding the reference of VS) p-p & ipsi autem sibi dederunt consilium hoc 4-4 so Oriental VSS.: & signa tt so $: other VSS. (including 1) > s-s % multa plurima portenta (= embody ΠΣ nixdpa) : EῚ many wonders (Violet regards multa in 3. as an uncorrected mistake for plurima) tt so % (of. other Oriental VSS.) : & diei only u-a % inluminatus es haec = ehwrw Ons tavra v-v Ψ tua = ra oa Oh 5(R) 14 t IV EZRA 18, 55—14. 2
155.  Thy life thou hast ordered unto wisdom and hast called understanding thy mother.
156.  Therefore have I showed thee this ; for there is a reward (laid up) with the Most High. And it shall be after three more days I will speak other things unto thee, and will declare to thee things difficult and marvellous, REDACTIONAL TRANSITION TO THE SEVENTH VISION [vv. 57-58 (S) misplaced: proper position after x. 57].
157.  [*Y Then I went forth and walked in the field ἦn, greatly magnifying and praising the Most High on
158.  account of the marvellous acts which he performs in due season ; and because he governs the times and the things which come to passin due season.] And there I abode three days. THE SEVENTH VISION. (THE EZRA-LEGEND.) (Chap. xiv) (E*) (S) (R). I. xiv. 1-17, EzRa’S COMMISSION (E?) (R). 2 And it came to pass “after the third day“, while I sat under the oak, lo! there came a voice out ww so S Ethiop. (o΄. Arm. Ar): 35. et profectus sum et transii in campum wow so Ar? Arm. (cf. & after this): & tertio die oat el IV EZRA 14. 2-17 of a bush over against me; and it said, Ezra, Ezra! And I said: Here am I, Lord. And I rose 3 upon my feet. Then said he unto me: I did manifestly reveal myself * in the bush *, and talked with 4 Moses when my people were in bondage in Egypt: and I sent him, Yand led’ my people out of Egypt, and brought them to Mount Sinai; and I held him by me for many days. 5 Itold him many wondrous things, showed him the secrets of the times, 2 declared to him” the end of the seasons : Then I commanded him saying : These words shalt thou publish openly, but these keep secret. And now I do say to thee: The signs which I have shewed *thee*, The dreams which thou hast seen, and the interpretations which thou hast heard— 9 lay them up in thyheart! For thou shalt be taken up from (among) men, and henceforth thou shalt remain with my Son, and with such as are like thee, until the times be ended. 10 ~=- For the world has lost its youth, The times begin to wax old. 1t For the world-age is divided into twelve” parts; °nine (parts) of it are passed already °, and the 12 half of the tenth part; and there remain of it two (parts), besides “the half of the tenth part. 13 Now, therefore, set in order thy house, and reprove thy people ; Comfort the lowly among them, °and instruct those that are wise °. Now do thou renounce the life that is corruptible, 14 let go from thee ‘ the cares of mortality ¢ ; cast from thee the burdens of man, put off now the weak nature ; lay aside thy burdensome cares, and hasten to remove from these times ! .16 For still worse evils than those which thou hast seen happen *shall yet take place®. For the weaker the world grows through age, so much the more shall evils increase upon the dwellers on earth. 11 Truth shall withdraw further off, and falsehood be nigh at hand : for already the Eagle is hastening to come whom thou sawest in vision. coos x-x @ super rubum (= ἐπὶ tῆς Barov): Av.’ in Mount Sinai (confusion of 13D [Aram. SID] bush amd 2 })2) YὙY read- ing eduxi (S A): the v. 1. eduxit ἐς supported by 3 Ar. Ar,? 2-2 so % (of. other Oriental VSS.): L> ** to 9 Ethiop. Ar}: but & (best MSS.) > b-b so © Ar?: Ethiop. ten [vv. 11-12 are not attested in S and Arm.) ©-e yeading et transierunt eius ix iam (77.5.5. of 3, have x [decem] = Ar.) 4-4 yeading dimidium 9-ὁ 50 Oriental VSS.: & > ff & mortales cogitationes (= toὺς θανασιμους λογισμους) 8-8 reading iterum . facientur (17S. facient) 4. [held him by me, i.e. ‘I held’ Moses (viz. on Mount Sinai); cf. Exod. xxxiv. 28. E’ FE? ne 1V EZRA 14. 18-31 II. xiv, 18-26. EZRA’S PRAYER FOR INSPIRATION TO RESTORE THE SCRIPTURES (E?). 18,19 And I answered and said: " Let me speak" before thee,O Lord! Lo, I will depart, as thou hast commanded me, and will warn the people who (now) exist: but they that shall be born later, who shall admonish them ? 20 ~=For the world lies in darkness, and the dwellers therein are without light. 21 For thy Law is burnt; and so no man knows the things which have been done by thee, or the 22 works that shall be done. If, then, I have found favour before thee, send into me the Holy Spirit, that I may write all that has happened in the world since the beginning, even the things which were written in thy Law, in order that men may be able to find ‘the path‘, and that they who would live at the last, may live. 23 And he answered me and said: Go thy way, assemble the people and tell them not to seek thee 24 for forty days. But do thou prepare for thyself many 7 writing-tabletsi; and take with thee Saraia, Dabria, Selemia, * Elkanah *, and Osiel, these five, because they are equipped for writings wiftly ; 25 and (then) come hither, and I will light the lamp of understanding in thy heart, which shall not be 26 extinguished until what thou art about to write shall be completed. And when thou shalt have finished, some things thou shalt publish, and some thou shalt deliver in secret to the wise. To-morrow, at this hour, thou shalt begin to write. III. xiv. 27-36. Ezra’s Last Worps (E2) (5) (R). 2] Then I went forth as he commanded me, and assembled all the people and said : 28 [Hear, O Israel, these words !| 29 |Our fathers were at the beginning strangers in Egypt, and they were delivered from thence. 30 And (then) they received the Law of life, which they kept not, !even as! you also after them have 31 transgressed (it), Then was a land given you for an inheritance ™in the land of Sion™, but ye and h-h yeading loquar (Lat. WSS, mostly >) = Oriental VSS. tὶ s0 © 5: Ethiop.+of life Fix buxos (= πυξια: Hebr. nim)) k-k so S and Arm. (cf. Ethiop.): 39. Ethanus I! @ quem (so 8): prob. an original Hebr, WORD was misread VOX (so Violet) m-m so, 8 (cf. Ethiop.): Ar.. >: Ar2 on Mount xiv. 18-26. IV EZRA 14. 31-43 your fathers have done unrighteousness, and have not kept the ways which *the Most High™ com- 32 manded you. ° And ° forasmuch as he is a righteous judge he took from you in due time that which 33 he had bestowed. And now ye are here [Ὁ and your brethren are . . .Ὁ]. 34 If ye, then, will rule over your own understanding and will discipline your heart, Ye shall be preserved alive and after death obtain mercy. 35 ~©«©For after death shall the Judgement come, [when we shall once more live again :] And then shall the names of the righteous be made manifest, and the works of the godless declared. ] 36 Let no man, then, come unto me now, nor seek me for forty days. IV. xiv. 37-48. THE RESTORATION OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES (Eὖ. IV EZRA 14. 43-50 but as for me, I spake in the day, and at night was not silent. 44,45 Soin forty days were written ‘ ninety-four books*. And it came to pass when the forty days were fulfilled, that the Most High spake unto me saying: "The twenty-four books" that thou hast 46 written publish, that the worthy and unworthy may read (therein): but the seventy last thou shalt keep, to deliver them to the wise among thy people. 41 For in them is the spring of understanding, the fountain of wisdom, and the stream of knowledge. 48 ‘And I did so’, “ix the seventh year, of the sixth week, after five thousand years of the creation and three months and twelve days™. V. xiv. 49-50. CONCLUSION OF THE BOOK (R). 49 And then was Ezra caught away, and taken up* into the place of such as were like him after 50 having written all these things. And he is called the Scribe of the knowledge of the Most High for ever and ever». t-t so $ Ethiop. Ar) Arm.: the number given in the Lat. MSS. varies between 904, 970, and 974 u-u oἷ (Ar2): & priora (cf Ethiop. Arm.)—omitting the number v-v here the Latin text breaks off v8 30% (= 5,042 years) see iy ae notes xx so 3 Ethiop. (cf. Arm.): Ar.’ to the land of the living of such as were like him y-Y so
