# The Psalms of Solomon

1.  11 cried unto the Lord when I was in distress [ 1, Unto God when sinners assailed.
2.  Suddenly the alarm of war was heard before me ; (I said), He will hearken to me, for I am full of righteousness.
3.  I thought in my heart that I was full of righteousness, Because I was well off and had become rich in children.
4.  Their wealth spread to the whole earth, And their glory unto the end of the earth.
5.  They were exalted unto the stars ; They said they would never fall.
6.  But they became insolent in their prosperity, ATE.
7.  Their sins were in secret, And even I had no knowledge (of them).
8.  Their transgressions (went) beyond those of the heathen before them ; They utterly polluted the holy things of the Lord. 4 Therefore He said: Cast them far from Me ; 5 It was set at naught before God, It was utterly dishonoured ; 6 The sons and the daughters were in grievous captivity, Sealed (?) (was) their neck, branded (?) (was it) among the nations. , According to their sins hath He done unto them, For He hath left them in the hands of them that prevailed. 8 He hath turned away His face from pitying them, Young and old and their children together ;
9.  For they had done evil one and all, in not hearkening. ro (9) And the heavens were angry, And the earth abhorred them ;
11.  For no man upon it had done what they did,
12.  (10) And the earth recognized all Thy righteous judgements, O God.
13.  (11) They set the sons of Jerusalem to be mocked at in return for (the) harlots in her ; Every wayfarer entered in in the full light of day.
14.  (12) They made mock with their transgressions, as they themselves were wont to do , In the full light of day they revealed their iniquities. (13) And the daughters of Jerusalem were defiled in accordance with Thy judgement,
15.  Because they had defiled themselves with unnatural intercourse. (14) Iam pained in my bowels and my inward parts for these things. tό (15)
17.  (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) 26 7 (24) 28 (25) >
30.  (26) ὲ ᾿ (And yet) I will justify Thee, O God, in uprightness of heart, For in Thy judgements is Thy righteousness (displayed), O God. For Thou hast rendered to the sinners according to their deeds, Yea according to their sins, which were very wicked. Thou hast uncovered their sins, that Thy judgement might be manifest ; Thou hast wiped out their memorial from the earth. God is a righteous judge, And He is no respecter of persons. For the nations reproached Jerusalem, trampling it down ; Her beauty was dragged down from the throne of glory. She girded on sackcloth instead of comely raiment, A rope (was) about her head instead of a crown. She put off the glorious diadem which God had set upon her, In dishonour was her beauty cast upon the ground. And I saw and entreated the Lord and said, Long enough, O Lord, has Thine hand been heavy on Israel, in bringing the nations upon (them). For they have made sport unsparingly in wrath and fierce anger ; And they will make an utter end, unless Thou, O Lord, rebuke them in Thy wrath. For they have done it not in zeal, but in lust of soul, Pouring out their wrath upon us with a view to rapine. Delay not, O God, to recompense them on (their) heads, To turn the pride of the dragon into dishonour. And I had not long to wait before God showed me the insolent one Slain on the mountains of Egypt, Esteemed of less account than the least, on and and sea ; ;
31.  (27) His body (, too,) borne hither and thither on the billows with much insolence, With none to bury (him), because He had rejected him with dishonour. (28) He reflected not that he was man,
32.  And reflected not on the latter end ;
33.  (29) He said: I will be lord of land and sea; And he recognized not that it is God who is great, Mighty in His great strength.
34.  (30) He is king over the heavens, And judgeth kings and kingdoms.
35.  (31) (It is He) who setteth me up in glory, And bringeth down the proud to eternal destruction in dishonour, Because they knew Him not.
36.  (32) And now behold, ye princes of the earth, the judgement of the Lord, For a great king and righteous (is He), judging (all) that is under heaven.
37.  (33) Bless God, ye that fear the Lord with wisdom, For the mercy of the Lord will be upon them that fear Him, in the Judgement ;
38.  (34) So that He will distinguish between the righteous and the sinner, (And) recompense the sinners for ever according to their deeds ;
39.  (35) And have mercy on the righteous, (delivering him) from the affliction of the sinner, And recompensing the sinner for what he hath done to the righteous.
40.  (36) For the Lord is good to them that call upon Him in patience, Doing according to His mercy to His pious ones, Establishing (them) at all times before Him in strength.
41.  (37) Blessed be the Lord for ever before His servants. III. A Psalm. Of Solomon. Concerning the righteous. 3 1 Why sleepest thou, O my soul, And blessest not the Lord? 2 Sing a new song, Unto God who is worthy to be praised. Esteemed of less account than the least. Held in less account than a person of the least position : so clearly S ; on (ἃ ὑπὲp ἐλαχίστου (or conjecturally ἐλάχιστον), see Ryle and James. Sing and {δe wakeful against His awakingf, For good is a psalm (sung) to God from a glad heart. 3 The righteous remember the Lord at all times, 4 The righteous despiseth not the chastening of the Lord ; His will is always before the Lord. 5 The righteous stumbleth and holdeth the Lord righteous: He falleth and looketh out for what God will do to him; 6 He seeketh out whence his deliverance will come. 7 (6) The steadfastness of the righteous is from God their deliverer ; There lodgeth not in the house of the righteous sin upon sin. 8 (7) The righteous continually searcheth his house, To remove utterly (all) iniquity (done) by him in error. 9 (8) He maketh atonement for (sins of) ignorance by fasting and afflicting his soul, to And the Lord counteth guiltless every pious man and his house. 1 (9) The sinner stumbleth and curseth his life, With thanksgiving and declaration of the righteousness of the Lord’s judgements. The day when he was begotten, and his mother’s travail. 2 (10) He addeth sins to sins, while he liveth (?) ; He falleth—verily grievous is his fall—and riseth no more. (11) The destruction of the sinner is for ever, And he shall not be remembered, when the righteous is visited. 2) 15 This is the portion of sinners for ever. 16 But they that fear the Lord shall rise to life eternal, And their life (shall be) in the light of the Lord, and shall come to an end no more. IV. A Conversation of Solomon with the Men-pleasers. 4 1 Wherefore sittest thou, O profane (man), in the council of the pious, Seeing that thy heart is far removed from the Lord, and 3) from 73Y; the original text of # may, therefore, have meant ‘and perform His service’. Perchance ‘good’ in v. 2d was accidentally repeated in 38 from the end of the line, and 2d originally ran, ‘ For a psalm (is due) to God from a glad heart.’ anew song. So J HS; RLC (erroneously) ‘song and praise’. a glad heart. So, rather than ‘a pious heart’, should ἀγaθῆς (R J 3) καρδίας be rendered; # 210 a5 means the giad or merry heart ; see e.g. Isa. Ixv. 14, Judges xvi. 25, Ruth iii. 7, Eccles. ix. 7; and cp. ‘Is any merry? Let him sing psalms’, James n. 13. The less well-supported reading, ‘the whole heart’ (LC H), is not to be preferred. 7 (6) Provoking with transgressions the God of Israel ? Extravagant in speech, extravagant in outward seeming beyond all (men), Is he that is severe of speech in condemning sinners in judgement. And his hand is first upon him as (though he acted) in zeal, And (yet) he is himself guilty in respect of manifold sins and of wantonness. His eyes are upon every woman without distinction ; His tongue lieth when he maketh contract with an oath. By night and in secret he sinneth as though unseen, With his eyes he talketh to every woman of evil compacts. He is swift to enter every house with cheerfulness as though guileless. Let God remove those that live in hypocrisy in the company of the pious, (Even) the life of such an one with corruption of his flesh and penury. Let God reveal the deeds of the men-pleasers, The deeds of such an one with laughter and derision ; 9 (8) That the pious may count righteous the judgement of their God, Io 11 (9) 12 (10) (11) 14 15 (12) When sinners are removed from before the righteous, (Even the) man-pleaser who uttereth law guilefully. And their eyes (are fixed) upon any man’s house that is (still) secure, That they may, like (the) Serpent, destroy the wisdom of . . . with words of transgressors. His words are deceitful that (he) may accomplish (his) wicked desire. He never ceaseth from scattering (families) as though (they were) orphans, Yea, he layeth waste a house on account of (his) lawless desire. He deceiveth with words, (saying,) There is none that seeth, or judgeth. He fills one (house) with lawlessness, And (then) his eyes (are fixed) upon the next house, the psalmist, or to the leader of that party; adopting the latter view some have identified the profane man with Alexander Jannaeus (Wellh.), others with Aristobulus (Ryle and James). the council of the pious. So J $; ‘the pious council’ R LC; ‘in council’ H. The fuller and correcter phrase need not necessarily refer to the Sanhedrin ; συνέδριον may also stand for 11D ; cp. e.g. Jer.xv.17. ‘Pious’ = DYWON ; cp. iii. 10, t ὁ. Cp. Isa. xxix. 13 (also Matt. xv. 8) ‘seeing that’; @& ‘and’. 27 25 (22) May He remove them from off the earth, THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 4. 15—5. 8 To destroy it with words that give wing to (desire). (13) (Yet) with all these his soul, like Sheol, is not sated. 16 Let his portion, O Lord, be dishonoured before thee ; Let him go forth groaning, and come home cursed. (15) Let his life be (spent) in anguish, and penury, and want, O Lord; Let his sleep be (beset) with pains and his awaking with perplexities. (16) Let sleep be withdrawn from his eyelids at night ; Let him fail dishonourably in every work of his hands. (17) Let him come home empty-handed to his house, And his house be void of everything wherewith he could sate his appetite. (18) (Let) his old age (be spent) in childless loneliness until his removal (by death). (19) Let the flesh of the men-pleasers be rent by wild beasts, And (let) the bones of the lawless (lie) dishonoured in the sight of the sun. (20) Let ravens peck out the eyes of the hypocrites. 23 For they have laid waste many houses of men, in dishonour, And scattered (them) in (their) lust ; (21) And they have not remembered God, Nor feared God in all these things ; But they have provoked God’s anger and vexed Him. Because with deceit they beguiled the souls of the flawless. (23) Blessed are they that fear the Lord in their flawlessness ; The Lord shall deliver them from guileful men and sinners, And deliver us from every stumbling-block of the lawless (men). 28 (24) Let God destroy them that insolently work all unrighteousness, 29 (28) δi 4 (3) 6 (4) 8 (6) For a great and mighty judge is the Lord our God in righteousness, Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon all them that love Thee. V. A Psalm. Of Solomon. O Lord God, I will praise Thy name with joy, In the midst of them that know Thy righteous judgements. For Thou art good and merciful, the refuge of the poor ; When I cry to Thee, do not silently disregard me. For no man taketh spoil from a mighty man; Who, then, can take aught of all that Thou hast made, except Thou Thyself givest ? For man and his portion (lie) before Thee in the balance ; He cannot add to, so as to enlarge, what has been prescribed by Thee. O God, 7 (5) when we are in distress we call upon Thee for help, And Thou dost not turn back our petition, for Thou art our God. Cause not Thy hand to be heavy upon us, Lest through necessity we sin. 15d. like Sheol. SoRLJCS; Hom. Cp. Prov. xxvii. 20, Isa. v. 14. y (7) Even though Thou restore us not, we will not keep away ; But unto Thee will we come. 10 (8) For if I hunger, unto Thee will I cry, O God ; And 7hou wilt give to me. 11 (9) Birds and fish dost Thou nourish, : In that Thou givest rain to the steppes that green grass may spring up, (10) (80) to prepare fodder in the steppe for every living thing ; 12 And if they hunger, unto Thee do they lift up their face. 13 (11) Kings and rulers and peoples Zou dost nourish, O God ; And who is the help of the poor and needy, if not Thou, O Lord? 14 (12) And Thou wilt hearken—for who is good and gentle but Thou ?— Making glad the soul of the humble by opening Thine hand in mercy. 15 (13) Man’s goodness is (bestowed) grudgingly and .. .; And if he repeat (it) without murmuring, even that is marvellous. 16 (14) But Thy gift is great in goodness and wealth, And he whose hope is (set) on Thee shall have no lack of gifts. 17 (15) Upon the whole earth is Thy mercy, O Lord, in goodness. 18 (16) Happy is he whom God remembereth in (granting to him) a due sufficiency ; 19 Ifa man abound overmuch, he sinneth. 20 (17) Sufficient are moderate means with righteousness, And hereby the blessing of the Lord (becomes) abundance with righteousness. 21 (18) They that fear the Lord rejoice in good (gifts), And Thy goodness is upon Israel in Thy kingdom. Blessed is the glory of the Lord, for He is our king. VI. Jn Hope. Of Solomon. 6 1 Happy is the man whose heart is fixed to call upon the name of the Lord ; 2 When he remembereth the name of the Lord, he will be saved. 3 (2) His ways are made even by the Lord, And the works of his hands are preserved by the Lord his God. 4 (3) At what he sees in his bad dreams, his soul shall not be troubled ; ga. Cp. Ps. Ixxx. 7. $ And turn not Thy face from us, lest we go far from Thee’. ᾿ When he passes through rivers and the tossing of the seas, he shall not be dismayed. 6 (4) He ariseth from his sleep, and blesseth the name of the Lord: When his heart is at peace, he singeth to the name of his God, (5) And he entreateth the Lord for all his house. 8 And the Lord heareth the prayer of every one that feareth God, (6) And every request of the soul that hopes for Him doth the Lord accomplish. 9 Blessed is the Lord, who showeth mercy to those who love Him in sincerity. VIL. Of Solomon. Of turning. 7 « Make not Thy dwelling afar from us, Ὁ God ; Lest they assail us that hate us without cause. 2 For Thou hast rejected them, O God ; Let not their foot trample upon Thy holy inheritance. 3 Chasten us Thyself in Thy good pleasure ; But give (us) not up to the nations; 4 For, if Thou sendest pestilence, Thou Thyself givest it charge concerning us ; (5) For Thou art merciful, And wilt not be angry to the point of consuming us. 5 (6) While Thy name dwelleth in our midst, we shall find mercy ; 6 And the nations shall not prevail against us. (7) For Thou art our shield, 7 And when we call upon Thee, Thou hearkenest to us; 8 For Thou wilt pity the seed of Israel for ever And Thou wilt not reject (them) : (9) But we (shall be) under Thy yoke for ever, And (under) the rod of Thy chastening. 9 (10) Thou wilt establish us in the time that Thou helpest us, Showing mercy to the house of Jacob on the day wherein Thou didst promise (to help them). VIII. Of Solomon. Of the chief Musician. 8 1 Distress and the sound of war hath my ear heard, The sound of a trumpet announcing slaughter and calamity, 2 The sound of much people as of an exceeding high wind, As a tempest with mighty fire sweeping through the Negeb. 3 And I said in my heart, Surely (?) God judgeth us ; 7 (6) (7) 9 A sound I hear (moving) towards Jerusalem, the holy city. My loins were broken at what I heard, (5) my knees tottered ; My heart was afraid, my bones were dismayed like flax. I said: They establish their ways in righteousness. I thought upon the judgements of God since the creation of heaven and earth; I held God righteous in His judgements which have been from of old. God laid bare their sins in the full light of day ; All the earth came to know the righteous judgements of God. In secret places underground their iniquities (were committed) to provoke (Him) to anger ; to They wrought confusion, son with mother and father with daughter ; II (10) 12 (11) They committed adultery, every man with his neighbour's wife. They concluded covenants with one another with an oath touching these things ; They plundered the sanctuary of God, as though there was no avenger. 13 (12) They trode the altar of the Lord, (coming straight) from all manner of uncleanness ; And with menstrual blood they defiled the sacrifices, as (though these were) common flesh. 14 (13) They left no sin undone, wherein they surpassed not the heathen. VIII. TiTLe, Of the chief Musician. & eἰς nῖκoς, ‘unto victory’; but in Theodotion’s version of Ps, xii. 1, xiii. 1, eἰς nῖκoς is the rendering of ny), ‘ Of (or to) the chief Musician.’ Fas Cp. is2; 14, announcing. ἠxoύσης = POW. Cp. Sir. xlv. 9. 5 (14) Therefore God mingled for them a spirit of wandering ; And gave them to drink a cup of undiluted wine, that they might become drunken. 6 (15) He brought him that is from the end of the earth, that smiteth mightily ; 1 He decreed (?) war against Jerusalem, and against her land. 8 (16) The princes of the land went to meet him with joy: they said unto him: Blessed be thy way! Come ye, enter ye in with peace. 9 (17) They made the rough ways even, before his entering in ; They opened the gates to Jerusalem, they crowned its walls. o (18) As a father (entereth) the house of his sons, (so) he entered (Jerusalem) in peace ; He established his feet (there) in great safety. (19) He captured her fortresses and the wall of Jerusalem ; 22 For God Himself led him in safety, while they wandered. 3 (20) He destroyed their princes and every one wise in counsel ; He poured out the blood of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, like the water of uncleanness. (21) He led away their sons and daughters, whom they had begotten in defilement. (22) They did according to their uncleanness, even as their fathers (had done) : 26 They defiled Jerusalem and the things that had been hallowed to the name of God. (23) (But) God hath shown Himself righteous in His judgements upon the nations of the earth ; 28 And the pious (servants) of God are like innocent lambs in their midst. 9 (24) Worthy to be praised is the Lord that judgeth the whole earth in His righteousness. o (25) Behold, now, O God, Thou hast shown us Thy judgement in Thy righteousness ; 31 Our eyes have seen Thy judgements, O God. _ (26) We have justified Thy name that is honoured for ever ; 32 For Thou art the God of righteousness, judging Israel with chastening. 33 (27) Turn, O God, Thy mercy upon us, and have pity upon us; 54. (28) Gather together the dispersed of Israel, with mercy and goodness ; _ 35 For Thy faithfulness is with us. ᾿ (29) And (though) we have stiffened our neck, yet Thou art our chastener ; 36 (30) Overlook us not, O our God, lest the nations swallow us up, as though there were none to deliver. 7 (31) But Thou art our God from the beginning, ἢ And upon Thee is our hope (set), O Lord ; 38 (32) And we will not depart from Thee, For good are Thy judgements upon us. 39 (33) Ours and our children’s be Thy good pleasure for ever ; O Lord our Saviour, we shall never more be moved. 40 (34) The Lord is worthy to be praised for His judgements with the mouth of His pious ones; And blessed be Israel of the Lord for ever. IX. Of Solomon. For rebuke Q , When Israel was led away captive into a strange land, When they fell away from the Lord who redeemed them, 2 They were cast away from the inheritance, which the Lord had given them. (2) Among every nation (were) the dispersed of Israel according to the word of God, 3 That Thou mightest be justified, O God, in Thy righteousness by reason of our transgressions: For Thou art a just judge over all the peoples of the earth. 5 (3) For from Thy knowledge none that doeth unjustly is hidden, 6 And the righteous deeds of Thy pious ones (are) before Thee, O Lord; Where, then, can a man hide himself from Thy knowledge, O God ? > (4) Our works are subject to our own choice and power To do right or wrong in the works of our hands ; gs And in Thy righteousness Thou visitest the sons of men. 9 (5) He that doeth righteousness layeth up life for himself with the Lord ; And he that doeth wrongly forfeits his life to destruction ; to For the judgements of the Lord are (given) in righteousness to (every) man and (his) house. 11 (6) Unto whom art Thou good, O God, except to them that call upon the Lord? 12 He cleanseth from sins a soul when it maketh confession, when it maketh acknowledgement ; 13 For shame is upon us and upon our faces on account of all these things. 14 (7) And to whom doth He forgive sins, except to them that have sinned ? Thou blessest the righteous, and dost not reprove them for the sins that they have committed ; And Thy goodness is upon them that sin, when they repent. 16 (8) And, now, Thou art our God, and we the people whom Thou hast loved : Behold and show pity, O God of Israel, for we are Thine; And remove not Thy mercy from us, lest they assail us. 17 (9) For Thou didst choose the seed of Abraham before all the nations, Les) IX. 1. Israel. J ‘ Jerusalem’. (to) And didst set Thy name upon us, O Lord, And Thou wilt not reject (us) for ever. Thou madest a covenant with our fathers concerning us ; And we hope in Thee, when our soul turneth (unto Thee). The mercy of the Lord be upon the house of Israel for ever and ever. X. A Hymn. Of Solomon. O x Happy is the man whom the Lord remembereth with reproving, And whom He restraineth from the way of evil with strokes, That he may be cleansed from sin, that it may not be multiplied. 2 He that maketh ready his back for strokes shall be cleansed, For the Lord is good to them that endure chastening. 3 For He maketh straight the ways of the righteous, And doth not pervert (them) by His chastening. 4 And the mercy of the Lord (is) upon them that love Him in truth, (4) 5 For the testimony (is) in the law of the eternal covenant, And the Lord remembereth His servants in mercy. The testimony of the Lord (is) on the ways of men in (His) visitation. 6 (5) Just and kind is our Lord in His judgements for ever, And Israel shall praise the name of the Lord in gladness. 7 (6) And the pious shall give thanks in the assembly of the people ; And on the poor shall God have mercy in the gladness (?) of Israel ; (7) For good and merciful is God for ever, And the assemblies of Israel shall glorify the name of the Lord. The salvation of the Lord be upon the house of Israel unto everlasting gladness ! XI. Of Solomon. Unto expectation. Blow ye in Zion on the trumpet to summon (the) saints, Cause ye to be heard in Jerusalem the voice of him that bringeth good tidings ; For God hath had pity on Israel in visiting them. Stand on the height, O Jerusalem, and behold thy children, From the East and the West, gathered together by the Lord ; 18, Thou wilt not reject. So, by conjecture, von Gebhardt ; cp. vii. 8. Ryle and James, by conjecture, ‘ Thou wilt abide (among us) for ever.’ (t Thou wilt not cease’. X. TitLt. A Hymn JLCH; ‘In hymns’ R. 4 (3) From the North they come in the gladness of their God, From the isles afar off God hath gathered them. 5 (4) High mountains hath He abased into a plain for them ; 6 The hills fled at their entrance. (5) The woods gave them shelter as they passed by ; (6) Every sweet-smelling tree God caused to spring up for them, That Israel might pass by in the visitation of the glory of their God. 8 (7) Put on, O Jerusalem, thy glorious garments ; Make ready thy holy robe ; For God hath spoken good concerning Israel, for ever and ever. 9 (8) Let the Lord do what He hath spoken concerning Israel and Jerusalem ; Let the Lord raise up Israel by His glorious name. (9) The mercy of the Lord be upon Israel for ever and ever. XII. Of Solomon. Against the tongue of transgressors. 12 tὸ Lord, deliver my soul from (the) lawless and wicked man, From the tongue that is lawless and slanderous, and speaketh lies and deceit. 2 Manifoldly twisted (?) are the words of the tongue of the wicked man, 4 Even as... a fire that burneth up... . . to fill houses with a lying tongue, To cut down the trees of gladness . . . To involve households in warfare by means of slanderous lips. (4) May God remove far from the innocent the lips of transgressors by (bringing them to) want 5 And may the bones of slanderers be scattered (far) away from them that fear the Lord! In flaming fire perish the slanderous tongue (far) away from the pious! 6 (5) May the Lord preserve the quiet soul that hateth the unrighteous; And may the Lord establish the man that followeth peace at home. 7 (6) The salvation of the Lord be upon Israel His servant for ever ; And let the sinners perish together at the presence of the Lord ; But let the Lord’s pious ones inherit the promises of the Lord. XIII. Of Solomon. A Psalm. Comfort for the righteous. 13 1 The right hand of the Lord hath covered me; The right hand of the Lord hath spared us. 2 The arm of the Lord hath saved us from the sword that passed through, From famine and the death of sinners. 3 Noisome beasts ran upon them: With their teeth they tore their flesh, And with their molars crushed their bones. (4) But from all these things the Lord delivered us. 4 (5) The righteous was troubled on account of his errors, Lest he should be taken away along with the sinners ; 5 (6) For terrible is the overthrow of the sinner ; But not one of all these things toucheth the righteous. (7) For not alike are the chastening of the righteous (for sins done) in ignorance, And the overthrow of the sinners. 4 (8) Secretly (?) is the righteous chastened, Lest the sinner rejoice over the righteous. 8 (9) For He correcteth the righteous as a beloved son, And his chastisement is as that of a firstborn. to) For the Lord spareth His pious ones, And blotteth out their errors by His chastening. (11) For the life of the righteous shall be for ever ; to But sinners shall be taken away into destruction, And their memorial shall be found no more. (12) But upon the pious is the mercy of the Lord, And upon them that fear Him His mercy. XIV. A Hymn. Of Solomon. A x Faithful is the Lord to them that love Him in truth, To them that endure His chastening, _ (2) To them that walk in the righteousness of His commandments, In the law which He commanded us that we might live. (5) The pious of the Lord shall live by it for ever ; “ The Paradise of the Lord, the trees of life, are His pious ones. _ 3 (4) Their planting is rooted for ever ; 4 They shall not be plucked up all the days of heaven: (5) For the portion and the inheritance of God is Israel. XIII. 1. me. 3 ‘us’. 2. 05. 4 ‘me’. that passed through: sc. the land. Cp. Ezek. xiv. 17, Lev. xxvi. 6. the death of sinners. From premature (Ps. lv. 24 (23) or violent death, or death beyond which lies no eternal life (cf. ix), i.e. from such deaths as sinners die. Cp. ‘the death of the righteous’, Num. xxiii. 10, Or, possibly, G is due to a wrong division of #9, which may have run, ‘from famine and pestilence (see vii. 4n.) ; as for sinners, noisome beasts’, &c. In that case the passage refers to the four plagues of Ezek. xiv. 21. ne 4 (6) But not so are the sinners and transgressors, Who love (the brief) day (spent) in companionship with their sin ; (7) Their delight is in fleeting corruption, 5 And they remember not God. (8) For the ways of men are known before Him at all times, And He knoweth the secrets of the heart before they come to pass. 6 (9) Therefore their inheritance is Sheol and darkness and destruction, And they shall not be found in the day when the righteous obtain mercy ; 7 10) But the pious of the Lord shall inherit life in gladness. XV. A Psalm. Of Solomon. With a Song. 15 t When I was in distress I called upon the name of the Lord, I hoped for the help of the God of Jacob and was saved ; 2 For the hope and refuge of the poor art Thou, O God. 3 (2) For who, O God, is strong except to give thanks unto Thee in truth? 4 And wherein is a man powerful except in giving thanks to Thy name? 5 (3) A new psalm with song in gladness of heart, The fruit of the lips with the well-tuned instrument of the tongue, The firstfruits of the lips from a pious and righteous heart— 6 (4) He that offereth these things shall never be shaken by evil ; The flame of fire and the wrath against the unrighteous shall not touch him, 7 (5) When it goeth forth from the face of the Lord against sinners, To destroy all the substance of sinners, 8 (6) For the mark of God is upon the righteous that they may be saved. (7) Famine and sword and pestilence (shall be) far from the righteous, 9 For they shall flee away from the pious as men pursued in war ; (8) But they shall pursue sinners and overtake (them), And they that do lawlessness shall not escape the judgement of God ; (9) As by enemies experienced (in war) shall they be overtaken, to ©For the mark of destruction is upon their forehead. 11 (10) And the inheritance of sinners is destruction and darkness, And their iniquities shall pursue them unto Sheol beneath. 12 (11) Their inheritance shall not be found of their children, 13 For sins shall lay waste the houses of sinners. (12) And sinners shall perish for ever in the day of the Lord’s judgement, 14 When God visiteth the earth with His judgement. 15 (13) But they that fear the Lord shall find mercy therein, And shall live by the compassion of their God ; But sinners shall perish for ever. XVI. A Hymn. Of Solomon. For Help to the Pious. 16 1 When my soul slumbered (being afar) from the Lord, I had all but slipped down to the pit, When (I was) far from God, 2 my soul had been wellnigh poured out unto death, 4- fleeting, lit. ‘littleness of’. XV. TITLE. Witha Song. Cp. v. 3, and see xii, title. 14, ‘And for my help I called to the God of Jacob’. (I had been) nigh unto the gates of Sheol with the sinner, 3 when my soul departed from the Lord God of Israel— Had not the Lord helped me with His everlasting mercy. 4 He pricked me, as a horse is pricked, that I might serve Him, My saviour and helper at all times saved me. 5 I will give thanks unto Thee, O God, for Thou hast helped me to (my) salvation ; And hast not counted me with sinners to (my) destruction. 6 Remove not Thy mercy from me, O God, Nor Thy memorial from my heart until I die. 7 Rule me, O God, (keeping me back) from wicked sin, And from every wicked woman that causeth the simple to stumble. g And let not the beauty of a lawless woman beguile me, Nor any one that is subject to (?) unprofitable sin. 9 Establish the works of my hands before Thee, And preserve my goings in the remembrance of Thee. to Protect my tongue and my lips with words of truth; Anger and unreasoning wrath put far from me. ti Murmuring, and impatience in affliction, remove far from me, When, if I sin, Thou chastenest me that I may return (unto Thee). 12 But with goodwill and cheerfulness support my soul ; ; When Thou strengthenest my soul, what is given (to me) will be sufficient for me. 13 For if Thou givest not strength, Who can endure chastisement with poverty ? _ 14 When a man is rebuked by means of his corruption, Thy testing (of him) is in his flesh and in the affliction of poverty. 15 If the righteous endureth in all these (trials), he shall receive mercy from the Lord. XVII. A Psalm. Of Solomon. With Song. Of the King. 17 t Lord, Thou art our King for ever and ever, , For in Thee, O God, doth our soul glory. 2 How long are the days of man’s life upon the earth? As are his days, so is the hope (set) upon him. 3 But we hope in God, our deliverer ; (2) that ὕπνου is due to a misplaced gloss or a corrupt dittograph in ® (NNW TΣ for NNW3); and (3) that καταφθορᾷ, as in Ps. xlix. 9, and as more frequently διαφθορά, was a misrendering of NNW, ‘pit’. The actual readings of the MSS. are ‘in corruption of sleep’ (J C H), (in) ‘sleep of corruption’ (S, which perchance represents the order of the two words in the original text of G&), and ‘in heaviness (καταφορᾷ) of sleep’ (R L). When (I was) far, tῷ μακράν. (ἃ lacks the ἐn and the pronoun which should normally be present, if the sense implied by the translation was intended. 5S ,5; but this is inconclusive as to the reading of (t, Von Gebhardt for ὕπνου tῷ conjectures ὑπνοῦτῶ = ὑπνούντων ; then render ‘ (sunk) in the heaviness of them that sleep afar from God’. For the might of our God is for ever with mercy, 4 And the kingdom of our God is for ever over the nations in judgement. 5 (4) Thou, O Lord, didst choose David (to be) king over Israel, And swaredst to him touching his seed that never should his kingdom fail before Thee. 6 (5) But, for our sins, sinners rose up against us; They assailed us and thrust us out ; What Thou hadst not promised to them, they took away (from us) with violence. 7 They in no wise glorified Thy honourable name ; (6) They set a (worldly) monarchy in place of (that which was) their excellency ; 8 They laid waste the throne of David in tumultuous arrogance. (7) But Thou, O God, didst cast them down, and remove their seed from the earth, 9 In that there rose up against them a man that was alien to our race. to (8) According to their sins didst Thou recompense them, O God; So that it befell them according to their deeds. 11 (9) God showed them no pity ; He sought out their seed and let not one of them go free. 12 (ro) Faithful is the Lord in all His judgements Which He doeth upon the earth. 13 (11) The lawless one laid waste our land so that none inhabited it, They destroyed young and old and their children together. 14 (12) In the heat of His anger He sent them away even unto the west, And (He exposed) the rulers of the land unsparingly to derision. 15 (13) Being an alien the enemy acted proudly, And his heart was alien from our God. 16 (14) And all . . . Jerusalem, As also the nations . . { (15) And the children of the covenant in the midst of the mingled peoples . . . ᾿ There was not among them one that wrought in the midst of Jerusalem mercy and truth. (16) They that loved the synagogues of the pious fled from them, As sparrows that fly from their nest. 17) They wandered in deserts that their lives might be saved from harm, And precious in the eyes of them that lived abroad was any that escaped alive from them. 8) Over the whole earth were they scattered by lawless (men). 19) For the heavens withheld the rain from dropping upon the earth, Springs were stopped (that sprang) perennial(ly) out of the deeps, (that ran down) from lofty moun- tains. For there was none among them that wrought righteousness and justice ; From the chief of them to the least (of them) all were sinful ; 22 The king was a transgressor, and the judge disobedient, and the people sinful. 1) Behold, O-Lord, and raise up unto them their king, the son of David, At the time in the which Thou seest, O God, that he may reign over Israel Thy servant. 2) And gird him with strength, that he may shatter unrighteous rulers, 2; And that he may purge Jerusalem from nations that trample (her) down to destruction. 23) Wisely, righteously 26 he shall thrust out sinners from (the) inheritance, He shall destroy the pride of the sinner as a potter’s vessel. 24) With a rod of iron he shall break in pieces all their substance, 27 He shall destroy the godless nations with the word of his mouth ; 5) At his rebuke nations shall flee before him, And he shall reprove sinners for the thoughts of their heart. — 6) And he shall gather together a holy people, whom he shall lead in righteousness, And he shall judge the tribes of the people that has been sanctified by the Lord his God. (27) And he shall not suffer unrighteousness to lodge any more in their midst, Nor shall there dwell with them any man that knoweth wickedness, 30 ἘῸγ he shall know them, that they are all sons of their God. as also the nations in the cities to their gods’; from this S$ seems to be derived through haplography of ἐn (ἐποίησεν for ἐποίησεν ev). The alternative that S represents the original text of (ἃ and that J L H is due to dittography of ἐn might be considered, if it was not probable that the toῖς θeoῖς of J L H S was a mere substitute for the unintelligible, but probably earlier, reading of R—rovs θeoύς. Similarly, ‘their cities’ (35) is probably a mere amplification of ‘the cities’ (Gr). For ἐn taῖς πόλeσi toὺς θeoύς von Gebhardt conjectures as the original reading of & ἐn taῖς πόλeσi toῦ σθένους, understanding ‘in the cities of their might’ to mean in the other cities besides Jerusalem which they had conquered. But this, if it were in other respects more acceptable, would still leave v. 16 ὁ suspiciously elliptical. This ellipsis, and the probability that the reading ‘ the cities’ (@&) is prior to ‘ their cities’ (95), and toὺς θeoύς to toῖς θeoῖς, deprives Frankenberg’s argument that the allusion is not to Pompey but to Antiochus Epiphanes (1 Macc. i. 44 ff., 54 ff. ; 2 Macc. vi. 102) of much of its plausibility. What may have been meant, or alluded to, by ® remains very uncertain. 17a. the children of the covenant, i.e. the Jews (cp. Ezek. xxx. 5, Acts iii. 25). ‘The mingled peoples,’ _ apparently here the Gentiles; for Y implied by συμμίκτων see Neh. xiii. 3, Jer. xxv. 20, 1. 37, Ezek. xxx. 5. What was meant by ἐπεκρατοῦσαν αὐτῶν (not translated above), or the Hebrew underlying it, is uncertain; is it that the Jews ‘surpassed’ (Ὁ 101) the heathen in wickedness (cp. i. 8), or ‘attached themselves (3 1P'"N7) to them’? (ἃ would most naturally mean ‘ ruled them’ (cp. xvi. 7), or ‘gained the mastery over them’. (28) And he shall divide them according to their tribes upon the land, 31 And neither sojourner nor alien shall sojourn with them any more. (29) He shall judge peoples and nations in the wisdom of his righteousness. Se/ah. 32 (30) And he shall have the heathen nations to serve him under his yoke ; And he shall glorify the Lord in a place to be seen of (?) all the earth ; 33 And he shall purge Jerusalem, making it holy as of old: 34 (31) So that nations shall come from the ends of the earth to see his glory, Bringing as gifts her sons who had fainted, 3325 And to see the glory of the Lord, wherewith God hath glorified her. (32) And he (shall be) a righteous king, taught of God, over them, 36 And there shall be no unrighteousness in his days in their midst, For all shall be holy and their king the anointed of the Lord. 37 (33) For he shall not put his trust in horse and rider and bow, Nor shall he multiply for himself gold and silver for war, Nor shall he gather confidence from (?) a multitude (?) for the day of battle. 38 (34) The Lord Himself is his king, the hope of him that is mighty through (his) hope in God. { ) All nations (shall be) in fear before him, 39 (35) For he will smite the earth with the word of his mouth for ever. 40 He will bless the people of the Lord with wisdom and gladness, 41 (36) And he himself (will be) pure from sin, so that he may rule a great people. He will rebuke rulers, and remove sinners by the might of his word ;
42.  (37) And (relying) upon his God, throughout his days he will not stumble ; For God will make him mighty by means of (His) holy spirit, And wise by means of the spirit of understanding, with strength and righteousness.
43.  (38) And the blessing of the Lord (will be) with him: he will be strong and stumble not ;
44.  (39) His hope (will be) in the Lord: who then can prevail against him ? (40) (He will be) mighty in his works, and strong in the fear of God,
45.  (He will be) shepherding the flock of the Lord faithfully and righteously, And will suffer none among them to stumble in their pasture.
46.  (41) He will lead them all aright, And there will be no pride among them that any among them should be oppressed. 32 ὁ. in a place to be seen of. So Ryle and James render ἐn ἐπiσήμῳ (cp. ii. 6 n.), seeing in the lines an allusion to the miraculously exalted and consequently conspicuous Zion of the Messianic age (Isa. ii. 2). Kit. here, as in ii. 6, takes ἐn ἐπi. to be a rendering of ? 133, and renders ‘openly before’. In $ v. 32 ὁ reads ‘and they (i.e. the nations) shall praise (= glorify) the Lord openly in all the earth’. 34, 35a. Very probably the original form of this tristich (originally a distich ?) is not correctly preserved. ‘ His glory’, i.e. the glory of the Messianic king ; ‘her sons’, i.e. the exiled inhabitants of Jerusalem. Ὁ ᾿ H 42) This (will be) the majesty of the king of Israel whom God knoweth ; He will raise him up over the house of Israel to correct him. 43) His words (shall be) more refined than costly gold, the choicest ; In the assemblies he will judge the peoples, the tribes of the sanctified.
49.  His words (shall be) like the words of the holy ones in the midst of sanctified peoples.
50.  Blessed be they that shall be in those days, In that they shall see the good fortune of Israel which God shall bring to pass in the gathering together of the tribes.
51.  May the Lord hasten His mercy upon Israel! May He deliver us from the uncleanness of unholy enemies! The Lord Himself is our king for ever and ever. XVIII. A Psalm. Of Solomon. Again of the Anointed of the Lord. 1 Lord, Thy mercy is over the works of Thy hands for ever ; Thy goodness is over Israel with a rich gift. 2 Thine eyes look upon them, so that none of them suffers want ; Thine ears listen to the hopeful prayer of the poor. (3) Thy judgements (are executed) upon the whole earth in mercy ; And Thy love (is) toward the seed of Abraham, the children of Israel. (4) Thy chastisement is upon us as (upon) a first-born, only-begotten son, To turn back the obedient soul from folly (that is wrought) in ignorance. } (5) May God cleanse Israel against the day of mercy and blessing, Against the day of choice when He bringeth back His anointed. Ἢ (6) Blessed shall they be that shall be in those days, In that they shall see the goodness of the Lord which He shall perform for the generation that is to come, 3 (7) Under the rod of chastening of the Lord’s_anointed in the fear of his God, In the spirit of wisdom and righteousness and strength ; (8) That he may direct (every) man in the works of righteousness by the fear of God, That he may establish them all before the Lord, (9) A good generation (living) in the fear of God in the days of mercy. Selah. ἢ (10) Great is our God and glorious, dwelling in the highest. 12 (It is He) who hath established in (their) courses the lights (of heaven) for determining seasons from _ year to year, And they es not turned aside from the way which He appointed them. 13 (11) In the fear of God (they pursue) their path every day, From the day God created them and for evermore. 14 (12) And they have erred not since the day He created them. Since the generations of old they have not withdrawn from their path, Unless God commanded them (so to do) by the command of His servants.


# 4 Maccabees

4.  is to say, if Reason is proved to control the passions adverse to temperance, gluttony and lust, it is also clearly shown to be lord over the passions, like malevolence, opposed to justice, and over those opposed to manliness, namely rage and pain and fear.
5.  But, some may ask, if the Reason is master of the passions, why does it not control forgetfulness - 6and ignorance? their object being to cast ridicule. The answer is that Reason is not master over _ defects inhering in the mind itself, but over the passions or moral defects that are adverse to justice and manliness and temperance and judgement ; and its action in their case is not to extirpate the passions, but to enable us to resist them successfully.
7.  Icould bring before you many examples, drawn from various sources, where Reason has proved _ 8itself master over the passions, but the best instance by far that I can give is the noble conduct of ᾿ς 9 those who died for the sake of virtue, Eleazar, and the Seven Brethren and the Mother. For these tς ἈΠ] by their contempt of pains, yea, even unto death, proved that Reason rises superior to the ‘topassions. I might enlarge here in praise of their virtues, they, the men with the Mother, dying on } ἡ this day we celebrate for the love of moral beauty and goodness, but rather would I felicitate them ‘tron the honours they have attained. For the admiration felt for their courage and endurance, not only by the world at large but by their very executioners, made them the authors of the downfall ᾿ς oὗ the tyranny under which our nation lay, they defeating the tyrant by their endurance, so that
12.  through them was their country purified. But I shall presently take opportunity to discuss this, after we have begun with the general theory, as I am in the habit of doing, and I will then proceed _ to their story, giving glory to the all-wise God. a4 Our enquiry, then, is whether the Reason is supreme master over the passions. But we must define just what the Reason is and what passion is, and how many forms of passion there are, and
15.  whether the Reason is supreme over all of them. Reason I take to be the mind preferring with * ὶ is revealed to the soul of the ‘ righteous man’ in the Book of Moses, and I therefore translate εὐσεβὴς λoγiσμός by ‘The Inspired Reason’, that is to say the Reason or Rational Will obeying the guidance of the Law. When so guided, the λoγiσμός becomes our higher self, and includes not only reason, but the moral sense and that noblest form of courage which consists in perfect self-sacrifice for the sake of our ideal. With regard to εὐσεβής I have only used ‘ Inspired ’ for it when thus connected with λoγiσμός. Elsewhere it is generally represented by ‘ righteous’, which must be taken in the meaning it usually bears in the Old Testament of ‘following the Law’ in the Jewish sense. Similarly εὐσέβεια is either ‘righteousness’ or ‘religion’, according to the context, with the same definitely limited connotation of orthodox Judaism. 531: » 23 certain sequences. Thus while desire goes before pleasure, satisfaction follows after, and while fear THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 1. 16-35
16.  clear deliberation the life of wisdom. Wisdom I take to be the knowledge of things, divine and
17.  human, and of their causes. This I take to be the culture acquired under the Law, through which we learn with due reverence the things of God and for our worldly profit the things of man, A
18.  Now wisdom is manifested under the forms of judgement and justice, and courage, and temper-
19.  ance. But judgement or se/f-control is the one that dominates them all, for through it, in truth,
20.  Reason asserts its authority over the passions. But of the passions there are two comprehensive sources, namely, pleasure and pain, and either belongs essentially also to the soul as well as to the
21.  body. And with respect both to pleasure and pain there are many cases where the passions have
24.  goes before pain, after pain comes sorrow. Anger, again, if a man will retrace the course of his
25.  feelings, is a passion in which are blended both pleasure and pain. Under pleasure, also, comes
26.  that moral debasement which exhibits the widest variety of the passions. It manifests itself in
27.  the soul as ostentation, and covetousness, and vain-glory, and contentiousness, and backbiting, and in the body as eating of strange meat, and gluttony, and gormandizing in secret. ig 8 Now pleasure and pain being as it were two trees, growing from body and soul, many offshoots of 9 these passions sprout up; and each man’s Reason as master-gardener, weeding and pruning and binding up, and turning on the water and directing it hither and thither, brings the thicket of
30.  dispositions and passions under domestication. For while Reason is the guide of the virtues it i: master of the passions. Observe, now, in the first place, that Reason becomes supreme over the passions in virtue of the
32.  inhibitory action of temperance. Temperance, I take it, is the repression of the desires; but of th
33.  desires some are mental and some physical, and both kinds are clearly controlled by Reason; wh we are tempted towards forbidden meats, how do we come to relinquish the pleasures to be deri from them? [5 it not that Reason has power to repress the appetites? In my opinion it is
34.  Accordingly when we feel a desire to eat water-animals and birds and beasts and meats of e
35.  description forbidden to us under the Law, we abstain through the predominance of Reason. the propensions of our appetites are checked and inhibited by the temperate mind, and all movements of the body obey the bridle of Reason. 2 For t THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 2. 1—3. 5 1 And what is there to be surprised at if the natural desire of the soul to enjoy the fruition of beauty -2is quenched? This, certainly, is why we praise the virtuous Joseph, because by his Reason, with a 3 mental effort, he checked the carnal impulse. For he, a young man at the age when physical desire 415 strong, by his Reason quenched the impulse of his passions. And Reason is proved to subdue the 5 impulse not only of sexual desire, but of all sorts of covetings. For the Law says, ‘ Thou shalt not 6 covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor anything that is thy neighbour’s.’ Verily, when the Law orders us not to covet, it should, I think, confirm strongly the argument that the Reason is capable of controlling covetous desires, even as it does the passions that militate against justice. 7 How else can a man, naturally gormandizing and greedy and drunken, be taught to change his ‘Snature, if the Reason be not manifestly the master of the passions? Certainly, as soon as a man orders his life according to the Law, if he is miserly he acts contrary to his nature,and lends money 9 to the needy without interest, and at the seventh-year periods cancels the debt. And if he is par- _ simonious, he is overruled by the Law through the action of Reason, and refrains from gleaning his _ stubbles or picking the last grapes from his vineyards. A And with regard to all the rest we can recognize that Reason is in the position of master over 9 the passions or affections. For the Law ranks above affection for parents, so that a man may not ΓI for their sakes surrender his virtue, and it overrides love for a wife, so that if she transgress a man 2 should rebuke her, and it governs love for children, so that if they are naughty a man should punish them, and it controls the claims of friendship, so that a man should reprove his friends if they do 13 evil. And do not think it a paradoxical thing when Reason through the Law is able to overcome 4 even hatred, so that a man refrains from cutting down the enemy’s orchards, and protects the property of the enemy from the spoilers, and gathers up their goods that have been scattered. t5 And the rule of Reason is likewise proved to extend through the more aggressive passions or 6 vices, ambition, vanity, ostentation, pride, and backbiting. For the temperate mind repels all these 7 debased passions, even as it does anger, for it conquers even this. Yea, Moses when he was angered against Dathan and Abiram did not give free course to his wrath, but governed his anger by his 3 Reason. For the temperate mind is able, as I said, to win the victory over the passions, modifying 9 some, while crushing others absolutely. Why else did our wise father Jacob blame the houses of Simeon and Levi for their unreasoning slaughter of the tribe of the Shechemites, saying, ‘ Ac- 20 cursed be their anger!’ For had not Reason possessed the power to restrain their anger he would not have spoken thus. For in the day when God created man, he implanted in him his passions 22 and inclinations, and also, at the very same time, set the mind on a throne amidst the senses to be 23 his sacred guide in all things; and to the mind he gave the Law, by the which if a man order himself, he shall reign over a kingdom that is temperate, and just, and virtuous, and brave. 4 Well then, some one may ask, if Reason is master of the passions why is it not master of forget- Ὁ t fulness and ignorance? But the argument is supremely ridiculous. For Reason is not shown to be 2 master over passions or defects in itself, but over those of the body. For example, none of you is able to extirpate our natural desire, but the Reason can enable him to escape being made a slave by 3desire. None of you is able to extirpate anger from the soul, but it is possible for the Reason to 4 come to his aid against anger. None of you can extirpate a malevolent disposition, but Reason can 5 be his powerful ally against being swayed by malevolence. Reason is not the extirpator of the passions, but their antagonist. , ἃ Il. 8, ἐνστασων 8 V III. 3. +7ov λογισμον SV Il. 8. at the seventh-year periods. The reading ἐντάσσων, which is that of A, and accordingly is retained by _ Swete, is supported by the Syriac version, which Bensly renders as follows: ‘So he reckoneth by the weeks and -forgiveth part of that which is due to him.’ But there is no MS. authority in the Greek for the insertion of the words * part of’, without which ἐντάσσων yields very poor sense. And even if we admit ‘part of’, how can reckoning by the _ weeks be supposed to reduce the debt? The Strassburg Bible of 1526 has the more intelligible reading ἐνστασῶν, which ‘must mean the seventh-year period of release. This reading is followed by Lloyd (1590) and many others. Lloyd _ translated the passage thus: ‘Cum primum igitur quis (? quisquis) ad Legis praescriptum vivit, si avaro fuerit ac sordido ingenio, suis vim adhibere moribus cogitur, ut tenuioribus sine foenore mutuet; atque imminentibus iam _ Septimanis mutuum amittat.’ And Lloyd is followed by Hudson (1720), who also reads ἐνστασῶν and translates ‘ut _imminentibus iam septimanis mutuum amittat’. The version of Deissmann, who likewise reads ἐνστασῶν, runs, ‘ He lends to the needy without interest, although (in the future) when the seventh year comes he even loses the capital he has lent.’ This reading ἐνστασῶν is also supported by the fact that it does certainly correspond very closely with the Law as stated in Deut. xv. 9: Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand ; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought.’ 6. 4 ; involved us in many and various calamities. Onias,a man of the highest character, being then 2,3 THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 3. 6—4. 10 ᾿ Ἴ The case of the thirst of King David may serve at least to make this clearer. For when David — had fought the live-long day against the Philistines, and by the help of our country’s warriors had 8 slain many of them, he came at eventide, all fordone with sweat and toil, to the royal tent, around — 9 which was encamped the whole army of our ancestors. So all the host fell to their evening meal; ro but the king, being consumed with an intense thirst, though he had abundance of water, was 11 unable to slake it. Instead, an irrational desire for the water that was in the possession of the 12 enemy with growing intensity burned him up and unmanned and consumed him. Then when his — body-guard murmured against the craving of the king, two youths, mighty warriors, ashamed that their king should lack his desire, put on all their armour, and took a water-vessel, and scaled the 13 enemy’s ramparts; and stealing undetected past the guards at the gate, they searched through 14 all the enemy’s camp. And they bravely found the spring, and drew from it a draught for the 15 king. But David, though still burning with the thirst, considered that such a draught, reckoned 16 as equivalent to blood, was a grievous danger to his soul. Therefore, opposing his Reason to his 17 desire, he poured out the water as an offering to God. For the temperate mind is able to conquer 18 the dictates of the passions, and to quench the fires of desire, and to wrestle victoriously -with the pangs of our bodies though they be exceeding strong, and by the moral beauty and goodness 19 of Reason to defy with scorn all the domination of the passions. And now the occasion calls us to set forth the story of the self-controlled Reason. At a time when our fathers enjoyed great peace through the due observance of the Law, and were in happy case, so that Seleucus Nicanor, the king of Asia, sanctioned the tax for the temple-service, 21 and recognized our polity, precisely then, certain men, acting factiously against the general concord, 20 high priest and having the office for his life, a certain Simon raised a faction against him, but since despite every kind of slander he failed to injure him on account of the people, he fled abroad with intent to betray his country. So he came to Apollonius, the governor of Syria and Phoenicia and Cilicia, and said, ‘ Being loyal to the king, I am here to inform you that in the treasuries of Jerusalem are stored many thousands of private deposits, not belonging to the temple account, and rightfully the property of King Seleucus.’ Apollonius, having made inquiry into the details of the matter, praised Simon for his loyal service to the king, and hastening to the court of Seleucus, disclosed to him the valuable treasure ; 5 then, after receiving authority to deal with the matter, he promptly marched into our country, 6 accompanied by the accursed Simon and a very powerful army, and announced that he was there 7 by the king’s command to take possession of the private deposits in the treasury. Our peopl were deeply angered by this announcement, and protested strongly, considering it an outrageous thing for those who had entrusted their deposits to the temple treasury to be robbed of them, and 8 they threw all possible obstacles in his way. Apollonius, however, with threats, made his way into 9 the temple. Then the priests in the temple and the women and children besought God to come to 10 the rescue of his Holy Place that was being violated; and when Apollonius with his armed host marched in to seize the moneys, there appeared from heaven angels, riding upon horses, with lightni 4 14. ἐγεμισαν is supported by the Syriac 18. tη καλοκαγαθια 8 V IV. 8. ἀπειλων N 9. του ιερου SV THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 4. 11—5. 2 1 flashing from their arms, and cast great fear and trembling upon them. And Apollonius fell down “half-dead in the Court of the Gentiles, and stretched out his hands to heaven, and with tears he _ entreated the Hebrews that they would make intercession for him and stay the wrath of the heavenly host. For he said that he had sinned and was worthy even of death, and that if he were given his 3 life he would laud to all men the blessedness of the Holy Place. Moved by these words, Onias, the igh-priest, although most scrupulous in other cases, made intercession for him lest King Seleucus _ should possibly think that Apollonius had been overthrown by a human device and not by divine 4 justice. Apollonius, accordingly, after his astonishing deliverance departed to report to the king the ngs that had befallen him. But Seleucus dying, his successor on the throne was his son Antiochus piphanes, an overweening terrible man; who dismissed Onias from his sacred office, and made his other Jason high-priest instead, the condition being that in return for the appointment Jason should y him three thousand six hundred and sixty talents yearly. So he appointed Jason high-priest and de him chief ruler over the people. And he (¥asonz) introduced to our people a new way of life a new constitution in utter defiance of the Law; so that not only did he lay out a gymnasium n the Mount of our fathers, but he actually abolished the service of the temple. Wherefore the 2 divine justice was kindled to anger and brought Antiochus himself as an enemy against us. For when he was carrying on war with Ptolemy in Egypt and heard that the people of Jerusalem had 3 rejoiced exceedingly over a report of his death, he immediately marched back against them. And when he had plundered he city he made a decree denouncing the penalty of death upon any who should be seen to live after the Law of our fathers. But he found all his decrees of no avail to break down the constancy of our people to the Law, and he beheld all his threats and penalties utterly despised, so that even women for circumcising their sons, though they knew beforehand 6 what would be their fate, were flung, together with their offspring, headlong from the rocks. When therefore his decrees continued to be contemned by the mass of the people, he personally tried to _ force by tortures each man separately to eat unclean meats and thus abjure the Jewish religion. Accordingly, the tyrant Antiochus, accompanied by his councillors, sat in judgement on a certain igh place with his troops drawn up around him in full armour, and he ordered his guards to drag 19. εξεδιητησεν 8 V Syr. 21. ἐπολεμωσεν 24. εὐνομιαν SV Syr. 1V. 13. most scrupulous. 1 have followed Grimm’s rendering, but it here may be noted that εὐλάβεια, caution, is regular philosophical term for the useful side of the passion which in excess becomes fear. If we take it in the la sense, ἄλλως εὐλαβηθείς would mean that Onias was so much alarmed as to the possible effect on King Seleucus that on this occasion he swallowed his repugnance and offered the prayer. In 2 Macc., where the story is told at much greater length, and where the offender is called Heliodorus not Apollonius, Onias not only prays but also offers sacrifice ‘as an atonement for the man’. Poor Onias seems to have been a lover of peace, nevertheless he was, after his retirement, murdered at Antioch by Menelaus, the usurping high-priest who outbid and ousted Jason. _ 15. his son, vids. An extraordinary mistake for brother, but the MSS. leave no doubt that the author made it. us Epiphanes was a curious mixture. Like the rest of the Seleucid House he was of mixed Persian and ian blood, and his education, half Greek, half Roman, was no less mixed, for he spent his childhood at the aa court, and his boyhood at Rome, where he became a hostage for his father on his defeat. Released his 15 death, he played as a young man at being a citizen and an elected official of Athens, keeping his eye the time on the Syrian throne. Then came the murder of his brother Seleucus by Heliodorus, and Antiochus made his bid for the kingdom and won. Thenceforth he reigned with a sort of insane energy, acting as the missionary of Hellenism in the East, and backing up his mission with wayward freakishness. While planting new temples and new Antiochs everywhere, he took advantage of his audacious title of Θeὸς ᾿Επιφανής, the God, to assert his right to plunder remorselessly the already existing temples in order that their treasures support his extravagances. His looting of the Temple at Jerusalem was but one instance out of many, and it the failure of his attempt on the shrine of Ishtar at Elymais that brought about his doom. 22, war with Ptolemy. Antiochus made several campaigns against Ptolemy and succeeded in conquering the of E with the single exception of Alexandria, to which he actually laid siege. But he had reckoned without who disapproved of his ambitions, and having finished the Macedonian war had got her hands free at last. was watching the siege when he saw a small party of Romans who had just landed approaching him. He their leader, a consular, Pompilius Laenas, whom he had known as a boy in Rome, and held out his hand ng. Pompilius took no notice of the offered hand, but presented a note from the senate desiring Antiochus to uit Egypt. The Syrian king looked at it, and said lightly, ‘I will consider it with my friends.’ Pompilius held in 5 hand a vine-stick, a thing as characteristic of a Roman officer as the sjambok was of a Boer commander. He drew circle in the sand with it round the king. ‘Consider there,’ he said. Antiochus paused, hesitated, and then, still the circle, said, ‘The senate shall be obeyed.’ His hand was instantly grasped by Pompilius, and they were best of friends. Having accepted the situation Antiochus withdrew his armies from Egypt, but being enraged the Jews, as related in the text, he relieved his feelings by the sack of Jerusalem and the persecution of the Jews. ἕῳ V. 1. acertain high place. Tradition varies as to the scene of the martyrdoms. In Maccabees there is nothing to that they took place anywhere except at Jerusalem. The early Church, however, held the place to have been Antioch, and a basilica was erected there in the martyrs’ honour. For the transfer of the relics from Antioch to _ Milan and Cologne, see ὃ 8. The relics are said now to be in Rome. a. 671 i THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 5, 2-25 there every single man of the Hebrews and compel them to eat swine’s flesh and things offered to_ 3 idols; but if any should refuse to defile themselves with the unclean things, they were to be tortured 4and put to death. And when many had been taken by force, one man first from among the company was brought before Antiochus,a Hebrew whose name was Eleazar,a priest by birth, trained in knowledge of the law, a man advanced in years and well known to many of the tyrant’s — court for his philosophy. 5 And Antiochus, looking on him, said: 6 ‘Before I allow the tortures to begin for you, O venerable man, I would give you this counsel, that you should eat of the flesh of the swine and save your life; for I respect your age and your grey hairs, although to have worn them so long a time, and still to cling to the Jewish religion, makes me 7 think you no philosopher. For most excellent is the meat of this animal which Nature has graciously 8 bestowed upon us, and why should you abominate it? Truly it is folly not to enjoy innocent 9 pleasures, and it is wrong to reject Nature’s favours. But it will be still greater folly, I think, on your part if with idle vapouring about truth you shall proceed to defy even me to your own punish- to, ti ment. Will you not awake from your preposterous philosophy? Will you not fling aside the non sense of your calculations and, adopting another frame of mind befitting your mature years, learn the 12 true philosophy of expediency, and bow to my charitable counsel, and have pity on your own 13 venerable age? For consider this, too, that even if there be some Power whose eye is upon this religion of yours, he will always pardon you for a transgression done under compulsion.’ 4 14 Thus urged by the tyrant to the unlawful eating of unclean meat, Eleazar asked permission 15 speak ; and receiving it, he began his speech before the court as follows: 16 ‘We,O Antiochus, having accepted the Divine Law as the Law of our country, do not believe any stronger necessity is laid upon us than that of our obedience to the Law. 17,18 ‘Therefore we do surely deem it right not in any way whatsoever to transgress the Law. And yet, were our Law, as you suggest, not truly divine, while we vainly believed it to be divine, not even so 19 would it be right for us to destroy our reputation for piety. Think it not, then, a small sin for us 20 to eat the unclean thing, for the transgression of the Law, be it in small things or in great, is equall 22 heinous; for in either case equally the Law is despised. And you scoff at our philosophy, 23 if under it we were living in a manner contrary to reason. Not so, for the Law teaches us self- control, so that we are masters of all our pleasures:and desires and are thoroughly trained in manli- 24 ness so as to endure all pain with readiness ; and it teaches justice, so that with all our various dis- positions we act fairly, and it teaches righteousness, so that with due reverence we worship only the 25 God whois. Therefore do we eat no unclean meat ; for believing our Law to be given by God, we know a} V. 4. φιλοσοφιαν V 11. tῶn λoγίσμωn ὃὲ 24. εκδιδασκει ὃὲ . THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 5, 26—6. 17 _ 26 also that the Creator of the world, as a Lawgiver, feels for us according to our nature. He has commanded us to eat the things that will be convenient for our souls, and he has forbidden us to 27 eat meats that would be the contrary. But it is the act of a tyrant that you should compel us not only to transgress the Law, but should also make us eat in such manner that you may mock at this 8, 29 defilement so utterly abominable to us. But you shall not mock at me thus, neither will I break the 30 sacred oaths of my ancestors to keep the Law, not even though you tear out mine eyes and burn out 31 mine entrails. I am not so unmanned by old age but that when righteousness is at stake the strength 33 of youth returns tomy Reason. So twist hard your racks and blow your furnace hotter. I do not so pity mine old age as to break the Law of my fathers in mine own person. I will not belie thee, O Law that wast my teacher ; I will not desert thee, O beloved self-control ; I will not put thee to shame, O wisdom-loving Reason, nor will I deny ye, O venerated priesthood and knowledge of the Law.
36.  Neither shalt thou sully the pure mouth of mine old age and my lifelong constancy to the Law. 31) THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 7. 18—8. 24 18 But as many as with their whole heart make righteousness their first thought, these alone are able 1g to master the weakness of the flesh, believing that unto God they die not, as our patriarchs, Abra- 20 ham and Isaac and Jacob, died not, but that they live unto God. Therefore there is nothing contradictory in certain persons appearing to be slaves to passion in consequence of the weakness of 21 their Reason. For who is there that being a philosopher following righteously the whole rule of 22 philosophy, and having put his trust in God, and knowing that it is a blessed thing to endure all 23 hardness for the sake of virtue, would not conquer his passions for the sake of righteousness? For the wise and self-controlled man alone is the brave ruler of the passions. Yea, by this means even young boys, being philosophers by virtue of the Reason which is according to righteousness, have triumphed over yet more grievous tortures. 1: For when the tyrant found himself notably defeated in his first attempt, and impotent to compel _2an old man to eat unclean meat, then truly in violent rage he ordered the guards to bring others of the young men of the Hebrews, and if they would eat unclean meat to release them after eating it, 3 but if they refused, to torture them yet more savagely. And under these orders of the tyrant seven brethren together with their aged mother were brought prisoners before him, all handsome, 4 and modest, and well-born, and generally attractive. And when the tyrant saw them there, standing as if they were a festal choir with their mother in the midst, he took notice of them, and struck by _ their noble and distinguished bearing he smiled at them, and calling them nearer said : “Ὁ young men, I wish well to each one of you, and admire your beauty, and honour highly so - large a band of brothers; so not only do I advise you not to persist in the madness of that old 6 man who has already suffered, but I even entreat of you to yield to me and become partakers in my friendship. For, as I am able to punish those who disobey my orders, so am I able to ἡ advance those who do obey me. Be assured then that you shall be given positions of importance sand authority in my service if you will reject the ancestral law of your polity. Share in the 9 Hellenic life, and walk in a new way, and take some pleasure in your youth; for if you drive me to anger with your disobedience you will compel me to resort to terrible penalties and put to every single one of you to death by torture. Have pity then on yourselves, whom even I, your 1 Opponent, pity for your youth and your beauty. Will you not consider with yourselves this _ thing, that if you disobey me there is nothing before you but death in torments?’ 12 With these words he ordered the instruments of torture to be brought forward in order to per- 13 Suade them by fear to eat unclean meat. But when the guards had produced wheels, and joint- dislocators, and racks, and bone-crushers, and catapults, and chaldrons, and braziers, and thumb- 14 Screws, and iron claws, and wedges, and branding irons, the tyrant spoke again and said, ‘ You 15 had better feel fear, my lads, and the Justice you worship will pardon your unwilling transgression ’. . But they, hearing his persuasions, and seeing his dreadful engines, not only showed no fear Ἢ but actually arrayed their philosophy in opposition to the tyrant, and by their right Reason did abase his tyranny. 6 And yet consider ; supposing some amongst them to have been faint-hearted and cowardly, what sort of language would they have used? would it not have been to this effect ? 17 ‘Alas! miserable creatures that we are and foolish above measure! When the king invites us 8 and appeals to us on terms of kind treatment shall we not obey him? Why do we encourage our- 19 Selves with vain desires and dare a disobedience that is to cost us our lives? Shall we not,O men my brothers, fear the dread instruments and weigh well his threats of the tortures, and abandon these 9 empty vaunts and this fatal bragging? Let us take pity on our own youth and have compassion on 2 our mother’s age; and let us lay to heart that if we disobey we shall die. And even the divine justice will have mercy on us, if compelled by necessity we yield to the king in fear. Why should we cast away from us this dear life and rob ourselves of this sweet world? Let us not strive against = Vii. 19. they live unto God. These words on immortality are repeated in xvi. 25. The closest parallel is Mark xii. 26: ‘ And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God ᾿ oe an him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God but the God of the living.’ . See also § 9. VIII. 13. wheels, ἅς. Erasmus gives the horrid list in Latin thus: ‘Exhibentur itaque rotae, radii, ungulae, catapultae, lebetes, catastae, frixoria, digitaria, pugillaria, manus ferreae, subulae, succensoria, ollae aeneae, sartago. Haec enim illis nomina esse reperimus. Succensorium ad excitandam flammam quoddam tenue esse ferri ᾿ς telum accepimus, Exhibentur id genus reliqua nimis profecto abhorrenda, quae sigillatim enarrantem dies sit defe- ᾿ς cturus.’ Lloyd’s list is ‘ rotae, eculeus, fidiculae, unci, catapultae, lebetes, sartagines, digitalia, manicae ferreae, cunei, et follies’. For myself I agree with the poet that artists in torture should be hoist with their own petard. en neque enim lex aequior ulla est Quam necis artifices arte perire sua.’ 675 Xx THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 8. 25---9. 23 25 necessity nor with vain confidence invite our torture. Even the Law itself does not willingly con- 26 demn us to death, we being in terror of the instruments of torture. Why does such contentiousness inflame us and a fatal obstinacy find favour with us, when we might have a peaceful life by obeying 27 the king?’ But no such words escaped these young men at the prospect of the torture, nor did 28 such thoughts enter into their minds. For they were despisers of the passions and masters over pain. 29 And thus no sooner did the tyrant conclude his urging of them to eat unclean meat than all with one voice together, and as with one soul, said to him: 9: ‘Why dost thou delay, O tyrant? We are ready to die rather than transgress the command- 2 ments of our fathers. For we should be putting our ancestors also to shame, if we did not walk in 3 obedience to the Law and take Moses as our counsellor.. O tyrant that counsellest us to transgress 4 the Law, do not, hating us, pity us beyond ourselves. For we esteem thy mercy, giving us our life 5 in return for a breach of the Law, a thing harder to bear than death itself. Thou wouldst terrify us with thy threats of death under torture, as if a little while ago thou hadst learned nothing from 6 Eleazar. But if the old men of the Hebrews endured the tortures for righteousness’ sake, yea, until they died, more befittingly will we young men die despising the torments of thy compulsion, over ; which he our aged teacher also triumphed. Make trial therefore,O tyrant. And if thou takest our g lives for the sake of righteousness, think not that thou hurtest us with thy tortures. For we through g this our evil entreatment and our endurance of it shall win the prize of virtue; but thou for our cruel murder shalt suffer at the hands of divine justice sufficient torment by fire for ever.’ to These words of the youths redoubled the wrath of the tyrant, not at their disobedience only but ti at what he considered their ingratitude. So by his orders the scourgers brought forward the eldest of them and stripped him of his garment and bound his hands and arms on either side with thongs. 12 But when they had scourged him till they were weary, and gained nothing thereby, they cast him 14 upon the wheel. And on it the noble youth was racked till his bones were out of joint. And as joint after joint gave way, he denounced ¢he tyrant in these words: 15 “Ὁ thou most abominable tyrant, thou enemy of the justice of heaven and bloody-minded, thou dost torment me in this fashion not for manslaying nor for impiety but for defending the Law of God.’ 16 And when the guards said to him, ‘Consent to eat, that so you may be released from your 17 tortures,’ he said to them, ‘ Your method, O miserable minions, is not strong enough to lead captive 18 my Reason. Cut off my limbs, and burn my flesh, and twist my joints; through all the torments I to will show you that in behalf of virtue the sons of the Hebrews alone are unconquerable.’ As he thus spake they set hot coals upon him besides, and intensifying the torture strained him yet tighter on — 20 the wheel. And all the wheel was besmeared with his blood, and the heaped coals were quenched by the humours of his body dropping down, and the vent flesh ran round the axles of the machine. 21 And with his bodily frame already in dissolution this great-souled youth, likea true son of Abraham, 22 groaned not at all; but as if he'were suffering a change by fire to incorruption, he nobly endured 23 the torment, saying, ‘Follow my example, O brothers. Do not for ever desert me, and forswear IX. 2. Μωύσει 8 Syr. 19. λεγοντι N IX. 9. torment by fire for ever. For the eschatology of this passage see § 9. There is here no trace of the spirit of the Crucified: ‘Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do.’ THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 9. 24—11. 12 24 not our brotherhood in nobility of soul. War a holy and honourable warfare on behalf of righteous- ᾿ ness, through which may the just Providence that watched over our fathers become merciful unto his 25 people and take vengeance on the accursed tyrant. And with these words the holy youth yielded up the ghost. 26 But while all were wondering at his constancy of soul, the guards brought forward the second in age of the sons, and grappling him with sharp-clawed hands of iron they fastened him to the 27 engines and the catapult. But when they heard his noble resolve in answer to their question, ‘ Would 28 he eat rather than be tortured ?’ these panther-like beasts tore at his sinews with claws of iron, and rent away all the flesh from his cheeks, and tore off the skin from his head. But he steadfastly 29 enduring this agony said, ‘ How sweet is every form of death for the sake of the righteousness of 80 our fathers!’ And to the tyrant he said, ‘O most ruthless of tyrants, doth not it seem to thee that at this moment thou thyself sufferest tortures worse than mine in seeing thy tyranny’s arrogant 31 intention overcome by my endurance for righteousness’ sake? For I am supported under pain 32 by the joys that come through virtue, whereas thou art in torment whilst glorying in thy impiety ; neither shalt thou escape, O most abominable tyrant, the penalties of the divine wrath.’ zt And when he had bravely met his glorious death, the third son was brought forward and was 2 earnestly entreated by many to taste and so to save himself. But he answered in a loud voice, * Are ye ignorant that the same father begat me and my brothers that are dead, and the same 3 mother gave us birth, and in the same doctrines was I brought up? I do not forswear the noble 4 bond of brotherhood. Therefore if ye have any engine of torment, apply it to this body of mine; for 5 my soul ye cannot reach, not if ye would.’ But they were greatly angered at the bold speech of the _ 6man, and they dislocated his hands and his feet with their dislocating engines, and wrenched his Ἷ limbs out of their sockets, and unstrung them; and they twisted round his fingers, and his arms, ἢ 7 and his legs, and his elbow-joints. And in no wise being able to strangle 47s spirit they stripped off _ his skin, taking the points of the fingers with it, and tore in Scythian fashion the scalp from his head, 8 and straightway brought him to the wheel. And on this they twisted his spine till he saw his own 9 flesh hanging in strips and great gouts of blood pouring down from his entrails. And at the point _ 10 of death he said, ‘We, O most abominable tyrant, suffer thus for our upbringing and our virtue that I, 12 are of God; but thou for thy impiety and thy cruelty shalt endure torments without end.’ And _ 13 when this man had died worthily of his brothers, they brought up the fourth, and said to him, ‘ Be not thou also mad with the same madness as thy brethren, but obey the king and save thyself.’ , 15 But he said unto them, ‘ For me ye have no fire so exceeding hot as to make meacoward. By the blessed death of my brethren, by the eternal doom of the tyrant, and by the glorious life of the 16 righteous, I will not deny my noble brotherhood. Invent tortures, O tyrant, in order that thou σὴ mayest learn thereby that I am brother of those who have been already tortured.’ When he heard this the bloodthirsty, murderous, and utterly abominable Antiochus bade them cut out his tongue. 18 But he said, ‘ Even if thou dost remove my organ of speech, God is a hearer also of the speechless. 20 Lo, I put out my tongue ready: cut it out, for thou shalt not thereby silence my Reason. Gladly _ 21 do we give our bodily members to be mutilated for the cause of God. But God will speedily pursue _ after thee ; for thou cuttest out the tongue that sang songs of praise unto him.’ 1 1 But when this man also was put to a death of agony with the tortures, the fifth sprang forward 2, 3 Saying, ‘I shrink not, O tyrant, from demanding the torture for virtue’s sake. Yea, of myself I come , ard, in order that, slaying me also, thou mayest by yet more misdeeds increase the penalty thou _ 4 Owest to the justice of Heaven. O enemy of virtue and enemy of man, for what crime dost thou _ 5 destroy us in this way? Doth it seem evil to thee that we worship the Creator of all and live 6, 7 according to his virtuous Law? But these things are worthy of honours not of tortures, if thou _ 8didst understand human aspirations and hadst hope of salvation before God. Lo, now thou art 9 God’s enemy and makest war on those that worship God.’ As he spake thus the guards bound to him and brought him before the catapult ; and they tied him thereto on his knees, and, fastening _ them there with iron cramps, they wrenched his loins over the rolling ‘wedge’ so that he was 11 completely curled back like a scorpion and every joint was disjointed. And thus in grievous strait 12 for breath and anguish of body he exclaimed, ‘Glorious, O tyrant, glorious against thy will are XI. 7. avOpworou πoθωn XI. 3. increase the penalty. Erasmus paraphrases thus: ‘Reum te gehennae effusus quattuor innocentum Sanguis effecit, me quinto gradatim numerus ipse ampliandus est, ut tibi tandem poenae ex multitudine peremptorum “ 7 if thou didst understand. εἴπερ joOdvov ἀνθρώπου πoθῶn. Lioyd’s text omits 7 and 8 entirely, following the - Bible. What Erasmus had before him is hard to guess: what he prints is ‘. . . honor nobis est et salus _ non poena: mirificum accipiemus a deo beneficium, si in nulla nobis laterum parte parcatur ’. 17, 21, 26, 27 Thy fire is cool for us, thy engines of torture torment not, and thy violence is impotent. For the 12: And when this one also died a blessed death, being cast into the cauldron, the seventh son, the 10, 11 loose him. And running up to the red-hot brazier, ‘O impious tyrant,’ he cried, ‘and most ungodly - 19, 20 nation. And thee will he punish both in this present life and after that thou art dead.’ And with 13: If therefore the seven brethren despised the tortures even to the death, it is universally proved . THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES. 11. 12—18. 5 the boons that thou bestowest on me, enabling me to show my fidelity to the Law through yet more honourable tortures. THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 18. 6—14. ὃ _6burning? For even as towers on harbour-moles repulse the assaults of the waves and offer a calm 7 entrance to those entering the haven, so the seven-towered right Reason of the youths defended the 8 haven of righteousness and repulsed the tempestuousness of the passions. They formed a holy choir 9 of righteousness as they cheered one another on, saying: ‘ Let us die like brothers, O brethren, for _ the Law. Let us imitate the Three Children at the Assyrian court who despised this same ordeal of 11 the furnace. Let us not turn cravens before the proof of righteousness.’ And one said, ‘ Brother, be 12 of good cheer,’ and another, ‘ Bear it out nobly’; and another, recalling the past, ‘ Remember of what _ stock ye are, and at whose fatherly hand Isaac for righteousness’ sake yielded himself to be a sacri- 13 fice. And each and all of them together, looking at each other brightly and very boldly, said, ‘ With a whole heart will we consecrate ourselves unto God who gave us our souls, and let us lend our bodies 15 to the keeping of the Law. Let us not fear him who thinketh he kills; for a great struggle and 16 peril of the soul awaits in eternal torment those who transgress the ordinance of God. Let us then 17 arm ourselves with divine Reason’s mastery of the passions. After this our passion, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall receive us, and all our forefathers shall praise us.’ (8 And to each separate one of the brothers, as they were dragged off, those whose turn was yet to come said, ‘ Do not disgrace us, brother, nor be false to our brethren already dead.’ » You are not ignorant of the love of brethren, whereof the divine and all-wise Providence has given an inheritance to those who are begotten though their fathers, implanting it in them even through _ 20 the mother’s womb; wherein brethren do dwell the like period, and take their form during the same 21 time, and are nourished from the same blood, and are quickened with the same soul, and are brought into the world after the same space, and they draw milk from the same founts, whereby their frater- 22 nal souls are nursed together in arms at the breast; and they are knit yet closer through a common ᾿ pa and daily companionship and other education, and through our discipline under the Law od. 23 «The feeling of brotherly love being thus naturally strong, the seven brethren had their mutual 24 concord made yet stronger. For trained in the same Law, and disciplined in the same virtues, and 25 brought up together in the upright life, they loved one another the more abundantly. Their 26 common zeal for moral beauty and goodness heightened their mutual concord, for in conjunction with their piety it rendered their brotherly love more fervent. 27 But though nature, companionship, and their virtuous disposition increased the ardour of their brotherly love, nevertheless the surviving sons through their religion supported the sight of their 4 t: brethren, who were on the rack, being tortured to death; nay more, they even encouraged them to face the agony, so as not only to despise their own tortures, but also to conquer their passion of 2 brotherly affection for their brethren. O Reasoning minds, more kingly than kings, than freemen 4 more free, of the harmony of the seven brethren, holy and well attuned to the keynote of piety! 4. 5 None of the seven youths turned coward, none shrunk in the face of death, but all hastened to 6 the death by torture as if running the road to immortality. For as hands and feet move in har- mony with the promptings of the soul, so those holy youths, as if prompted by the immortal soul ἢ of religion, went in harmony to death for its sake. O all-holy sevenfold companionship of brethren Sinharmony! For as the seven days of the creation of the world do enring religion, so did the youths ἄμοτον “Ss Se Tay gL eee 9. Ασσυριας (ao superscrip.). 12. καταμνησθεις δὲ V Syr. 19. αδελῴοτητος N 24. eavrous ἡγaπωn δὲ V Syr. XIV. 2. βασιλεων 8 V 3. evappoorov & XIV. 2. more kingly than kings, βασιλέων βασιλικώτεροι. The Stoics held that the wise man alone was a king : μόνον εἶναι tὸn σoφὸn βασιλέα κaὶ βασιλικόν (Stob. Lh. ii. [222] of Heeren’s ed.). Also we have in Diog. Laert. vii. 122 ov μόνον δ᾽ ἐλευθέρους εἶναι toὺς σoφoὺς ἀλλὰ κaὶ βασιλέας, tῆς βασιλείας oὔσης ἀpxῆς ἀνυπευθύνου. THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 14. 8—15. 10 choir-like enring their sevenfold companionship, and made the terror of the tortures of no account. 9 We now shudder when we hear of the suffering of those youths; but they, not only seeing it with their eyes, nor merely hearing the spoken, imminent threat, but actually feeling the pang, endured 10 it through; and that in the torture by fire, than which what greater agony can be found? For sharp and stringent is the power of fire, and swiftly did it bring their bodies to dissolution. 11 And think it not wonderful if with those men Reason triumphed over the tortures, when even 12a woman’s soul despised a yet greater diversity of pains; for the mother of the seven youths endured the torments inflicted on each several one of her children. 13 But consider how manifold are the yearnings of a mother’s heart, so that her feeling for her 14 offspring becomes the centre of her whole world ; and indeed, here, even the irrational animals have 15 for their young an affection and love similar to men’s. For example, among the birds, the tame — 16 ones sheltering under our roofs defend their nestlings; and those that nest upon the mountain tops, and in the rock clefts, and in the holes of trees, and in the branches, and hatch their young 17 there, do also drive away the intruder. And then, if they be unable to drive him away, they flutter around the nestlings in a passion of love, calling to them in their own speech, and they give suc- 18 cour to their young ones in whatever fashion they can. And what need have we of examples of the 19 love of offspring among irrational animals, when even the bees, about the season of the making of the comb, fend off intruders, and stab with their sting, as with a sword, those who approach their 20 brood, and do battle against them even to the death? But she, the mother of those young men, with a soul like Abraham, was not moved from her purpose by her affection for her children. 15: © Reason of the sons, lord over the passions! O religion, that wast dearer to the mother than 2her children! The mother, having two choices before her, religion and the present saving alive of 3 her seven sons according to the tyrant’s promise, loved rather religion, which saveth unto eternal 4 life according toGod. O how may I express the passionate love of parents for children? Westamp a marvellous likeness of our soul and of our shape on the tender nature of the child, and most of all 5 through the mother’s sympathy with her children being deeper than the father’s, For women are softer of soul ai men, and the more children they bear the more do they abound in love for them. 6 But, of all mothers, she of the seven sons abounded in love beyond the rest, seeing that, having in 7 seven child-bearings felt maternal tenderness for the fruit of her womb, and having been constrained 8 because of the many pangs in which she bore each to a close affection, she nevertheless through the - 9 fear of God rejected the present safety of her children. Ay, and more than that, through the moral beauty and goodness of her sons and their obedience to the Law, her maternal love for them was to made stronger. For they were just, and temperate, and brave, and great-souled, and lovers of each other and of their mother in such manner that they obeyed her in the keeping of the Law even unto XV. 4. (ἢ after πaθη εναποσφραγιζομεν N* To tῶn TaTepov V 7. ηναγκασμενὴ SV their proper motions were seen to be confined within the broad belt of the heavens known to us as the Zodiac. Seven was found to be the number of these πλάνητες or Wanderers, who did indeed appear to go like the fixed stars round the earth from east to west once in every twenty-four hours, but, as was well known to Chaldaean, Egyptian, and Greek star-gazers, had likewise another exceedingly complicated set of movements peculiar to themselves. The direction of these movements was retrograde or from west to east: ἀπὸ γὰp δuσμῶn ἐπ᾽ ἀνατολὰς ἀντιφέρεσθαι says Plutarch (Pac. Phil. ii. 16), describing the astronomical knowledge possessed by Alcmaeon and the mathematicians. And the early star-gazers, who by painful labour had obtained this difficult knowledge, took these movements of the mysterious Seven, their journeyings and their standings still, their oppositions and their conjunctions, to be the visible hand of Fate writing the scroll of man’s destiny upon the sky. Thus the sacred Seven, the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, to whom in the course of time were assigned the different hours of the day and after whom were — named the days of the week, came to be honoured as the lords of heaven and earth, and the very number of them, seven, was nothing less than a power to conjure with. i i i .......“«..- Ἷ THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 15. 11—16. 5 11death. But nevertheless, though she had so many temptations to yield to her maternal instincts, in no single instance did the dreadful variety of tortures have power to alter her Reason ; 12, 13 but the mother urged each son separately, and all together, to die for their religion. O holy nature, and parental love, and yearning of parents for offspring, and wages of nursing, and unconquerable 14 affection of mothers! The mother, seeing them one by one racked and burned, remained unshaken 15 in soul for religion’s sake. She saw the flesh of her sons being consumed in the fire, and the extremities of their hands and feet scattered on the ground, and the flesh-coverings, torn off from 16 their heads right to their cheeks, strewn about like masks. O mother, who now knew sharper 17 pangs than the pangs of labour! O woman, alone among women, the fruit of whose womb was 18 perfect religion! Thy firstborn, giving up the ghost, did not alter thy resolution, nor thy second, to looking with eyes of pity on thee under his tortures, nor thy third, breathing out his spirit. Neither didst thou weep when thou beheldest the eyes of each amid the torments looking boldly on the same 20 anguish, and sawest in their guivering nostrils the signs of approaching death. When thou sawest the flesh of one son being severed after the flesh of another, and hand after hand being cut off, and head after head being flayed, and corpse cast upon corpse, and the place crowded with spectators 21 on account of the tortures of thy children, thou sheddest not a tear. Not the melodies of the sirens nor the songs of swans with sweet sound do so charm the hearers’ ears, as sounded the voices of the 22 sons, speaking to the mother from amid the torments. How many and how great were the tortures with which the mother was tormented while her sons were being tortured with torments of rack and 23 fire! But Inspired Reason lent her heart a man’s strength under her passion of suffering, and exalted her to make no account of the present yearnings of mother-love. 24 And although she saw the destruction of her seven children and the many and varied forms of 25 their torments, the noble mother willingly surrendered them through faith in God. For she beheld in her own mind, even as it had been cunning advocates in a council-chamber, nature, and parenthood, 26 and mother-love, and her children on the rack, and it was as if she, the mother, having the choice 27 between two votes in the case of her children, one for their death and one to save them alive, thereupon _28 regarded not the saving of her seven sons for a little time, but, as a true daughter of Abraham, called _ 29 to mind his God-fearing courage. O mother of the race, vindicator of our Law, defender of our religion, 4 go and winner of the prize in the struggle within thyself! O woman, nobler to resist than men, and braver gr than warriors to endure! For as the Ark of Noah, with the whole living world for her burden in 32 the world-whelming Deluge, did withstand the mighty surges, so thou, the keeper of the Law, beaten upon every side by the surging waves of the passions, and strained as with strong blasts by the tortures of thy sons, didst nobly weather the storms that assailed thee for religion’s sake. Thus then, if one both a woman and advanced in years, and the mother of seven sons, endured the sight of her children being tortured to death, the Inspired Reason must confessedly be supreme 2 ruler over the passions. I have proved, accordingly, that not only have men triumphed over their 3 sufferings, but that a woman also has despised the most dreadful tortures. And not so fierce were the lions around Daniel, not so hot was the burning fiery furnace of Mishael, as burned in her the 4 instinct of motherhood at the sight of her seven sons being tortured. But by her religion-guided 5 Reason the mother quenched her passions, many and strong as they were. For there is this also to Il. + βασανοι 13. γενεσει V: yeveots Syr. 18. eἰς σe NV 21. ὡς NV Syr. 32. umep NV Syr. XVI. 3. exewny ορωσαν & V Syr. outs ποικιλως δὲ V Syr. THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 16. 5—17. 2 consider, that had the woman been weak of spirit, despite her motherhood, she might have wept 6 over them, and perchance spoken thus: ‘ Ah, thrice wretched me, and more than thrice wretched ! 7 Seven children have I borne and am left childless! In vain was I seven times with child, and to no profit was my ten months’ burden seven times borne, and fruitless have been my nursings, and 8 sorrowful my sucklings. In vain for you, O my sons, did I endure the many pangs of labour, and 9 the more difficult cares of your upbringing. Alas, for my sons, that some were yet unwed, and those that were wedded had begotten no children; I shall never see children of yours, nor shall I be called to by the name of grandparent. Ah me, that had many beautiful children, and am a widow and 11 desolate in my woe! Neither will there be any son to bury me when I am dead!’ 12 Butthe holy and God-fearing mother wailed not with this lamentation over any one of them, neither 13 besought she any to escape death, nor lamented over them as dying men ; but, as though she had a soul of adamant and were bringing forth the number of her sons, for a second time, into immortal life, 14 she besought rather and entreated of them that they should die for religion’s sake. O mother, warrior of God in the cause of religion, old and a woman, thou didst both defeat the tyrant by thy endurance, 15 and wast found stronger than a man, in deeds as well as words. For verily when thou wast put in bonds with thy sons, thou stoodest there seeing Eleazar being tortured, and thou spakest to thy 16 sons in the Hebrew tongue: ‘ My sons, noble is the fight; and do ye, being called thereto to bear 17 witness for our nation, fight therein zealously on behalf of the Law of our fathers. For it would be shameful if, while this aged man endured the agony for religion’s sake, you that are young men shrank 18 before the pain. Remember that for the sake of God ye have come into the world, and have enjoyed 20 life, and that therefore ye owe it to God to endure all pain for his sake; for whom also our father Abraham made haste to sacrifice his son Isaac, the ancestor of our nation; and Isaac, seeing his 21 father’s hand lifting the knife against him, did not shrink. And Daniel, the just man, was cast to the lions, and Ananias, Azarias, and Mishael were flung into the furnace of fire, and they endured 23 for God’s sake. And ye also, having the same faith unto God, be not troubled ; for it were against Reason that ye, knowing righteousness, should not withstand the pains.’ 4 With these words the mother of the seven encouraged every single one of her sons to die rather 5 than transgress the ordinance of God; they themselves also knowing well that men dying for God live unto God, as live Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the patriarchs. t Some of the guards declared that when she also was about to be seized and put to death, she 2 cast herself on the pyre in order that no man might touch her body. O mother, that together 2 THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 17. 2-24 with thy seven sons didst break the tyrant’s force, and bring to nought his evil devices, and 3 gavest an example of the nobleness of faith. Thou wert nobly set as a roof upon thy sons as pillars, 4 and the earthquake of the torments shook thee not at all. Rejoice therefore, pure-souled mother, 5 having the hope of thy endurance certain at the hand of God. Not so majestic stands the moon amid the stars in heaven as thou, having lit the path of thy seven starlike sons unto righteousness, standest _6in honour with God; and thou art set in heaven with them. For thy child-bearing was from the 7sonof Abraham. And had it been lawful for us to paint, as might some arfis?, the tale of thy piety, would not the spectators have shuddered at the mother of seven sons suffering for righteous- 8ness’ sake multitudinous tortures even unto death? And indeed it were fitting to inscribe these _ words over their resting-place, speaking for a memorial to future generations of our people: HERE LIE AN AGED PRIEST AND A WOMAN FULL OF YEARS AND HER SEVEN SONS THROUGH THE VIOLENCE OF A TYRANT DESIRING TO DESTROY THE HEBREW NATION. THEY VINDICATED THE RIGHTS OF OUR PEOPLE LOOKING UNTO GOD AND ENDURING THE TORMENTS EVEN UNTO DEATH. 1,12 For truly it was a holy war which was fought by them. For on that day virtue, proving them 13 through endurance, set before them the prize of victory in incorruption in everlasting life. But the _ first in the fight was Eleazar, and the mother of the seven sons played her part, and the brethren 4fought. The tyrant was their adversary and the world and the life of man were the spectators. 5; 16 And righteousness won the victory, and gave the crown to her athletes. Who but wondered at the 7 athletes of the true Law? Who were not amazed at them? The tyrant himself and his whole 18 council admired their endurance, whereby they now do both stand beside the throne of God and live the blessed age. For Moses says, ‘All also who have sanctified themselves are under thy hands. And these men, therefore, having sanctified.themselves for God’s sake, not only have received this honour, but also ¢he honour that through them the enemy had no more power I, 22 over our people, and the tyrant suffered punishment, and our country was purified, they having as it were become a ransom for our nation’s sin; and through the blood of these righteous men and the propitiation of their death, the divine Providence delivered Israel that before was evil 23 entreated. For when the tyrant Antiochus saw the heroism of their virtue, and their endurance 24 under the tortures, he publicly held up their endurance to his soldiers as an example ; and he thus 3. στυλους NV 4. βεβαιαν δ V 7. ws em τινος δ ἘN Syr. ευσεβιας σou ἰστοριαν N V say that a few years ago, when the Red Indian tortures still awaited captives, many frontiersmen, men whom it would hardly have been safe to call cowards, made no secret that they intended to keep their last bullet (if need be) for themselves. As to whether a woman could harden her heart to the act, let me borrow the words of the author of this book, πολλαχόθεν μὲn oὖn κaὶ ἀλλαχόθεν ἔχοιμ᾽ ἂn ὑμῖn ἐπιδεῖξαι, and say that many a woman in every age and every land has chosen death rather than that polluted hands should touch her body. THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 17. 24---18, 14 inspired his men with a sense of honour and heroism on the field of battle and in the labours of besieging, so that he plundered and overthrew all his enemies. 18: 0 Israelites, children born of the seed of Abraham, obey this Law, and be righteous in all ways, 2 recognizing that Inspired Reason is lord over the passions, and over pains, not only from within, 3 but from without ourselves ; by which means those men, delivering up their bodies to the torture for righteousness’ sake, not only won the admiration of mankind, but were deemed worthy of 4 a divine inheritance. And through them the nation obtained peace and restoring the observance of the Law in our country hath captured the city from the enemy. 5 And vengeance hath pursued the tyrant Antiochus upon earth, and in death he suffers punish- ment. For when he failed utterly to constrain the people of Jerusalem to live like Gentiles and abandon the customs of our fathers, he thereupon left Jerusalem and marched away against the Persians. 6 Now these are the words that the mother of the seven sons, the righteous woman, spake to her 7 children: “1 was a pure maiden, and I strayed not from my father’s house, and I kept guard over 8 the rib that was builded zzto Eve. No seducer of the desert, no deceiver in the field, corrupted me; 9 nor did the false, beguiling Serpent sully the purity of my maidenhood; I lived with my husband all the days of my youth; but when these my sons were grown up, their father died. Happy was to he; for he lived a life blessed with children, and he never knew the pain of their loss. Who, tr while he was yet with us, taught you the Law and the prophets. He read to us of Abel who was slain by Cain, and of Isaac who was offered as a burnt-offering, and of Joseph in the prison. 12 And he spake to us of Phineas, the zealous priest, and he taught you ¢he song of Ananias, Azarias, 13 and Mishael in the fire. And he glorified also Daniel in the den of lions, and blessed him; and 14 he called to your minds the saying of Isaiah, “ Yea even though thou pass through the fire, the XVIII. 5. «dav V Syr. 9. ἐπiζησaς S ὍN extolled them to his troops. The text here is practically the same as that of the Strasburg LXX, and also as that of Lloyd, but Erasmus, followed by Lloyd, takes the latter part of the sentence in a way that is hard to reconcile with the original: ‘videns namque Antiochus magnitudinem fidei mortisque contemptum peditum 5101 legiones ex Hebraeorum numero congregat, per quas hostem perculit, et laudis plurimum cepit.’ If this be so the Syrian king would have understood William III’s feeling, when he met in battle the brave exiles whom the penal laws had driven from Ireland, and cried, ‘ Cursed be the laws that deprive me of such soldiers.’ But history knows nothing of these Hebrew legions, and Antiochus, like William, had to do without the soldiers whose religion he could not shake. all his enemies. κaὶ ἐκπορθήσας ἐνίκησεν πάντας toὺς πολεμίους. This is one way of drawing a moral from — history. Whether Antiochus fired his soldiers by the martyrs’ example or not, he did certainly after leaving Jerusalem conquer Armenia and no small part of Persia. And as it would rather spoil the moral to say that in the full tide of — success he failed miserably in an attack on an obscure Persian temple and died almost immediately after, the fatal ending is quietly dropped just for the moment. But of course the audience knew perfectly well the story of Antiochus’ death, so the author covers himself by deftly alluding to it five verses later, where he says that vengeance purs the tyrant upon earth, and in death he suffers punishment still. It is a neat rhetorical turn. XVIII. 2. from within. oἱ ἔνδοθεν πόνοι are mental sufferings, of ἔξωθen πόνοι are physical: see on xv. 29 and yi. 35. —— - ll THE FOURTH BOOK OF MACCABEES 18. 15-24 15 flame shall not hurt thee.” He sang to us the words of David the psalmist, “ Many are the afflictions tό of the just.” He quoted to us the proverb of Solomon, “ He is a tree of life to all them that do his will.’ He confirmed the words of Ezekiel, “Shall these dry bones live?” For he forgat not the to song that Moses taught, which teaches, “I will slay and I will make alive. This is your life and the ~ blessedness of your days.”’ Ὁ ΔH, cruel was the day, and yet not cruel, when the cruel tyrant of the Greeks set the fire blazing for his barbarous braziers, and with his passions boiling brought to the catapult and back again to his t tortures the seven sons of the daughter of Abraham, and blinded the eyeballs of their eyes, and cut out their tongues, and slew them with many kinds of torment. For which cause the judgement of 3 God pursued, and shall pursue, the accursed wretch. But the sons of Abraham, with their victorious mother, are gathered together unto the place of their ancestors, having received pure and immortal 4 souls from God, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 21. ἐπηρωσεν SN!


# Pirké Aboth (Sayings of the Fathers)

1.  Moses received Torah from Sinai and delivered it to Joshua, and Joshua to the Elders, and the _ Elders to the Prophets, and the Prophets delivered it to the men of the Great Synagogue. They said three things: Be deliberate in judgement; and raise up many disciples; and make a fence for the Torah. Simeon the Just was of the remnants of the Great Synagogue. He used to say: On three things the world standeth: on the Torah, and on the Service, and on the doing of kindnesses.
3.  Antigonos of Socho received from Simeon the Just. He used to say: Be not like slaves who _ serve the master with a view to receiving a present; but be like slaves who serve the master not with a view to receiving a present : and let the fear of Heaven be upon you. Jose ben Joezer of Zeredah and Jose ben Johanan of Jerusalem received from them. Jose b. Joezer of Zeredah said: Let thy house be a house of meeting for the Wise, and bedust thyself with _ the dust of their feet, and drink with thirst their words. I. 1. Torah. A technical term not identical with ‘Law’. Torah (= teaching) denotes the revelation which God gave to Israel by Moses, supposed to be complete and final. The Pentateuch is the written record of that teaching; the name Torah is often applied to the Pentateuch. But Torah included also the unwritten tradition whereby the implicit contents of the revelation were made explicit by successive interpretations. No English word is equivalent to Torah, which is therefore retained untranslated in the text and the notes. _ the Elders. Probably the ‘able men’ chosen by Moses to assist him (Exod. xviii. 25), and regarded as a permanent body. Great Synagogue. In the rabbinical tradition a council founded by Ezra which lasted for many years. The _ scanty references to it indicate the assembly mentioned in Neh. ix, x. No such permanent council can be shown to have existed ; but the tradition is not wholly worthless. The term ‘Great Synagogue’ may be taken to denote the early Scribes (Sopherim), who developed the religion of Torah on the lines and in the spirit of Ezra, for several _ generations after his time. See my Pharzsaism, pp. 18-22. They said, i.e. the men of the Great Synagogue said. Tradition represented as decrees of a council what were probably only the rules agreed on by the Scribes for their own guidance. The three sayings are certainly very ancient. It was the duty of the Scribes to judge, also to teach Torah. a fence for the Torah, 771N? 3°D. This does not mean that the Torah was to be made into a stiff hedge, but tefers merely to precautions by which a man might be guarded from transgression before it was too late.
5.  Jose b. Johanan of Jerusalem said: Let thy house be opened wide; and let poor folk be thy household ; and talk not much with the wife. 5@_ [He said it concerning his own wife; much more concerning the wife of his associate. Hence the Wise have said: So long as a man talks much with the wife he causes evil to himself, and desists from words of Torah, and his end is that he inherits Gehenna. ]
6.  Joshua b. Perahiah and Nittai the Arbelite received from them. Joshua b. Perahiah said: Make to thyself a teacher; and get thee an associate; and judge every man with a leaning to Azs merit.
7.  Nittai the Arbelite said: Keep far from an evil neighbour, and consort not with the wicked, and be not heedless of retribution.
8.  Judah b. Tabbai and Simeon b. Shetah received from them. Judah b. Tabbai said: Make not thyself as those that prepare the judges ; and when the suitors are standing before thee let them be in thine eyes as wicked men ; and when they have been dismissed from before thee let them be in thine eyes as just sex who have received their sentence. F
9.  Simeon b. Shetah said: Do much in examining the witnesses; and be careful in thy words ; perchance by means of them they may learn to lie.
10.  Shemaiah and Abtalion received from them. Shemaiah said: Love work, and hate mastery, anc make not thyself known to the government. f(t Abtalion said: Ye Wise, be careful in your words; lest ye become guilty with the guilt chaz involves exile, and be exiled to a place of evil waters, and the disciples that come after you drink and die, and the Name of Heaven be found profaned.
12.  Hillel and Shammai received from them. Hillel said: Be of the disciples of Aaron, one that loves peace, that pursues peace, that loves mankind and brings them nigh to Torah. 3 He used to say: Whoso makes great his name destroys his name; whoso adds not makes to cease ; and he who will not learn is guilty so as to deserve killing. And whoso serves himself with the crown passes away. t He used to say: If I am not for myself, who is for me? And when I am for myself, what am I? And if not now, when? 5 Shammai said: Make thy Torah a fixed duty; say little and do much; and receive every man _ with the look of a cheerful face. ς΄ Rabban Gamaliel said: Make to thyself a teacher ; and remove thyself from what is doubtful; and do not often tithe by mental valuation. government, Nw. The authorities (so ii. 3 below). It is dangerous to become known to the authorities, or it is corrupting. Probably here the latter is meant ; as Shemaiah was very well known to the authorities. _ it, Wise. The teachers, Rabbis; see above, i. 4. To expound Torah wrongly is to promote the transgression of its precepts. If, as the divine retribution for doing so, a teacher is exiled to a place of evil waters, i.e. a place where there is no sound teaching of Torah, he may perpetuate his error, so that those who come after, i.e. learn from him, _ may drink, i.e. receive his teaching, and die, i. e. fall into sin for which death is the divine punishment. In that ᾿ς ¢ase, it will be found, i.e. it will result, that the name of God has been profaned. Simeon his son said: All my days I have grown up among the Wise, and I have not found any- thing better than silence ; and not study is the chief thing but action ; and whoso makes many words occasions sin. Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel said: On three things the world stands: on judgement, on truth, and on peace. [As it is said: ‘Truth and judgement of peace judge ye in your gates.’] Rabbi said: What is that right way which a man should choose for himself? Whatever is an honour to him that does it and an honour to him zz the sight of men. And be careful over a light precept as over a weighty, for thou knowest not the giving of the rewards of the precepts. And reckon the loss zzvolved in a precept against its reward, and the reward of a sin against its loss. And and do not depend on your own judgement alone’ ; the reference is to the functions of a judge, and not to the difficulties of a searcher after truth. The third saying is mere practical advice not to rely on guesswork in estimating the amount to be separated (from corn, &c.) as tithe. keep in view three things, and thou wilt not come into the clutches of sin; know what is above thee, an eye that sees and an ear that hears, and all thy deeds written in a book. 2 Rabban Gamaliel the son of Rabbi Judah the Prince said: Comely is study of Torah with worldly occupation, for toil in both makes sin forgotten. And all Torah without work ends in failure and brings w7th z¢ sin. And let all who labour with the congregation labour with them for the Name of Heaven, for the merit of their fathers upholds them, and their righteousness standeth for ever. And ye—I confer upon you, saith God, [plenteous] reward, as if ye had wrought. 3 Be careful with the government, for they do not come near to a man except for their own need ; and they appear like friends in the hour of their advantage, and they stand not by a man in the hour of his need, 4 He used to say: Make His will as thy will that He may make thy will as His will; efface thy will before His will that He may efface the will of others before thy will. 5 Hillel said: Separate thyself not from the congregation, and be not sure of thyself till the day of thy death; and judge not thine associate until thou comest to his place. And say not ofa word which cannot be understood that it will be understood in the end. And say not ‘when I am at leisure I will study’; perchance thou wilt not be at leisure. 6 Heused to say: A rude man fears not sin; and no vulgar person is pious; and the shy man does and enging be the advantage or profit gained by sin, there is the divine disapproval, retribution, behind it. Cp. Matt. xvi. 26. three things. It is not quite clear what the ‘three things’ are, as ‘know what is above thee’ may be reckoned as one of them. But probably this is only a variation on ‘consider’, and the three things are the seeing eye, the listening ear, and the book of record. C reads ‘know that above thee ave’, &c. For the book of record cp. Rev. xx. 12. not learn nor the passionate teach, nor he that hath much business become wise. And in a place where there are no men strive to be a man. 7 Moreover, he saw a skull which floated on the face of the water, and he said to it: Because thou drownedst they drowned thee; and at the last they who drowned thee shall be drowned. 8 He used to say: More flesh more worms; more wealth more care; more maidservants more lewdness ; more menservants more thieving ; more women more witchcraft ; more Torah more life; more classroom more wisdom; more counsel more discernment; more righteousness more peace. Whoso has gained a good name has gained 7¢ for himself; who has gained for himself words of Torah has gained for himself the life of the world to come. 9 Rabban Johanan b. Zaccai received from Hillel and from Shammai. He used to say: If thou hast practised much Torah, take not credit to thyself, for thereunto wast thou created. 10 Five disciples there were to Rabban Johanan b. Zaccai, and these are they: Rabbi Eliezer b. Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua b. Hananiah, Rabbi Jose the priest, Rabbi Simeon b. Nathaniel, and Rabbi Eleazar b. Arach. He used to sum up their praise—Eliezer b. Hyrcanus is a plastered cistern which loseth not a drop; Joshua b. Hananiah, happy is she who bore him; Jose the priest is pious; Simeon b. Nathaniel feareth sin; Eleazar b. Arach is a full-flowing spring. 11 He used to say: If all the Wise of Israel were in one scale of the balance and Eliezer Ὁ. Hyrcanus in the other scale, he would weigh*down them all. Abba Saul said, in his name: If all the Wise of Israel were in one scale of the balance and Eliezer b. Hyrcanus with them, and Eleazar b. Arach — in the other scale, he would weigh them all down. 12 He said to them: Go and see what is that good way to which a man should cleave. R. Eliezer said: A good eye. R. Joshua said: A good associate. R. Jose said: A good neighbour. R. Simeon said: He that regards the result of an action. R. Eleazar said: A good heart. He said to them: I regard the words of Eleazar b. Arach more than your words, for your words are included in his.
13.  He said to them: Go and see what is that evil way from which a man should keep himself. passionate, j75P. The teacher who loses his temper when his pupils do ask him questions. become wise. Cp. Sirach xxxviii. 24. { R. Eliezer said: An evil eye. R. Joshua said: An evil associate. R. Jose said: An evil neighbour. ᾿ς ἮN. Simeon said: He that borrows and does not pay. [He that borrows from man is as he that borrows from God, blessed be He; as it is said, ‘The wicked borroweth and payeth not, but the Ps. xxxvii, 21 righteous showeth favour and giveth.’] R. Eleazar said: An evil heart. He said to them: I regard the words of Eleazar b. Arach more than your words; for your words are included in his.
14.  They said each three things. R. Eliezer said: Let the honour of thine associate be dear to thee as thine own. And be not easily wroth; and repent one day before thy death. And warm thyself at the fire of the Wise, and be careful of their glowing coal lest thou be singed. For their bite is the bite of a jackal, and their sting the sting of a scorpion, and their hiss the hiss of a serpent, and all their words like coals of fire. R. Joshua said: An evil eye and the evil principle and hatred of mankind drive a man out of the world. tό R. Jose said: Let the wealth of thy associate be dear to thee as thine own. And set thyself to learn Torah, for it is not a legacy to thee. And let all thy actions be to the Name of Heaven. tῇ Ἐ. Simeon said: Be careful in reading the ‘ Shema’ and in prayer. And when thou prayest make not thy prayer a fixed form, but [mercies and] entreaties before God. [As it is said: ‘For he is Joel ii. 13 gracious and merciful, longsuffering and full of compassion, and repenteth him of the evil.’] And be not wicked in thine own sight. a8 N. Eleazar said: Be alert to learn Torah, [and know] what thou shalt answer to an Epicurean ; ' 14. They. The five Rabbis of the preceding verses. : ὶ three things. It will be noticed that most of the teachers in i, ii are credited with a group of three sayings ; this arrangement is not maintained in the case of later teachers. The three sayings of R. Eliezer are variously dis- tinguished, according as the remark about ‘the fire of the Wise’, &c., is included or excluded. Maimonides excludes i] _ it, and this seems right, although a connexion can be made out between the other three clauses so as to group two of _ themasone. R. Eliezer was excommunicated in his old age by his colleagues ; and the caustic criticism of the Wise probably expresses his sentiments upon the subject. It may well have been remembered as an epigram, but hardly as an expression of habitual wisdom. honour, good name, credit. For a variant of the saying see below, iv. 15. repent ... death. KE. Eliezer explained his meaning thus :—Repent every day, since thou knowest not the day of thy death (Ὁ. Shabb. 1535). : e of the Wise, as being dangerous to play with. The vivid similes which follow are easily intelligible under the circumstances of R. Eliezer’s closing years, and need no comment. and know co whom thou toilest, and who is master of thy work, [who will pay the hire of thy labour].
19.  KE. Tarphon said: The day is short and the work is great, and the labourers are slow, and the hire is much, and the master of the house is urgent.
20.  He used to say: It is not incumbent on thee to finish the work, and thou art not free to desist from it. Ifthou hast learned much Torah, they will give thee much hire; and the master of thy © work is faithful who will pay thee the hire of thy labour; and know that the giving of the reward of the righteous is for the time to come. 1 Akabia Ὁ. Mahalalel said: Keep in view three things, and thou wilt not come into the clutches of sin ;—know whence thou comest, and whither thou goest, and before whom thou art to give strict account. Azow whence thou comest,—from a fetid drop; and whither thou goest,—to the place of dust, worm, and maggot ; and before whom thou art to give strict account,—before the King of the kings of the kings, the Holy One, blessed be He. 2 Ka. Hanina, the deputy of the priests, said: Pray for the peace of the kingdom ; for except for the fear of that we should have swallowed up each his neighbour alive. 3 KX. Hanina b. Teradion said: When two sit and there are not between them words of Torah, lo, this is ‘the seat of the scornful’, as it is said: ‘ Nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful’. But when two sit and there are between them words of Torah, the Shechinah rests between them, as it is said: ‘Then they that feared the Lord spake one with another, [and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before Him for them that feared the Lord and that thought upon His name’}. who will pay. The phrase is repeated in the next verse, and may be an interpolation here. A omits it; BS contain it. [I find here only two. Whence 22 ἐς proved that when even one sits and is occupied with Torah the Holy One, blessed be He, fixes for him a reward? As it is said: ‘Let him sit alone and be Lam.iii.28 silent, for he hath taken it upon him.’] 5 KE. Simeon said: Three who have eaten at one table and have not said over it words of Torah, lo, they are as if they had eaten sacrifices of the dead, as it is said: ‘ For all tables are full of vomit 1sa-xxviii.8 and filthiness without God.’ But three who have eaten at one table and have said over it words of Torah are as if they had eaten from the table of God, blessed be He, as it is said: ‘And he said Ezek.xli.22 to me, This is the table that is before the Lord.’ 6 Rk. Hanina Ὁ. Hachinai said: He who wakes in the night, and he who walks alone by the way and turns his heart to idle thoughts, lo, he makes himself guilty against his soul. Ἴ ἘK. Nehunia b. ha-Kanah said: Every one who receives upon him the yoke of Torah, they remove from him the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of worldly occupation. And every one who breaks off from him the yoke of Torah, they lay upon him the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of worldly occupation. 8 R. Halaphta [b. Dosa] of Chephar Hanania said: When ten sit and are occupied with Torah, the Shechinah is among them, as it is said: ‘God stands in the congregation of God.’ _ [And Ps.Ixxxii.r whence 7s z¢ proved for even five? Asit issaid: ‘He hath founded His troop upon the earth.’] And Amos ix. 6 4 xviii. 20, and Rev. xxi. 3. In the latter passage the Greek is: Ἰδoύ, ἡ σκηnὴ toῦ Θeoῦ μetὰ tῶn ἀνθρώπων, kai σκηνώσει «tA. σκηnή looks very much like an allusion to ‘ Shechinah’. whence even three? As it is said: ‘He judgeth among gods,’ And whence even two? As it is Ps.Ixxx said: ‘ Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another.’ And whence even one? As it Mal. ii is said: ‘In every place where I record My name I will come to thee and will bless thee.’ 9 R.Eleazar b. Judah of Bartotha said: Give Him of what is His, for thou and thine are His. And thus the Scripture saith, in the place concerning David, ‘ For all things come of Thee, and of Thine x own have we given Thee.’ to R, Jacob said; He who walks by the way and studies and breaks off his study and says, ‘How beautiful is that tree,’ and ‘how beautiful is that fallow’, the Scripture reckons it to him as if he had made himself guilty against his soul. ti KN. Dosthai b. Jannai, in the name of R. Meir, said: A disciple of the Wise who sits and studies and forgets a word of his study, the Scripture reckons it to him as if.he had made himself guilty against his soul; as it is said: ‘Only take heed to thyself and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen.’ It may be that his study has been hard to him. Learn to say, ‘Lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life.’ Lo! he makes not i himself guilty until he sits and turns them away from his heart. 12 KN. Hanina b. Dosa said: Every one whose fear of sin precedes his wisdom, his wisdom endures ; and every one whose wisdom precedes his fear of sin, his wisdom does not endure. 13 He used to say: Every one whose deeds are more than his wisdom, his wisdom endures. And every one whose wisdom is more than his deeds, his wisdom does not endure. 14 He used to say: Every one with whom the spirit of mankind is pleased, the Spirit of God is pleased with him. And every one with whom the spirit of mankind is not pleased, the Spirit of God is not pleased with him. 15_ KE. Dosa b. Harchinas said: Morning sleep, and midday wine, and children’s talk, and sitting in the meeting-houses of the vulgar, drive a man out from the world. tό R. Eleazar,the Modiite, said: He who profanes holy things and despises the set feasts [and shames his associate in public], and makes void the covenant of Abraham our father, and discloses meanings in the Torah which are not according to the Rule, yea, even if he have [Torah and] good works, he has no portion in the world to come. 11 R. Ishmael said: Be light-minded and yielding to forced service, and receive every man with gladness. 18 R. Akiba said: Laughter and light-mindedness accustom a man to shame. Tradition is a fence for Torah. Vows are a fence for separation. A fence for wisdom is silence. to He used to say: Beloved is man in that he was created in the image of God. [Greater love was it that it was known to him that he was made in the image.] As it is said: ‘In the image of God Gen. he made man.’ Beloved are Israel, that they are called sons of God. Greater love was it that it was known to them that they were called sons of God. As it is said: ‘Sons are ye to the Lord your God.’ Beloved are Israel, in that to them was given the precious instrument wherewith the world was created. Greater love was 22 that it was known to them that there was given to them the precious instrument wherewith the world was created, as it is said: ‘ For a good doctrine I have given you ; Proy forsake not my Torah.’ All is foreseen, and free-will is given, and the world is judged by goodness, and all is according to the amount of work. He used to say: All is given on pledge, and the net is spread over all the living; and the shop is open and the shopman gives credit, and the account-book is open and the hand writes, and every one who will borrow comes and borrows, and the collectors go round continually every day, and exact payment from man whether with his knowledge or without it ; and they have whereon to lean, and the judgement is a judgement of truth; and everything is prepared for the banquet. R. Eleazar b. Azariah said: If there is no Torah there is no worldly occupation; if there is no worldly occupation there is no Torah. If there is no wisdom there is no fear; if there is no fear there is no wisdom. If there is no knowledge there is no discernment; if there is no discernment there is no knowledge. If there is no meal there is no Torah; if there is no Torah there is no meal. He used to say: Every one whose wisdom is greater than his deeds, to what ishe like? Toa tree whose branches are many and its roots few; and the wind comes and roots it up and turns it over on its face. [As it is said: ‘For he shall be like a tamarisk in the desert, and he shall not see when J good cometh, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land undwelt in.’] But every one whose deeds are more than his wisdom, to what is he like? Toatree whose branches are few and its roots many, which, if all the winds that are in the world come and blow upon it, they move it not from its place; [as it is said: ‘For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and ib. blessing, the ‘ greater love’ of the two following clauses. In clause 2 God is D\PD, see on ii. 17 above. The proof text is a declaration to Israel of their sonship to God. wherewith . . . created. The ‘precious instrument’ is the ‘ Torah’; not the written record or the oral inter- pretation of it, but the divine thought enshrined in it. This is shown by the proof-text. All is foreseen, DY 297. Lit. ‘seen’; but ‘all’ includes future things and actions as well as present and past ones. free-will, MNw77. Lit. ‘authority’, which is explained to mean man’s responsibility for his own actions. The Talmudic Rabbis attempted no solution of the philosophical problem ; they were content to affirm the two truths and left the reconciliation of them a divine mystery. judged by goodness. Either by one who is good, viz. God, or according to the goodness found in it. The former is probably meant, because the latter would be hardly more than a variant of the following clause. amount of work. So BDS. A omits ‘amount’, 3). But CD have ‘not according to the amount’, and B knows of this reading. The difference is that between quality and quantity of human action. The former meani is preferable, but the reading ‘amount’ is the better supported ; and the omission of the word in A, and the addition of ‘not’ in CD, may be due to the desire to modify the sense. that sendeth out its roots by the river, and shall not fear when heat cometh, but his leaf shall be green ; and in the year of drought he shall not be anxious, neither shall cease from yielding fruit ᾽Ἴ.
23.  ἘK. Eleazar Hisma said: Offerings of birds and purifications, these are the main Rules. Astronomy and geometry are mere fringes to wisdom.
41.  Ben Zoma said: Who is wise? He who learns from every man; as it is said: ‘From all my Ps. cxix. 99 teachers I get understanding, for thy testimonies are my conversation.’ Who is mighty? He who controlleth his evz/ disposition; as it is said: ‘Better is the long- Prov.xvi.32 suffering than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.’ Who is rich? He that rejoiceth in his portion ; as it is said: ‘ When thou eatest of the labour of Ps.cxxviii.2 thy hands, happy art thou and it shall be well with thee.’ ‘ Happy art thou’ in this world, and ‘it shall be well with thee’ in the world to come. Who is honoured? He who honoureth mankind ; as it is said: ‘For them that honour Me I will 1Sam.ii.30 honour, and they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.’ 2 Ben Azai said: Be swift towards a light precept [as towards a weighty one] and flee from sin; for precept leads to precept and sin leads to sin. For the reward of a precept is a precept, and the reward of a sin is a sin. 3 He used to say: Despise not any man, and be not captious at any thing; for you find no man _ that has not his hour, and no thing that has not its place. 4 R. Levitas of Jabneh said: Be exceedingly humble, for the hope of man is ozly the worm. 5 EK. Johanan b. Berokah said : ‘ Every one who profanes the Name of Heaven in secret, they exact punishment of him openly ; the ignorant and the wilful are alike sixners in regard to the profaning of the Name. 6 R. Ishmael his son said: He who learns with a view to teaching, they give him the opportunity to learn and to teach; he who learns with a view to doing, they give him the opportunity to learn and to teach and to do. 7 R. Zadok said: [Separate not thyself from the congregation, and be not as they who prepare the judges]. Make not them a crown wherewith to magnify thyself, nor a dish to eat from. And thus Hillel used to say: He who serves himself with the crown passes away. Behold, [thou hast — learned, ] ‘ Every one that makes a profit from words of Torah removes his life from the world.’ 8 R. Jose said: Every one who honours the Torah is himself honoured of men. And every one who dishonours the Torah is himself dishonoured of men. R. Ishmael 47s son said: He who withdraws from judgement gets rid of enmity, theft and perjury ; and he who is haughty in his teaching is foolish, wicked and arrogant. 10 He used to say: Judge not alone ; for there is none save One that judgeth alone. And say not to thy colleagues, Receive my opinion; for they are entitled and thou art not. R. Jonathan said: Every one who fulfils the Torah when poor will in the end fulfil it when rich; and every one who makes it vain when rich will in the end make it vain when poor, ignorant ... wilful. The meaning is that the guilt of profaning the Name is so great that no account is taken of whether it was done in ignorance or intentionally ; both are punished alike. 12 R.Meir said: Do little in business and be busy with the Torah ; and be humble of spirit before all men ; and if thou hast been idle iz respect of the Torah, there will be many idle things in thy way ; and if thou hast laboured at the Torah, there will be for Him much reward to give thee. 13 NE. Eliezer b. Jacob said: He who does one precept gains for himself one advocate ; and he who commits one transgression gains for himself one accuser ; repentance and good works are as a shield in face of punishment. t4 R. Johanan, the sandal-maker, said: Every assembly which is for the sake of Heaven will in the end be established; and ove that is not for the sake of Heaven will in the end not be established. 15 R. Eleazar b. Shammua said: Let the honour of thy disciple be dear to thee as the honour of thy associate, and the honour of thy associate as the fear of thy teacher, and the fear of thy teacher as the fear of Heaven. tό KE. Judah said: Be careful in teaching ; for error in teaching amounts to sin. 1Φ; R. Simeon said: There are three crowns ;, the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood and the crown of royalty ; but the crown of a good name mounts above them. 18 KE. Nehorai said: Betake thyself to a place of Torah, and say not it shall come after thee; for thine associates will fulfil it through thee. And ‘ Lean not upon thine own understanding’. Prov. iii. 5 to R. Jannai said: It is not in our hands Zo exp/aiu either the prosperity of the wicked or the chastisements of the righteous. zo Ka. Matthia b. Harash said: Be first in greeting every man; and be a tail to lions and not a head to foxes. 21 KN. Jacob said: This world is like a porch before the world to come. Make thyself ready in the porch, that thou mayst enter into the banqueting-hall. 22 Heused to say: Fairer is one hour of repentance and good works in this world than all the life of the world to come; and fairer is one hour of calmness of spirit in the world to come than all the life of this world. 23 R. Simeon b. Eleazar said: Pacify not thy associate in the hour of his anger, and console him not in the hour when his dead is stretched out before him ; and question him not in the hour of his vow, and seek not to behold him in the hour of his degradation. 24 Samuel, the small, said: ‘ Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad P, when he is overthrown, [lest the Lord see it, and it displease Him, and He turn away His wrath ib. from him ’}. 25 Elisha b. Abuiah said: He who learns when a youth, to what is he like? To ink written on new paper. And he who learns when an old man, to what is he like? To ink written on erased paper. 26 KR. Jose b. Judah, of Chephar ha-Babli, said: He who learns from the young, to what is he like? To one that eats unripe grapes and drinks wine from his winepress. He that learns from the old, to what is he like? To one that eats ripe grapes and drinks old wine. 2] Rabbi said: Look not at the pitcher but at what is in it. There is a new pitcher that is full of old zwzxe, and an old pitcher in which there is not even new zine. 28 KN. Eleazar ha-Kappar said: Jealousy and desire and ambition drive a man out of the world. 29 Heused tosay: Those that are born are for death, and the dead for making alive, and the living to be judged ; to know and to make known and to be known that He is the maker and He the creator, and He the discerner, and He the Judge, and He the witness, and He the adversary, and He will judge in whose presence there is neither obliquity nor forgetfulness nor respect of persons nor taking a bribe; for all is His; and know that all is according to reckoning. Let not thy nature make thee believe that the grave is a place of refuge. For not of thy will wast thou formed, and not of thy will dost thou live, and not of thy will dost thou die, and not of thy will art thou to give jus¢ - account and reckoning before the King of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He. 1: By ten Sayings the world was created. And why does the Scripture teach this? Could not the world have been created by one Saying? But 227 was in order to exact penalty from the wicked who destroy the world that was created by ten Sayings, and to give good reward to the righteous who establish the world that was created by ten Sayings. 2 Ten generations from Adam to Noah, to make known how much long-suffering is with Him ; for all the generations provoked Him, until He brought the flood upon them. 3 Ten generations from Noah to Abraham, to make known how much long-suffering is with Him ; for all the generations provoked Him, until Abraham our father came, and received the reward of them all. 9 Ten things were created ‘between the suns’. And these are they: The mouth of the earth; the mouth of the well; the mouth of the ass of Balaam ; the bow; and the manna, and the rod of Moses; and the shamir-zworm ; and writing ; and the writing; and the Tables. Some say, also the evil spirits, and the grave of Moses, and the ram of Abraham our father; and some say also the tongs that are made with tongs. 10 Seven things concerning a rude man, and seven concerning a wise man. A wise man does not speak in the presence of one who is greater than he in wisdom ; and he does not break in upon the words of his associate; and he does not hasten to reply; he asks according to the Rule, and answers according to the subject; and he speaks on the first thing first, and on the last last ; concerning what he has not heard he says, I have not heard ; and he acknowledges the truth. The opposites of these are found in the rude man. Seven kinds of punishment come upon the world for seven main transgressions, When some men tithe and some do not tithe, famine from drought comes ; some go hungry and some are full. . When they have resolved that they will not tithe aὐ aἰ, famine from tumult and from drought comes. And when they have resolved that they will not offer the cake of dough a famine of extermination comes. Pestilence comes upon the world for the capital crimes mentioned in the Torah which are not within the jurisdiction of the court of justice. Also, for fruits of the seventh year. The sword comes upon the world for suppression of justice and for perversion of justice, and for those that teach in the Torah not according to Rule. The wild beast comes on the world for false swearing, and for profaning of the Name. Exile comes upon the world for false worship, for incest, for bloodshed, and for zot giving release to the earth. 12 At four seasons pestilence increases ; in the fourth year, in the seventh, at the end of the seventh, and at the end of the Feast in each year. In the fourth, because of the tithe for the poor in the third; in the seventh, because of the tithe for the poor in the sixth; at the end of the seventh, because of the fruits of the seventh ; and at the end of the Feast, because of the robbery of the gifts assigned to the poor. 13 Four types of men: He that says, What is mine is mine and what is thine is thine; this is the average type, some say it is the type of Sodom. He ¢hat says, What is mine is thine and what is thine is mine, is one of the vulgar ; He ¢hat says, What is mine and what is thine are thine, is pious. He who says, What is thine and what is mine are mine, is wicked. 14 Four types of character: Easy to provoke and easy to pacify, his gain is cancelled by his loss. I ~ g. Ninth group of ten. The things here mentioned became of special importance in the later history, but they are not specially mentioned in the account of the Creation ; since, it was held, God had created nothing more after He ‘rested from His labour’, the things here mentioned must have been created last of all. “between the suns,’ NIwNwN 2, i.e. between sunset and sunrise. So all the MSS. C adds ‘at nightfall’, and DS ‘on the eve of Sabbath’. mouth . . . earth, that swallowed Korah. Num. xvi. 32. mouth ... well. Probably that in Num. xxi. 16-18. mouth . . . ass, i.e. the speaking of Balaam’s ass was provided for at the Creation. bow, the rainbow. shamir, a worm supposed to have the power of gnawing the hardest substances. Moses and Solomon are said to have made use of it. writing, the forms of the letters ; the writing, either the art of combining letters into words, or the writing on the Tables, or the writing instrument, stylus or pen. tongs ... tongs. The meaning is, that if the smith uses tongs in order to make tongs, who made the first tongs t Answer, they were made among the last things at the Creation. Presumably meaning that God is the author of all unexplained beginnings. to. First group of seven. rude man, pda. Lit. foetus, the unformed human being. Rule, alachah. See on ii. 1 above. Hard to provoke and hard to pacify, his loss is cancelled by his gain. Hard to provoke and easy to pacify, he is pious. Easy to provoke and hard to pacify, he is wicked. 15 Four types of disciples: Quick to hear and quick to lose, his gain is cancelled by his loss. Slow to learn and slow to lose, his loss is cancelled by his gain. Quick to hear and slow to lose, he is wise. Slow to hear and quick to lose, this is an evil lot. 16 Four types of almsgivers: He who is willing to give but not that others should give, his eye is evil towards what is theirs; Ze who zs willing that others should give but does not give himself, his eye is evil towards what is his; he who is willing to give and that others should give, is pious ; he who is not w2//ling that he should give or that others should give, is wicked. 17 Four types of them that go to the house of learning: He that goes and does nothing, has the reward of Ais going; he that goes not but does something, has the reward of doing; he that goes and does something, is pious; he that neither goes nor does anything, is wicked. 18 Four types of them that sit before the Wise: A sponge, a funnel, a strainer and a sieve. A sponge, because it sucks up everything ; a funnel, because it receives at one end and lets out at the other ; a strainer, because it lets out the wine and keeps back the dregs; a sieve, because it lets out the coarse meal and keeps the fine flour. 19 All love which depends on something—if the thing ceases, the love ceases. If it does not depend on something it ceases not for ever. What love is that which depends on something? This is the love of Amnon and Tamar. And that which does not depend on something? This is the love of David and Jonathan. 20 [very controversy which is for the name of Heaven will in the end be established ; and that which is not for the name of Heaven will not in the end beestablished. What controversy is that which is for the name of Heaven? The controversy of Shammai and Hillel. And that which is not for the name of Heaven? This is the controversy of Korah. 21 Every one that makes the many virtuous, sin comes not by his means ; and every one that maketh the many to sin, they give him not the opportunity to repent. Moses was virtuous and made the many of the Lord, and His judgements with Israel.’ Jeroboam sinned and made the many to sin, the sin of the many depended on him ; as it is said: _ ‘For the sin of Jeroboam who sinned and made Israel to sin.’ 22 Every one who has three things is one of the disciples of Abraham our father. And every one who has three other things is one of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. Jf he has a good eye, and a lowly soul and a humble spirit, he is of the disciples of Abraham our father. Jf he has an evil eye, and a boastful soul and a haughty spirit, he is of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. What is the difference between the disciples of Abraham our father and the disciples of Balaam the wicked ἢ The disciples of Balaam the wicked inherit Gehenna and go down to the pit of destruction, as it is shall not live out half their days; but I willtrust in Thee.’ But the disciples of Abraham our father that love me to inherit substance, and that I may fill their treasuries.’ 22 KR. Judah Ὁ. Tema said: Be bold as a leopard, and light as an eagle, and swift as a gazelle, and strong as a lion to do the will of thy Father which is in heaven. 24 [πe used to say: The bold-faced man is for Gehenna, and the shame-faced man is for the Garden of Eden. May it be Thy will, O Lord our God and the God of our fathers, that Thy city may be built speedily in our days; and grant our portion 20 de in Thy Torah. ] 25 _ [Ben Bag-Bag said: Turn it, and turn it again, for the whole is in it, and the whole of thee is in it ; and from it swerve not, for there is to thee no greater good than it. 26 [Ben He-He said: According to the toil is the pay.] 2] [Hesaid: At five years old one zs fit for the Scripture, at ten years for Mishnah, at thirteen for the commandments, at fifteen for Talmud, at eighteen for marriage, at twenty for retribution, at thirty for power, at forty for discernment, at fifty for counsel, at sixty for elderhood, at seventy for grey hairs, at eighty for strength, at ninety for decrepitude, and at a hundred he is as if he were dead and had passed away and vanished from the world.] END OF THE, TREATISE ‘ FATHERS’. THE CHAPTER OF R. MEIR, OR, THE ACQUISITION OF TORAH. G1 Zhe Wise have taught in the language of the Mishnah; blessed is He that made choice of them and of their Mishnah. [ R. Meir said: Every one who is occupied with the Torah for its own sake is worthy /o have many things; and not only so, but the whole world, all of it, is his equivalent. He is called friend, beloved, one that loves God and loves mankind, makes glad both God and mankind. And it clothes him with humbleness and fear, and purifies him to become righteous, pious, upright and faithful ; keeps him far from sin and brings him to virtue. Men enjoy from him counsel and sound knowledge, discernment and might ; as it is said: ‘Counsel is mine and sound knowledge; I am Prov. viii. 14 discernment; I have might.’ And it gives him sovereignty and dominion and searching out of justice ; and they disclose for him secrets of Torah. And he is made like a spring which ceases not, and like a stream that goes on getting stronger. And he is modest and longsuffering and forgiving of insult. And it makes him great and lifts him above all the things that are done. R. Joshua b. Levi has said: Every day a Bath-Qol goes forth from Mount Horeb and proclaims and says ‘ Woe to mankind because of ¢#ezr insulting of the Torah’; for every one that is not occupied with the Torah is called reprobate ; as it is said: ‘ As a jewel of gold in the snout of Prov. xi. 22 a swine, so is a fair woman without sense.’ And Scripture says: ‘And the tables were the work Exod. xxxii. 16 of God, and the writing writing of God, graven on the tables.’ Read not ‘haruth’ (graven) but ‘heruth’ (freedom) ; for none is your freeman, but he who is occupied with the study of Torah. And every one who is occupied in the study of Torah, lo, he exalts himself, as it is said: ‘ And Num. xxi. 19 from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth.’ 3 He who learns from his associate one chapter, one rule, one verse, one saying, even one letter, must show honour to him ; for thus we find in the case of David, king of Israel, that he learned loves God ... mankind. Observe the unlimited range of the love inspired by the religion of Torah. makes glad. Cp. Zeph. iii. 17, but with a finer meaning here. it clothes him. ‘It’ is Torah, personified. Cp. 1 Pet. v. 5 for humility as a virtue put on, given from above. es, makes him W5, 4ashér, in a fit condition to perform his religious duties. The same word, pronounced ‘kosher’, is used in Jewish shops to denote food ritually fit for use. from him, i.e. from the man who is occunied with Torah. The proof-text, Prov. viii. 14, makes Wisdom say ‘Counsel is mine’, ἄς. Torah is identified with wisdom ; therefore the man who has Torah is enabled to give what is inherent in wisdom. it gives, i.e. Torah gives. sovereignty, m5», moral not political supremacy. searching ... justice. Solomon, the wise king, was able to find out what true justice required, 1 Kings iii. 16-28, they disclose. ‘ They’ are the familia caelestis, the angels. stream, &c. For the phrase cp. ii. 10; the simile used there is expanded here. And ... is. Strack reads 77 (participle) for the common reading “i, imperative, which, as he says, makes no sense. But 7 is very unusual, and it would be simpler to read N37 ‘he (is)’. The structure of the whole passage is very clumsy, with its frequent changes of subject; it may be a cento of phrases from different sources. gs ... dome, meaning that he is not the slave of circumstance but spiritually free. from Ahithophel only two things, ut he called him his master, his teacher, his familiar friend ; as it is said: ‘But thou, a man mine equal, my teacher and my familiar friend’. And are not these Ps. ly) things an argument a@ fortiori? If David, king of Israel, who learned from Ahithophel only two things, called him his master, his teacher, his familiar friend, how much more one who learns from his associate one chapter or one rule, or one verse, or one saying, or even one letter, ought to show honour to him: and ‘honour’ simply means Torah; as it is said: ‘The wise shall inherit Prov. ii honour’; and ‘The perfect shall inherit good’: and ‘good’ simply means Torah; as it is said : ib. x ‘For I have given thee good doctrine, forsake not my Torah,’ ib. i 4 This is the way of Torah: A morsel with salt thou shalt eat, ‘and thou shalt drink water by measure’; and thou shalt sleep on the ground, and thou shalt live a life of hardship, and thou shalt labour in the Torah. If thou doest thus ‘happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee’; Ps. ‘happy ’ in this world, and ‘ well with thee’ in the world to come. 5 Seek not greatness for thyself, neither covet honour. Perform more than thou hast learned. And crave not for the tables of kings; for thy table is greater than their table, and thy crown greater than their crown ; and faithful is He, the master of thy work, to pay thee the reward of thy labour. 6 Greater is Torah than priesthood and than sovereignty. For sovereignty is acquired through thirty qualifications, and priesthood by twenty-four; but the Torah is acquired by forty-eight things. And these are they :—‘ By learning, the listening of the ear, the ordering of the lips, the discernment of the heart, fear, dread, humility, cheerfulness, purity, attendance on the Wise, discussion with asso- ciates, argument with disciples, sedateness, Scripture, Mishnah; by little business, little intercourse with the world, little sleep, little conversation, little luxury, little merriment ; by forbearance, a good heart, faith in the Wise, acceptance of chastisements; dy being one that knows his place, and rejoices in his portion, and makes a fence for his words, and claims not goodness for himself, that is loved, that loves God, that loves mankind, that loves deeds of charity, that loves uprightness, that loves reproofs, and keeps himself far from honour, and puffs not up his heart with his learning, and delights not in giving decisions, that bears the yoke along with his associate, and judges him with a leaning to merit, and establishes him upon truth, and establishes him upon peace, and settles his heart in his study, that asks and answers, that hears and adds thereto, that learns with a view to teaching, and that learns with a view to action, that makes his teacher wise, that makes sure what he hears, and that repeats a word in the name of him who said it. See, thou hast learned: Every one that says a word in the name of him who said it brings redemption into the world ; as it is said: ‘And Esther said to the king in the name of Mordecai.’ Es 7 Great is Torah, for it gives to them that practise it life in this world and in the world to come; as it is said: ‘For they are life to them that find them, and health to all their flesh.’ Ὁ called ... master. This is not in the Talmudic story, but merely an inference from Ps. lv. 13, taken as referring to Ahithophel. a fortiori, "ΠῚ bp, lit. ‘light and heavy’. The form of the argument is: ‘if 4 is B, how much more Cis B??” This is one of the seven rules which Hillel introduced for the interpretation of Scripture. ‘honour’... means Torah. There is a confusion of thought here, for the disciple is to show honour to his Master because of Torah; he does not show Torah to him. good doctrine. The same proof-text is quoted in iii. 19 above. And Scripture says: ‘It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.’ And it says : Prov. iii. 8 ‘She shall be a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy are they that retain her.’ ib. iii. 18 And it says: ‘For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy ib. i.9 neck.’ And it says: ‘She shall give to thine head a chaplet of grace; a crown of beauty shall she ib. iv. 9 deliver thee.’ And it says: ‘For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and they shall increase to ib. ix. 11 thee years of life.’ And it says: ‘Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches ib. iii. 16 and honour.’ And it says: ‘ For length of days, and years of life, and peace shall they add to thee.’ ib. iii. 2 -g KE. Simeon b. Judah, in the name of R. Simeon b. Johai, said: Beauty, strength, riches, honour, wisdom, old age, grey hairs, children, are comely for the righteous and comely for the world ; as it is said: ‘ The hoary head is a crown of glory; it shall be found in the way of righteousness.’ Prov. xvi. 31 And it says: ‘Children’s children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are their ib. xvii. 6 fathers. And it says: ‘The glory of young men is their strength; and the beauty of old men is ib. xx. 29 the hoary head.’ And it says: ‘Then the moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed ; for Isa. xxiv. 23 the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before His ancients gloriously.’ R. Simeon b. Menasia said: These seven attributes, which the Wise have assigned to the righteous, were all exemplified in Rabbi and in his sons. tὸ KE. Jose b. Kisma has said: Once I was walking by the way and there met me a man, and he greeted me, and I greeted him again. He said to me, Rabbi, whence comest thou? I said to him, I am from a great city of wise men and scribes. He said to me, Rabbi, wilt thou dwell with us in our place, and I will give thee a thousand thousand gold pieces and precious stones and pearls ? I said to him, If thou gavest me all the silver and gold and precious stones and pearls which are in the world I would not dwell except in a place of Torah. For thus it is written in the book of Psalms, by the hands of David, king of Israel: ‘The Torah of Thy mouth is better unto me than Ps. cxix. 72 thousands of gold and silver.’ And not only so, but in the hour of a man’s death it is not silver or gold or precious stones or pearls which accompany him, but Torah and good works alone; as it is said: ‘When thou walkest it shall lead thee. when thou liest down it shall watch over thee, Prov. vi. 22 and when thou wakest it shall talk with thee.’ ‘ When thou walkest it shall lead thee ’—in this world. ‘When thou liest down it shall watch over thee’—in the grave. ‘When thou wakest it shall talk with ὌN ᾿--ἰη the world to come. And it says: ‘The silver is Mine and the gold is Mine, saith the Lord Hag. ii. 8 of Hosts.’ : t Εἶνε possessions hath the Holy One, blessed be He, acquired in His world, and these are they: Torah is one possession ; heaven and earth are one possession ; Abraham is one possession ; Israel is one possession ; the house of the sanctuary is one possession. Whence ἐς this proved concerning Torah? That which is written: ‘The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His way, before His Prov. viii. 22 works of old.’ Whence concerning heaven and earth? That which is written: ‘Thus saith the Isa. lxvi.1 Lord of Hosts, Heaven is My throne and the earth the footstool of My feet: what is this house that ye build for Me, and what is the place of My rest?’ And it says: ‘How manifold are Thy works, Ps. civ. 24 O Lord! in wisdom hast Thou made them all: the earth is full of Thy possessions.’ Whence concerning Abraham? That which is written: ‘And he blessed him and said, Blessed be Abraham of God Ge Most High, possessor of heaven and earth.’ Whence concerning Israel? That which is written: ‘Till Thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over which Thou hast possessed.’ And it Ex says: ‘As for the saints that are in the earth, they are the excellent in whom is all my delight.’ Ps. Whence concerning the house of the Sanctuary? That which is written: ‘ The place, O Lord, Ex which Thou hast made for Thee to dwell in, the Sanctuary, O Lord, which Thy hands have founded.’ And it says: ‘And He brought them to the border of His Sanctuary, to this mountain which His Ps. 12 right hand hath possessed.’ All that the Holy One, blessed be He, created in His world, He created it only for His glory; as it is said: ‘Every one that is called by My name, and whom I have Is created for My glory, I have formed him, I have made him.’ And it says: ‘The Lord shall reign En for ever and ever,’


# The Story of Ahikar

2.  Vizier of the king Sennacherib. He had a fine fortune and much goods, and he was skilful, wise, a philosopher, [in] knowledge, [in] opinion and [in] government, and he had married sixty women, and had built a castle for each of them. But with it all he had no child by any of these women,
3.  who might be his heir. And he was very sad on account of this, and one day he assembled the astrologers and the learned men and the wizards and explained to them his condition and the matter of his barrenness. And they said to him, ‘Go, sacrifice to the gods and beseech them that perchance they may provide thee with a boy.’
4.  And he did as they told him and offered sacrifices to the idols, and besought them and implored them with request and entreaty. And they answered him not one word. And he went away sorrowful and dejected, departing with a pain at
5.  his heart. And he returned, and implored the Most High God, and believed, beseeching Him with a burning in his heart, saying, ‘O Most High God, O Creator of the Heavens and of the earth, O Creator of all created things! I beseech Thee to give me a boy, that I may be consoled by him, that he may be present at my death, that he may close my eyes, and that he may bury me.’ Then
6.  there came to him a voice saying, ‘ Inasmuch as thou hast relied first of all on graven images, and hast offered sacrifices to them, for this reason thou shalt remain childless thy life long. But take Nadan thy sister’s son, and make him thy child and teach him thy learning and thy good breeding, and at thy death he shall bury thee.’ 1 Literally ‘God, may He be exalted !’ Jassim. } ARMENIAN VERSION THE maxims and wisdom of Khikar, which 1 the children of men learn. In the times and in the reign of Seneqerim King of Nineveh and of Asorestan, I, Khikar Notary of Seneqerim the King, took! sixty wives and builded me sixty palaces. And I, Khikar, was sixty years of age, 2 and I had not a son. Then I went in to the 3 gods with many offerings; I lit a fire before the gods and cast incense? upon it, and presented my offerings and sacrificed victims, kneeled down and prayed, and thus spake in my prayer. O my lords and gods, Belshim and Shimil and 4 Shamin, ordain and give to me male seed. For lo, Khikar dieth alive. And what say men? That Khikar though alive and wise and clever is dead, and there is no son of his to bury him, nor daughter to bewail him. I have no heir after my death. Not even if a son should spend ten talents in the last day, would he exhaust my riches. But (I ask merely) that he may cast 5 dust with his hands upon me, in order that I may not remain unremembered. Then there was a voice from the gods and 6 they said: Khikar, there is not ordained seed for thee. But thou shalt take Nathan®, thy sister’s son, and bring him up as thy son, and he shall pay thee back thy cost of rearing him *. 1 Can. thus: ‘acquired me slaves and handmaids and many possessions. I builded,’ ἄς. 2 Add ‘ of sweet odour’ 58 and Edjm. ® So the better Arm. MSS. The inferior read ‘ Nadan’, * So Canon. Others have ‘ pay thee back thy name’. text. Syvr. A Syr. B
7.  And when I heard these things, I was grieved again, and said, ‘O Lord God! is it that Thou wilt give me as a son Nadan my sister's son, so that when I die, he may throw dust on my eyes?’ And no further answer was
8.  returned to me. And I obeyed the command and took to me for a son Nadan, my sister’s son: and because he was yet young, I furnished him with eight wet-nurses: and I brought up my son on honey, and made him lie on choice carpets,
9.  and clothed him in fine linen and purple; and my son grew and shot up like a cedar, and when my son was grown big, I taught him book-lore to and wisdom; and when the king came from the place to which he had gone, he called me and said to me, ‘O Ahikar, the wise scribe and master of my thoughts, when thou shalt wax old and die, who is there to come after thee and to serve me like thyself?’ II And I answered and said to him, ‘O my lord the king, live for ever! I have a son, wise like myself, and book-learned like myself, and educated.’
12.  And the king said to me, ‘Bring him and let me see him. If he is able to stand before me, I will release thee in peace, and thou shalt spend thy old age in honour, until
13.  thou shalt end thy days.’ Then I took my son Nadan and set him before the king, and when my lord the king saw him, he said, ‘This day shall be a blessed day before God, so that like as Ahikar walked! before my father Sarhadum, and before me also, he shall be rewarded? and I will set his son in my gate in his lifetime, and he shall depart his life [in peace].’
14.  Thereupon I, Ahikar, bowed down before the king and said, ‘ My lord ’ the king, live for ever! And like as I walked ᾿ before thy father and before thyself even until now, so do thou also extend thy forbearance to the youthfulness of this my son, that thy grace which was toward me may be found multiplied
15.  towards him.’ Then when the king heard this, a he gave me his right hand, and I, Ahikar, bowed > down before the king. Nor did I cease from the instruction of my son, until I had filled him with instruction as with ue bread and water. And on this wise was I dis- 3 coursing to him: EἸ “rans * Reading w4ads. ARABIC 7 Thereupon he took Nadan his sister’s son, who was a little suckling. And he handed him over to eight wet-nurses, that they might suckle him 8and bring him up. And they brought him up with good food and gentle training and silken 9 clothing, and purple and crimson. And he was seated upon couches of silk. And when Nadan grew big and walked, shooting up like a tall cedar, he taught him good manners and writing and science and philosophy. 10 And after many days King Sennacherib looked at Haiqdr and saw that he had grown very old, and moreover he said to him, ‘O my honoured friend, the skilful, the trusty, the wise, the governor, my secretary, my vizier, my Chancellor! and director; verily thou art grown very old and weighted with years; and thy departure from this world must be near. Tell me who shall have a place in my service 1rafter thee. And Haiqdr said to him, ‘O my lord, may thy head live forever! There is Nadan my sister's son, I have made him my child. And I have brought him up and taught him my 12 wisdom and my knowledge.’ And the king said to him,‘ O Haiqar! bring him to my presence, that I may see him, and if I find him suitable, put him in thy place; and thou shalt go thy way, to take a rest and to live the remainder of thy 13 life in sweet repose.’ Then Haiqdr went and pre- sented Nadan his sister's son. And he did homage and wished him power and _ honour. And he looked at him and admired him and rejoiced in him and said to Haiqar: ‘Is this thy son, O Haiqar? I pray that God may preserve him. And as thou hast served me and my father Sarhadum so may this boy of thine serve me and fulfil my undertakings, my needs, and my business, so that I may honour him and make t4him powerful for thy sake. And Haiqar did _ obeisance to the king and said to him, ‘May thy head live, O my lord the king, for ever! I seek from thee that thou mayst be patient with my boy Nadan and forgive his mistakes that he may serve thee as it is fitting. Then the king swore to him that he would make him the greatest of his favourites, and the most powerful of his friends, and that he should be with him in all ‘tshonour and respect. And he kissed his hands and bade him farewell. And he took Nadan his sister’s son with him and seated him in a parlour and set about teaching him night and day till he had crammed him with wisdom and knowledge more than with bread and water. ARMENIAN And when I heard this from the gods, I took 7 Nathan my sister’s son; one year old was he, and I clad him in byssus and purple; and a gold collar did I bind around his neck; and like a king’s son I decked him out with ornaments. And I gave him to drink milk and honey, and 8 laid him to sleep on my eagles and doves, until he was seven years of age. Then I began to9 teach him writing and wisdom and the art of knowledge and the answering of dispatches, and the returns of contradictory speeches. And by day and by night I ceased not to instruct him ; and I sated him with my teaching, as it were with bread and water. Then saith the king unto me: Khikar, my tὸ Notary and wise one, I know that thou art grown old; and after thy death, who is there to discharge ably and wisely the affairs of our kingdom? And I am very grieved at this thought. And I said to him: O King, live for 11 ever, There is my son, who is superior to me and is more clever. And the king says: Bring 12 him unto me, that I may behold him. And when I had brought him and stood him before the king, he beheld him and said: In his days may Khikar be blessed, because in his lifetime he hath led and stood before me his son, and may he himself be at rest. I bowed my head to my lord, and taking 13 Nathan I led him into my dwelling and thus spake in my teaching 1. 1 Canon adds: ‘ give ear to my conversation and pre- cept. Write it on thy seal, and forget it not; that the years of thy life may be plentiful, and that in glory and wealth thou mayst reach old age.’ No other Arm. source The Proverbs of Ahikar Syr. A ‘Hear,O my son Nadan, and come to the under- standing of me, and be mindful of my words, as the words of God!: 2 My son Nadan, if thou hast heard a word, let it die in thy heart, and reveal it to no man; lest it becomea hot coal in thy mouth and burn thee, and thou lay a blemish on thy soul, and be angered against God. ARABIC Thus he taught him, saying: t ‘O my son! hear my speech and follow my advice and remember what I say. 2 Onmy son! if thou hearest a word, let it die in thy heart, and reveal it not to another, lest it become a live coal and burn thy tongue and cause a pain in thy body, and thou gain a re- proach, and art shamed before God and man. 3 Omy son! if thou hast heard a report, spread it not; and if thou hast seen something, tell it not. 4 Omy son! make thy eloquence easy to the listener, and be not hasty to return an answer. 5 O my son! when thou hast heard anything, hide it not. 6 Omy son! loose not a sealed knot, nor untie it, and seal not a loosened knot. 7 O my son! covet not outward beauty, for it wanes and passes away, but an honourable re- membrance lasts for aye. 8 Onmy son! let not a silly woman deceive thee with her speech, lest thou die the most miserable of deaths, and she entangle thee in the net till thou art ensnared. 9 Omy son! desire not a woman bedizened with dress and with ointments, who is despicable and silly in her soul. Woe to thee if thou bestow on her anything that is thine, or commit to her what is in thine hand and she entice thee into sin, and God be wroth with thee. to O my son! be not like the almond-tree, for it brings forth leaves before all the trees, and edible fruit after them all, but be like the mul- berry-tree, which brings forth edible fruit before all the trees, and leaves after them all. iz O my son! bend thy head low down, and soften thy voice, and be courteous, and walk in the straight path, and be not foolish. And raise not thy voice when thou laughest, for if it were The Proverbs of Ahikar ARMENIAN Son, if thou hear any word in the royal gate, 2 1 make it to die and bury it in thy heart, and to no one divulge it. The knot that is sealed do thou not loose, and that which is loosed do thou not tie. And that which thou dost see, tell not ; and that which thou hearest, reveal it not. Son, raise not up thine eyes to look on a2 lovely woman, rouged and antimonied. Desire her not in thy heart. For if thou shouldst give her all thy riches, thou! dost get nothing the more out of her; but art condemned by God and by mankind. For she is like unto a sepulchre which is fair on the upper. side and below is full of the rottenness and bones of the dead. Son, be not like the olive-tree, which is first 3 to bloom and last to ripen its fruit. But be like the mulberry, which is last to bloom and first to ripen its fruit. has such an addition, which however distantly resembles the Slavonic and Syriac. 1 Bod]. = ‘thou art not in any way benefited by her more than to be condemned by the God of just judge- ments and by mankind’. Canon = ‘thou wilt not get anything more than thy own sin and shame from men and judgement from God’, omitting the rest. THE. STORY OF ; Syr. A if a house could be built by a high voice, the ass would build two houses in one day: and if by sheer force the plough was guided, its share would never be loosed from the shoulder of the camel. 9 Myson, it is better to rernove stones with a wise man than to drink wine with a fool. My son, pour out thy wine on the graves of the righteous, rather than drink it with evil men. Io 11 My son, with a wise man thou wilt not be depraved, and with a depraved man thou wilt not become wise. My son, associate with the wise man, and thou wilt become wise like him; and associate not with a garrulous and talkative man, lest thou be numbered with him. EZ. My son, while thou hast shoes on thy feet, tread down the thorns and make a path for thy sons and for thy sons’ sons. 13 My son, the rich man eats a snake, and they say, “He ate it for medicine.” And the poor man eats it, and they say, “ For his hunger he ate it.” 14 My son, eat thy portion, and despise not thy neighbours. My son, it is not becoming even to eat with a shameless man.! 15 c
17.  My son, envy not the prosperity of thy enemy; and rejoice not at his adversity.”
18.  My son, draw not near to a woman that is a whisperer, nor to one whose voice is high. My son, go not after the beauty of a woman, and lust not after her in thy heart because the beauty of a woman is her good sense, and her adornment is the word of her mouth. My son, if thine enemy meet thee with evil, meet thou him with wisdom.* My son, the wicked falleth and riseth not ; but the just man is not moved, for God is with him. 19 1 Cf. 1 Cor. v. 11 ἐᾶn, Tis. . μηδὲ συνεσθίειν. ἢ Cf. Prov. xxiv. 17 ἐὰn πέσῃ ὁ ἐxθpός σou, μὴ ἐπιχάρῇς auT@, THE STORY OF ARABIC would build many houses every day ; and if it were by dint of strength that the plough were driven, the plough would never be removed from under the shoulders of the camels. Ὁ πᾶn son! the removing of stones with a wise man is better than the drinking of wine with a sorry man, 3 O my son! pour out thy wine on the tombs of the just, and drink not with ignorant, con- temptible people. 4 Onmy son! cleave to wise men who fear God and be like them, and go not near the ignorant, lest thou become like him and learn his ways. O my son! when thou hast got thee a comrade or a friend, try him, and afterwards make him a comrade and a friend; and do not praise him without a trial ; and do not spoil thy speech with a man who lacks wisdom. Ὁ O my son! while a shoe stays on thy foot, walk with it on the thorns, and make a road for thy son, and for thy household and thy children, and make thy ship taut before she goes on the _ sea and its waves and sinks and cannot be saved. 7 [Omy son! if the rich man eat a snake, they say “It is by his wisdom ”, and if a poor man eat it, the people say “ From his hunger ”.] 8 O my son! be content with thy daily bread and thy goods, and covet not what is another’s. ig O my son! be not neighbour to the fool, and eat not bread with him, and rejoice not in the calamities of thy neighbours. If thine enemy wrong thee, show him kindness. 2 Omy son! a man who fears God do thou fear him and honour him. O my son! the ignorant man falls and stumbles, and the wise man, even if he stumbles, he is not shaken, and even if he falls he gets up quickly, and if he is sick, he can take care of his life. But as for the ignorant, stupid man, for his disease there is no drug.
22.  O my son! if a man approach thee who is inferior to thyself, go forward to meet him, and remain standing, and if he cannot recompensc thee, his Lord will recompense thee for him. AHIKAR 2. 11-22 ARMENIAN Son, it is better with a wise man to carry 4 stones, than with a foolish man to drink wine. Son, with wise men be not a fool, and with 5 fools be not thou wise. Son, be thou the companion of a wise man, 6 so that thou become wise as he is; but do not become the companion of a senseless man and of a fool, lest like them thou be called a fool. Son, pour out thy wine, and drink it not with 7 the senseless and with the lawless, lest thou be despised by them?. Son, be thou not over-sweet, so that they 8 swallow thee down, nor over-bitter, so that they spit thee out. But do thou be gentle, tranquil in the works of thy paths and in all thy words. Son, while the boot is on thy foot, tread down 9 the thorns and make a path for thy sons *. Son, a rich man hath eaten a serpent, and ro they say it is medicine for him. A poor man hath eaten it, and they say that he ate it out of hunger. Eat thy own portion in peace*, and cast not thy eye on that of thy companion; and with one that is without fear go not on a journey ; and with the senseless do thou not eat bread. Son, if thou seest thy enemy fallen, do not ta make a scoff at him; for if he get up again, he requiteth thee evil *. Son, the lawless man falleth by his evil deeds, r2 but the just man is raised by his good deeds. Son, go not near a senseless and backbiting 13 woman, that thou be not despised by her®; and thou art made a mock of, and she robs thee. 1 Canon and Edjm. = ‘ despised like them’. 2 So Canon, ordofz: the other MSS. have oétéz, ‘for thy feet ’. % Ven. and Canon add ‘in peace’: Bodl. and 58 omit. 4 Ven. adds: ‘and there is continual ill-will’ 5 The Arm.=‘by them’. If that be read we should turn ‘ woman’ into the plural. Syrk. A My son, withhold not thy son from stripes ; for the beating of a boy is like manure to the arden, and like rope to an ass or any other beast],! and like tether on the foot of an ass. 22 My son, subdue thy son while he is yet a boy, before he wax stronger than thee and rebel against thee,and thou be shamed in all his corrupt doing, 23 My son, get thee an ox that [is fat and] lies down, and an ass that has good hoofs, but do not get thee a slave that is run- away nor a maid that is thievish; lest they destroy all that thou hast gotten. My son, the words of a liar are like fat sparrows; and he that is void of understanding eateth them. My son, bring not upon thee the curses of thy father and of thy mother, lest thou rejoice not in the blessings of thy children. 24 21 My son, walk not in the way 1 The bracketed words are a gloss. 23
27.  ARABIC O my son! spare not to beat thy son, for the drub- bing of thy son is like manure to the garden, and like tying the mouth of a purse, and like the tethering of beasts, and like the bolting of the door. O my son! restrain thy son from wickedness, and teach him manners before he rebels against thee and brings thee into contempt amongst the people and thou hang thy head in the streets and the assemblies and thou be punished for the evil of his wicked deeds. O my son! get thee a fat ox with a foreskin, and an ass great with its hoofs, and get not an ox with large horns, nor make friends with a tricky man, nor get a quarrelsome slave, nor a thievish handmaid, for every- thing which thou committest to them they will ruin. O my son! let not thy parents curse thee, and the Lord be pleased with them ; for it hath been said, “ He who despiseth his father or his mother let him die the death (I mean the death of sin); and he who honoureth his parents shall prolong his days and his life and shall see all that is good.” O my son! walk not on 732 ARMENIAN Son, spare not the rod to thy aὶ son; for the rod is to children as the dung in the garden; and as the tie and seal fastening the packet, and as the tether on the feet of the ass, so is the rod — profitable to the child. For if thou strike him with a rod once or twice, he is rendered clever quietly, he does not die. But if thou leave him to his own will, he becomes a thief; and they take him to the gallows and to death, and he becomes unto thee a reproach and break- ing of heart 3. Son, train thy son in hunger and thirst, in order that in humility he may lead his life. Son, receive not any who shall repeat to thee the (word) of an enemy, for they will repeat thy word. Son ὅ, at first thou art fond of ἢ a false man‘, but in the end he becomes hateful to thee. For a false word is like a fat quail; but he that is foolish swallows it down. Son, love the father who begat thee, and earn not the curses of thy father and mother; to the end that thou mayst rejoice in the prosperity of thy own sons. Son, without a weapon go . ? Bodl. = ‘once or twice, he is quieted, but does not die’. I render the Venice text which is attested by Canon. * Canon here adds in agreem with the Syriac and Slavonic 6 two precepts: ‘Son, make thy child obedient, while he is small and pli lest he come into open conflict with thee, and thou be undone by his injury, and win the curses of s because of his disobedience. acquire for thyself a sturdy ass a strong-hoofed horse and an ox short in neck. And desire not a runaway slave, or one petulant of tongue, or a quarrelsome thief.’ Paris 58 omits this adage. * So Bodl., 58: Ven. = ‘at first (one) loves a false man’. Ἵ Syr. A unarmed; because thou knowest not when thy enemy shall come upon thee. Mῦn son, even as a tree is fair ‘in its branches and fruit, and a bosky mountain in its trees, so a man fair in his wife and eans; and he that hath not brethren, nor wife nor weans, is despised and contemptible before his enemies; and he is like unto a tree by the roadside, from which every passer-by plucketh, and every beast of the weald teareth down its leafage.' |} My son, say not, “ My lord is a fool,and Iam wise”; but take hold of him in his faults and thou shalt obtain mercy. 9 Myson, count not thyself to be wise, when others count thee not to be wise. x Myson, lie not in thy speech before thy lord, lest thou be con- victed, and he shall say to thee, “ Away from my sight!” My son, let thy words be true, in order that thy lord may say to thee, ‘‘ Draw near me,’ and thou shalt live. 3 My son, in the day of thy calamity revile not God; lest when He hear thee, He should _ be angered against thee. My son, treat not thy slave better than his fellow; for thou knowest not which of them thou _ wilt have need of at the last.
35.  My son, smite with stones the Ὲ that has left his own master €: followed after thee. N nm 1 Cf. Ps, CXXVii. 5: ARABIC the road without weapons, for thou knowest not when the foe may meet thee, so that thou mayst be ready for him. 28 O my son! be not like a bare, leafless tree that doth not grow, but be like a tree covered with its leaves and its boughs ; for the man who has neither wife nor children is disgraced in the world and is hated by them, like a leaf- less and fruitless tree. 29 Omyson! be like a fruit- ful tree on the roadside, whose fruit is eaten by all who pass by, and the beasts of the desert rest under its shade and eat of its leaves. 30 O my son! every sheep that wanders from its path and its companions becomes food for the wolf. 31 Omy son! say not, “My lord is a fool and I am wise,” and relate not the speech of ignorance and folly, lest thou be despised by him. 32 Omy son! be not one of those servants, to whom their lords say, “Get away from us,” but be one of those to whom they say, “ Approach and come near to us.” 33 (O myson! caress not thy slave in the presence of his companion, for thou knowest not which of them shall be of most value to thee in the end.) 34 Omy son! be not afraid 733 27-35 ARMENIAN not on a journey by night", lest thy enemy meet thee, and thou be destroyed. Son, as a tree is enjoyable to 20 see for its fruit and branches, and the mountains are wooded with the cedars, in the same way are enjoyable to see man and wife? and son and brother and kinsman and friend, and all families. Son, one who hath not wife δὲ or son or brother or kinsman or friend is in the long years despised, and is like unto a tree that is in the crossways, and all who pass by it pluck off her leaves and break down her branches. Son *, say not thus: My lord 22 is foolish and I am wise, but bear with him in his folly ; and thou wilt keep thyself with a wise man, until some other one shall praise thee. Son, say ill to no one; and 23 be thou not evil-tongued in the presence of thy lord, that thou be not contemned by him. Son, turn not aside at the day 24 of thy sacrifice, for fear lest the Lord be displeased with thy sacrifice *. Son, quit not the scene of 25 mourning and repair unto the wedding ; for death lies ahead of all, and the punishment is great. Son, put not on thy finger a 26 gold® ring which is not thine; nor clothe thee in byssus and purple that is not thine. Neither mount a horse that is not thine, since the onlookers who know it will make mock at thee δ, ? Canon adds ‘by night’ with the Slavonic. The other sources omit with the Syriac. * Ven. omits ‘and wife’. The other sources with Canon add it. THE Syr. A My son, the flock that makes many tracks becomes the por- tion of the wolves. My son, judge upright judge- ment in thy youth, in order that in thy age thou mayst have honour. My son, sweeten thy tongue and make savoury the opening of thy mouth ; for the tail of a dog gives him bread, and his mouth gets him blows. My son, suffer not thy neigh- bour to tread on thy foot, lest he tread on thy neck. My son, smite the [wise] man with wise word, that it may be in his heart like a fever in sum- mer; [but know] that if thou smite the fool with many blows, he will not understand. 36 Sil My son, send a wise man and give him no orders; but if thou wilt send a fool, go rather thy- self and send him not. 41 My son, test thy son with bread and water, and then thou canst leave in his hands thy pos- sessions and thy wealth. My son, withdraw at the first cup, and tarry not for lickerish draughts!: lest there be to thee wounds in thy head. My son, he whose hand is full is called wise and honourable; and he whose hand is scant is called foolish and abject. My son, I have carried salt and removed lead; and I have not seen anything heavier than 42 ? Lit. ‘heats’, But perhaps we should change the reading slightly (cf. the 73rd proverb), and translate ARABIC of thy Lord who created thee, lest He be silent to thee. O my son! make thy speech fair and sweeten thy tongue; and permit not thy companion to tread on thy foot, lest he tread at another time on thy breast. 35
36.  Omy son! if thou beat a wise man with a word of wisdom, it will lurk in his breast like a subtle sense of shame; but if thou drub the ignorant with a stick he will neither Uae it Sept nor hear. O my son! if thou send a wise man for thy needs, do not give him many orders, for he will do thy business as thou desirest : and if thou send a fool, do not order him, but go thyself and do thy business, for if thou order him, he will not do what thou desirest. If they send thee on business, hasten to fulfil it quickly. O my son! make not an enemy of a man stronger than thyself, for he will take thy measure’, and his revenge on thee. O my son! make trial of thy son, and of thy servant, before thou committest thy belongings to them, lest they make away with them ; for he who hath a full hand is is called wise, even if he be stupid and ignorant, and he who hath an empty hand is called poor, ignorant, even if he be the prince of sages. O my son! I have eaten a colocynth, and swallowed aloes 2, and I have found no- thing morebitterthan poverty and scarcity. 51 1 Literally ‘he will weigh thee ’. 2 Or ‘myrrh’. 734 36-45 ARMENIAN Son, eat not bread that is not thine own, even though thou be very hungry. Son, if a man be stronger than thyself, have no troversy with him, lest he slay thee. Son, crush and consume the evil out of thy heart, and it i well for thee with God and mar and thou art holpen by the will of God. Son, if thy doorposts be loftily built to heaven as it were seven ells, whenever thou enterest, bow thy head. ; Son, take not from others with a big weight and give back to them with a little weight, say: I have madea profit. For God allows it not, but will wroth; and thou wilt die of starvation. Son, swear not false, that of. thy days there be no fail}, Son, give ear unto the laws of God, and be not afraid of the evil (one), for the command- ment of God is the rampart of man. Son, rejoice thou not in the number of thy children, and in — their deficiency be not dis- tressed. Son, children and possessions 35 are bestowed by God. Th rich man is made poor, the poor man is enriched; the humble is’ exalted, and the exalted is humbled. 7 Son, if lofty be the lintels of 3 thy house, and thy friend be sick, say not: What shall I send him? but go on foot and see him with thy eyes; for that is better for him than a thousand talents of gold and silver. Son, in reward for evil-spez ing receive not gold and silver, ; for it is a death-fraught deed COli= — anG 1 Bodl. and Paris 58 add ‘ upon the earth’. Syr. A that a man should pay back a debt when he did not borrow. 46 My son,I have carried iron and removed stones; and they were not heavier on me than a man who settles in the house of his father-in-law. 4 My son, teach hunger and thirst to thy son, that according as his eye sees he may govern his house. 8 My son, better is he that is blind of eye than he that is blind of heart ; for the blind of eye straightway learneth the road and walketh in it: but the blind of heart leaveth the right way and goeth into the desert. My son, better is a friend that is at hand thana brother who is far away; and better is a good name than much beauty: because a good name standeth for aye, but beauty wanes and wastes away. My son, death is better than life to a man that hath no rest: and better is the voice of wail- ing in the ears of a fool than music and joy.”
51.  My son, better is a drumstick ᾿ ᾿ in thy hand than a wing [?] in the pot of other people; and better is a sheep that is at hand * Cf. Sirach xxii. 14, 15; Prov. XXVii. 3. * Cf. Eccles. vii. 1,2. Apparently the sentiments of Ecclesiastes are contradicted. ARABIC 41 O my son! teach thy son frugality and hunger, that he may do well in the manage- ment of his household. O my son! teach not to the ignorant the language of wise men, for it will be bur- densome to him. O my son! display not thy condition to thy friend, lest thou be despised by him. O my son! the blindness of the heart is more grievous than the blindness of the eyes, for the blindness of the eye may be guided little by little, but the blindness of the heart is not guided, and it leaves the straight path, and goes in a crooked way. O my son! the stumbling of a man with his foot is better than the stumbling of a man with his tongue. O my son! a friend who is near is better than a more excellent brother who is far away. Syr. A than a heifer that is far off: and better is poverty that gathers than wealth that scatters; and better one sparrow in thy hand than a thousand on the wing: and better is a woollen coat on thy back than fine linen and silks on the backs of others.
52.  My son, restrain a word in thy heart, and it shall be well with thee ; because when thou hast exchanged thy word, thou hast lost thy friend.
53.  My son, let not a word go forth from thy mouth, until thou hast taken counsel within thy heart: because it is better fora man to stumble in his heart than to stumble with his tongue.
54.  My son, if thou hear an evil matter, put it seven fathoms deep underground. 855 My son, tarry not where there is contention: for from strife arises murder.
56.  My son, every one who does not judge right judgement angers God. 51 Myson, remove? not from thy father’s friend, lest perchance thy friend come not near to thee.
58.  My son, go not down into princes’ gardens, and draw not near to princes’ daughters.
59.  My son,aid thy friend before the ruler, that thou mayst find 1 Cf. Teaching of Apostles, ‘Be not angry: for anger leads to murder: nor contentious ᾿. ? A slight textual correction. ARABIC gathers is better than the scattering of much provision ; and a living fox is better than a dead lion ; and a pound of wool is better than a pound of wealth, I mean of gold and silver ; for the gold and the silver are hidden and covered up in the earth, and are not seen; but the wool stays in the markets and it is seen, and it is a beauty to him who wears it. 50 Onmyson! asmall fortune is better than a scattered fortune. 51 Omy son! a living dog is better than a dead poor man. 52 O my son! a poor man who does right is better than a rich man who is dead in sins. 53 O my son! keep a word in thy heart, and it shall be much to thee, and beware lest thou reveal the secret of thy friend. 54 Omyson! let not a word issue from thy mouth till thou hast taken counsel with thy heart. And stand not betwixt persons quarrelling, because from a bad word there comes a quarrel, and from a quarrel there comes war, and from war there comes fighting, and thou wilt be forced to bear witness; but run from thence and rest thyself. 55 O my son! withstand not a man stronger than thyself, but get thee a patient spirit, and endurance and an up- right conduct, for there is nothing more excellent than that. 56 O my son! hate not thy first friend, for the second one may not last. 5] O my son! visit the poor in his affliction, and speak of him in the Sultan’s presence, and do thy diligence to save him from the mouth of the lion, 736 5-59 ARMENIAN Son, boast not in the day of 4 thy youth, lest thy youth be thy destruction. Son, suffer not thy companion 4; to tread on thy feet, lest he should presume and tread on thy neck! as well. Son, speak not in wrath with 4 thine adversary before the judge, lest thou be called senseless? and foolish. But whatever he asks thee, answer him with sweetness ; and thou wilt heap up his judgement on his head. Son, if thou petitionest God 4 for good, first fulfil His will with fasting and prayer, and then are fulfilled thy petitions unto thy good. Son, a good name is better than a face that excites longing. For beauty is destroyed *, but a good name endureth for ever. Son, it is better to be blind 51 of eye than blind of mind; for he that is blind of eye is quick to learn the coming and going of the road. But the blind in mind forsakes the straight road, and walks according to his will. Son, a side-bone in thy own 52 hand is better than a fat lamb in the hand of others. A sparrow in thy hand is better than a thousand fluttering in the air. A kid for a feast* in thy own house is better than a steer in the house of others. Son, it is better to garner with δ᾽ poverty ὅ than to squander with riches. Son, curse not thy son, until thou seest his end; and reject him not in scorn, until thou behold his latter end and earn- ings. Son, examine the word in thy heart and then utter it. For if thou alter the word, thou art a fawner. 1 Bodl. add ‘ and head’. 2 Bodl.: ‘lest thou appear sense- less and unprofitable.’ Syr. A out how thou mayst help him from the lion. My son, rejoice not over thy enemy when he dieth. My son, when thou seest a man who is stronger than thy- self, rise up before him. My son, if the waters should stand up without earth, and the sparrow fly without wings, and the raven become white as snow, and the bitter become sweet as honey, then may the fool become wise. My son, if thou art a priest of God, be thou ware of Him and enter His presence in purity, 60 not. My son, him that God pros- pers do thou also honour. My son, strive not? with a man in his day, and stand not against a river in its flood.” My son, the eye of man is like a fountain of water, and it is not satisfied with riches until filled with dust. My son, if thy will is to be wise, refrain thy tongue from lying, and thy hand from theft, and thou shalt become wise. 64 =?
68.  My son, have no part in the espousal of a woman; for if it _ shall go ill with her, she will curse thee; and ifit shall go well with her, she will not remember thee
69.  My son, he that is elegant in his dress is elegant also in his speech, and he that is con- ? Lit. ‘judge not ’. ? Cf. Sirach iv. 26. 1105,2 and from His presence remove 58 64 ARABIC O my son! rejoice not in the death of thine enemy, for after a little while thou shalt be his neighbour, and him who mocks thee do thou respect and honour and be be- forehand with himin greeting. O my son! if water would stand still in heaven, and a black crow become white, and myrrh grow sweet as honey, then ignorant men and fools might understand and _ be- come wise. O my son! if thou desire to be wise, restrain thy tongue from lying, and thy hand from stealing, and thine eyes from beholding evil ; then thou wilt be called wise. O my son! let the wise man beat thee with a rod, but let not the fool anoint thee with sweet salve. Be humble in thy youth and thou shalt be honoured in thine old age. O my son! withstand not a man in the days of his power, nor a river in the days of its flood. O my son! be not hasty in the wedding of a wife, for if it turns out well, she will say, ‘My lord, make pro- vision for me’; and if it turns out ill, she will rate at him who was the cause of it. (O my son! whosoever is elegant in his dress, he is the same in his speech; and he ARMENIAN Son, if thou hearest an evil 56 word about any one, hide it in thy heart seven fathoms deep ; so that the evil die and the good be fulfilled. Son, do thou not scoff frivo- 57 lously ; for the frivolous scoff is a quarrel, and the quarrel is slaying and death. Son, the false word and the 58 false conversation is heavy as lead; but after a few days it floats upon the waters, like the leaf of a tree. Son, reveal thy lesser counsel 59 to thy friend, and after days irritate him and flout him. And! if he does not reveal that counsel, then reveal to him thy greater counsels, and thou keep- est him a trusty friend. Son, in the presence of kings 60 and judges, be helpful to thy comrade; for, as it were from the mouth of a lion, dost thou rescue him; and he becometh to thee a good name and a glory. Son, if thy enemy come to 61 thy foot, grant him pardon and laugh with joy to his face and receive him with honour. Son, where thou art not in- 62 vited, go not unto a festival; and where they ask thee not, give no answer. Son, over a river frozen and 63 swollen pass thou not, lest thou die a sudden death. Son, ask of a wise man words 64 of advice*, and thou shalt be made wise. But if thou ask a foolish man, in spite of many words, he is not wise. Son, if thou sendest a wise 65 man to give any command, he himself fulfils the matter. But if thou sendest a fool, give the command in the presence of many men. And do thou either go thyself or not send him. Son, test thy son in hunger 66 and thirst; and if he is able to bear it, then give thy riches into his hands. 1 Bodl. ‘and see, if’ and below ‘and keep him’, &c. 2 Bodl. § words of wisdom ’. 3B o fe ὙΠ! SYRIAC temptible in -his dress is con- temptible also in his speech. My son, if thou shalt find a find before an idol, offer the ido] its share of it.? My son, the hand that was satisfied and is now hungry will not give, nor the hand that was hungry and is now satisfied. My son, let not thine eyes look upon a woman that is beau- tiful; and be not inquisitive into beauty that does not belong to thee: because many have perished through the beauty of woman, and her love has been as a fire that burneth. My son, let the wise man strike thee with many blows, and let not the fool salve thee with sweet salve.” My son, let not thy foot run after thy friend, lest he be sur- feited with thee and hate thee. My son, put not a gold ring on thy finger, when thou hast not [wealth] *, lest fools make mock of thee.’ This is the teaching which Ahikar taught to Nadan his sister’s son. 1 This sentence cannot be of Christian or Moslem origin. ? Cf. Ps. cxli. 5, ‘ Let the righteous smite me,’ &c. 5 Or ‘ when it is not thine’. 65 Son+, love thy flesh and thy wife. extreme labour she nurtures thy son.® Son, if thy lord send thee to bring a dunged grape, bring it not to him; for he will eat the grape, yet not let thee off punishment for the dung. Son, the word of a wise man in drink is better than the word of a fool that is thirsty or sober.® Better is an upright slave than one free but false. far away. ARABIC who has a mean appearance in his dress, he also is the same in his speech.) O my son! if thou hast committed a theft, make it known to the Sultan, and give him a share of it, that thou mayst be delivered from him, for otherwise thou wilt endure bitterness. O my son! make a friend of the man whose hand is satisfied and filled, and make no friend of the man whose hand is closed and hungry. There are four things in which neither the king nor his army can be secure: oppression by the vizier, and bad government, and per- version of the will, and tyranny over the subject ; and four things which can- not be hidden : the prudent, and the foolish, and the rich, and the poor.’ ARMENIAN ARMENIAN Son, from the house of invi- 67 tation and from the wedding go first before thy fellow, and return not again’; that thou mayst get thy boon fragrant 3 and mayst get no wounds on the head. Son, a man who has many 68 possessions and chattels, they call him wise and virtuous; but one who has few chattels they call a fool and of no account, and no man honoureth him. Son, I have eaten endive and ὁ I have drunk gall, and it was not more bitter than poverty. I have lifted salt, and I have lifted lead, and it was not heavier than is debt. For though I ate and drank, I could not rest *, I have lifted iron and I have lifted stones upon my shoulders, and it was better for me, than to dwell with the ignorant and the fool. Son, if thou be poor among 70 thy fellows, reveal it not; lest thou be despised by them, and they hearken not unto thy words. 1 Perhaps the sense is ‘and stay not till the last’. * Canon: ‘that thou mayst be anointed with fragrant oil, ἅς. Compare the Syriac. Other texts read; ‘that thou mayst get a good name.’ 5 Canon adds: ‘until I repaid the debt.’ For she is thyself and the companion of thy life, and even by Better is a friend near at hand than a brother — Son, reveal not thy secret counsel to thy wife. For she is weak and small of soul, and she reveals it to the powerful, and thou art despised. Son, if thou drinkest wine, keep thy tongue from much speaking, and it is well for thee and thou art called wise. Son, without a schedule and witness, give not up thy property, lest the other deny it and thou regret it. Son, forsake not thy friend, lest thou find not another sharer of thy counsel and friend. Son, love thy father who begat thee, and incur not the curse of thy father and mother, so that thou mayst rejoice in the prosperity of thy sons. * This precept, no. 41 in the series of Paris 58, is not in Ven. 5 p aris 58 here repeats precept 15. ® The Armenian text must be faulty here. * Nos. 77 and 79 are only given in Paris 58. ARMENIAN
79.  Son, it is better if they steal thy goods, than that they detect theft in thee.
80.  Son, if God prosper a man in his undertakings, do thou honour him. And whenever thou beholdest an aged man, do thou rise and stand up before him and magnify him. Son, oppose not thyself to a wealthy man and to a river in flood. For the eyes of a grasping man are not filled? except with dust *.
82.  Son, do thou not bring about a betrothal match, for they see the good to be from God and from _ luck; but the bad is traced to thee, and they call thee an intriguing person ὃ.
83.  Son, if the rivers pause in their courses or the sun in its career, or if the gall become sweet as honey, or the raven turn white as the dove, even so will the senseless man abandon his want of sense and the fool become sensible.
84.  Son, go not on foot * too often to the house of thy friend, lest he hate thee.
85.  Son, a dog that leaves his master and follows after thee, pursue him with stones °. Son, good deeds and a pure offering are pleasing to God; and do thou fear shame as thou fearest God. Son, the taking of an evil counsel into thy heart is the antagonism of the dev®; and endurance is the foundation of deeds and the rampart of faith.
88.  Son, that which seems evil unto thee do not to thy companion; and what is not thine own, give not unto others. Son, love the truth and hate lawlessness and? falsehood. Give ear unto the commandments of God, and fear not the evil one. For the commandment of God is the rampart of man. o Son, flee from a man that is evil and speaketh falsely; for avarice is the mother of all evils, and all evils are engendered of impudence. Son, love not judgement*; for even if thou get the better of thine adversary, yet be in fear of the judgement of God. Son, he that is upright in mind is the sun giving light, and he that is treacherous in heart is gloomy with darkness, and he that is generous in heart is full of pity. He that is grasping, even though he has aught, is nevertheless dull of wit.
93.  Son’, into the house of a drunkard enter not; and if thou enter, tarry not ; for in thy habits thou _ remainest empty and idle.
94.  Son, malign not thy fellow whether near or at a distance; for evil words will quickly reach the _ master and lead to quarrels 1),
95.  Son, God hath ordained wine for the sake of gladness, but in the place of a brothel or in any other low and unsuitable place, it is better to drink muck than wine". § Son, a drunken man thinks in his mind thus: I am brave, and everything that I say, I say wisely. He does not know that if he meets with a man of courage, he will throw him at the first touch of his hands flat on the ground and drag him. (Son, if thou behold thine enemy fallen, do thou sorrow over him, that thou mayst make a friend of him ; but if thou mock at him, when he gets up again he will requite thee with evil 12.) 8 Son, a drunken man thinks that the earth whirls round; in his going he knows not that his head is deranged ; for as the earth is the mother of all plants and fruit-bearing things, so wine is the mother of all evils; it doth cause men to be sick with divers sicknesses, and to slay others without mercy; it deranges the man and changes his nature into that of a brute. y Son, flee from guaranteeing ; but if thou become a guarantor, make up thy mind that thou must give away out of thy purse; and not thy purse only, but the hair off thy chin "3, © Son, be thou not false in speech ; for if they find thee to be once false, then when thou speakest the truth, they will reckon thee false and will not believe thee 14, or And I say to Nadan: Son, receive into thy mind my precepts and forget them not. 1 Paris 69 adds ‘ with treasure ’. . ? Paris 58 om. 81. Paris 69 has ‘ are not filled with treasure, but are filled with dust’. * The Armenian is obscure here. * Canon adds ‘ on foot’. 5 Bodl., Ven. add: ‘ which is πoῖ. Canon omits. © Or to the dev, a Persian word which in Old Armenian usually means a demon. 7 Ven. om. ‘ lawlessness and’. ® Canon adds ‘ of injustice ’. * Nos. 93-100 are only given in Codex Paris 58 and Venet. Codex Paris 58 gives this precept in late and obscure Armenian, and its text is clearly faulty. ti Ven. adds this: ‘A drunken man is like an arrow in the hollow (lit. “ palate”) of a bow, which strikes no one else, but bruises its own head.’ 12 This precept has already come as no. 11, in almost identical language. 13 This precept is in bad late Armenian and give the sense of the last clause conjecturally. % This precept also is in late Armenian. 739 3B2 ARMENIAN The questions! of the king’s sons and the answer of Khikar. Houday and Baliayn asked questions of Khikar, and Khikar said to Nathan: There are four things that increase the light to man’s eyes,—to look upon flowers, to tread with naked foot on the green, to walk upon the water, and to see one’s friend.
102.  Four things are there which make a man fat and keep him healthy,—to wear linen and to hear such things as seem to him pleasant; in the house an amiable and healthy spirit, and to see one’s remote (friend) well off.
103.  And four things are there which improve a man’s banquet,—at all times to converse well, not to give answer to every word, to be humble, to talk little, modesty in small matters and big ones.
104.  And four things are there which bring shame to one’s face—domination of love, to talk too much and to boast that one knows what one does not know, (to conceal everything, to weave a snare and fall into it) 5, and false-speaking.
105.  They asked the sage and said: What is the most pleasing thing on earth? He replied: Modesty. He that hath a modest face is pleasing. For all evils are born of impudence and folly. ' The passage which follows until the resumption of the narrative is written in vulgar Armenian. the names thus: Shoutay and Bayilan. * Ven. omits the words in brackets. SYRIAC But I, Ahikar, supposed that everything which I had been teaching Nadan he took hold of in his heart, and that he stood in my stead in the king’s gate ; and I knew not that Nadan listened not to my words, but scattered them, as it were to the wind, and returned and said that ‘my father Ahikar is grown old, and stands at the door of his grave; and his intelligence has withdrawn and his understand- ing is diminished’ ; 31 ARABIC 3 1 Thus spake Haiqdr, and when he _ had finished these injunctions and pro- verbs to Nadan, his sister’s son, he imagined that he would keep them all, and he knew not that instead of that he was displaying to him weariness and contempt and mockery. Thereafter HaiqAr sat still in his house and delivered over to Nadan all his goods, and the slaves, and the hand- maidens, and the horses, and the cattle, and everything else that he had possessed and gained; and the power of bidding and of forbidding remained in the hand of Nadan; and Haigéar sat at rest in his house, and every now and then Haiqar went and paid his respects to the king, and returned home. Now when Nadan perceived that the power of bidding and of forbidding was in his own hand, he despised the positionof Haiqdr.and scoffed at him, and set about blam- Ven. gives ARMENIAN And* this wastheadvice which I taught to Nathan my sister's son. All this I taught to Nathan my sister’s son, I, Khikar, chief Notary of Senegerim the king. And so I supposed in my mind that the teaching and advice which I taught to Nathan would abide and remain and that he would preserve it in his mind. And I knew not that he despised my words, and scattered them like the chaff before the wind, supposing in his mind that Khikar his father was grown very old and had arrived at the door of his tomb. His mind (he said) is distraught and his thoughts are deficient and he knows nothing. ἃ What follows is in MS. Canon given in a form which often more nearly resembles the Syriac than do the better Armenian copies, as below : All this I taught to Nathan my sister’s son, thus thinking that what I taught he kept in his heart and would live in the royal gate. the wind. Forthwith he began to waste my chattels and my possessions. slaves maidservants nor even my darlings and my friends, but bound and ill-treated them ; wounded with violent blows and destroyed my steeds continually. 740 And I knew not that he scorned my words, and scattered them like dust before He spared not my slaves and SYRIAC and my son Nadan began [to ill-treat] my servants by beating them and slaughtering them and destroy- ing them; and he showed no mercy on my servants and my handmaidens though they were industrious and well-beloved and excellent; and my horses he slew and my good mules he ham- strung. So when I beheld me that my son Nadan was doing detestable things, I answered and said to him, ‘My son Nadan, touch not my property; my son, it is said in the proverb, “ What the hand did not acquire, the eye did not spare.”’ 4 Moreover I showed to Sennacherib my lord all these matters; and my iord spake on this wise: ‘As long as Ahikar lives, no man shall have power over his wealth.’ 5 Then when my son Nadan saw his brother Nebuzardan stand- ing in my house, he was very irate and he spake on this wise : ‘ My father Ahikar is grown old and his wits have waned ; [and as for his wise words, he despised them]'; hath he given his pos- sessions to Nebuzardan my brother, and hath he removed ; me from his house ?’
106.  When I, Ahikar, heard these _ things, I said, ‘Alas for thee, my wisdom, that my son Nadan has made insipid ; and as for my wise sayings, he has contemned them.’ Ὁ Probably a repetition from three lines lower down. ARABIC ing him whenever he ap- peared, saying, ‘My uncle Haiqar is in his dotage, and 2 he knows nothing now’; and he began to beat the slaves and the handmaidens, and to sell the horses and the camels and be spendthrift with all that his uncle Haiqar had owned. 3 And when Haigqar saw that he had no compassion on his servants nor onhis household, he arose and chased him from his house, and sent to inform the king that he had scattered his possessions and his pro- vision. 4 And the king arose and called Nadan and said to him: ‘Whilst Haiqdr re- mains in health, no one shall rule over his goods, nor over his household, nor over his 5 possessions.” And the hand of Nadan was lifted off from his uncle Haiqar and from all his goods, and in the meantime he went neither in nor out, nor did he greet him. 6 Thereupon Haiqarrepented him of his toil with Nadan his sister’s son, and he con- tinued to be very sorrowful. And Nadan had a younger brother named Benuzardan, so Haiqar took him to him- self in place of Nadan, and brought him up and honoured ARMENIAN Nathan began to dissipate 2 my property to its loss, and spared not my servants and handmaids. But he tormented them and killed them, and cut about my horses and mules, and my steeds, and destroyed the very pick of the flock. And when I saw Nathan my 3 sister's son, that he was trans- forming my affairs and dissi- pating my property, I began to speak with him and 1 said: Keep away from my property, and come not near it, for it is written in the Proverbs that, whereon hands have not la- boured, that thing his eye spareth not. And I went and 4 told Senegerim my lord. And he called Nathan and said: As long as Khikar is alive, thou shalt not touch his property, In that season Nathan saw 5 Boudan? his brother, who had been brought up in my house, and said: Khikar my father is grown old and his words have lost their savour. And when I 6 heard this, I cast him out from all my belongings. 1 In Bodleian MS. Baudan. When I saw that Nathan counterfeited (ov metamorphosed) my affairs, then I spared my chattels lest he should ruin them. And I said to Nathan: Come not near my chattels, for it is said in the wise ones, that hands which have not been hard worked, the eye shall not spare. And the king ordered Nathan and said: As long as thy father Khikar is alive, go not near his possessions, but remain in the royal gate, and let thy father Khikar remain in his gate, and rest in his old age. I, Khikar, when I saw all this that Nathan did, I said in my heart: Alas! How hath Nathan despised my Sweet advice, and all my wisdom hath he set at naught and quite despised. And I went and told my lord Senegerim. SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN, him with the utmost honour. And he delivered over to him all that he possessed, and made him governor of his house. 4 Now when my son Nadan 7 Now when Nadanperceived But Nathan 7 heard thereof,he wasangry and — what had happened he was formed a plan of wickedness in seized withenvy and jealousy, his heart. He wrote inmyname and he began tocomplain to a letter' to the enemy of every one who questioned Seneqerim, the King of Nineveh him, and to mock his uncle and Asorestan; and it was as of Sennacherib my lord ; one to Haiqar, saying: ‘My uncle follows: Akhi, the son of Hamselim, king has chased me from his of Persia and Elam, as follows: house, and has preferred my brother to me, but if the Most High God give me the power, I shall bring upon him the misfortune! of being killed” And Nadan con- tinued to meditate as to the stumbling-block he might contrive for him. And after a while Nadan turned it over in his mind, and wrote a letter to Achish, son of Shah the Wise, king of Persia, say- ing thus; 8‘From Ahikar the Secretary 8 ‘Peace and health and I, Khikar, chief Notary of 8 and Great Seal of Sennacherib might and honour from Sen- Seneqerim the king, have sent king of Assyria and Nineveh, nacherib king of Assyria and to the King of the Egyptians to went to the gate of the king, and devised evil in his heart; and sat down and wrote two letters to two kings who were enemies greeting. When this letter Nineveh, and from his vizier this effect: When this writing 9 reaches thee, arise and come to. — and his secretary Haiqdrunto reaches thee, thou shalt muster Assyria to meet me; and I will _—‘ thee,Ogreatking! Lettherebe thy forces, and come to the plain — bring thee into Assyria,and thou peace between thee and me. of the Eagles on the twenty-_ shalt seize the kingdom without And when this letter reaches fifth day of the month Hrotitz, war.’ thee, if thou wilt arise and and I will put in your power the go quickly to the plain of land of the Asores, and will give Nisrin*, and to Assyria and the throne of Seneqerim into Nineveh, I will deliver up thy hand without trouble, for the kingdom to thee without thee to hold it. : war and_ without battle- array.’ 9 And he wrote another 9 And he wrote also another And he had made his hand- t letter, as follows: ‘To Pharaoh, letter in the name of Haiqar writing to resemble my hand- 1 Lit. ‘cast him into the mis- 1 There is evidently a lacuna here fortune’. to be filled up from the Bodley MS. — δ Nisrin may either mean ‘the as follows: ‘to Pharaoh, king of eagles’ or ‘the wild rose’. I prefer Egypt.’ _ the latter, because the usual plural of nasr is nusttr or ansur. Then Nathan went into the house of the king and planned very great evils for me. For he wrote two — letters. One he sent to Pharaon, king of Egypt, since he was an enemy of my lord Seneqerim, and it was written as follows : I, Khikar, notary of Seneqerim king of Asorestan and Nineveh, to Pharaon king of Egypt write. Be it in thy cognizance, when this dispatch reaches thee, at once shalt thou muster thy forces and come to the plain of ἘΜΕΙ͂Ο: on the twenty-fifth day of the month Hrotitz, and I will lead and make thee king over these without — trouble. And again a letter which had this form: From Senegerim, king, health (07 peace) to Khikar, notary of my tribunal. When there shall come to — SYRIAC king of Egypt, from Ahikar, Secretary and Great Seal of the king of Assyria and Nineveh, greeting. When this letter shall reach thee, arise and come to meet me at Eagles’ dale, which lieth to the south, on the twenty- fifth day of the month of Ab. And I will bring thee into Nineveh without war and thou And he made these writings of his like to my own handwriting ; and he sealed them in the king’s palace, and went his way. And he wrote further another letter to me, as if from my lord the king Sennacherib; and on this wise he wrote it: ‘From Sennacherib the King, to Ahikar, my Secretary and Great Seal, greeting. When this letter reaches thee, gather all thy forces together, to the rock that is called Sis: and come forth from thence and come to meet me at Eagles’ dale, which lieth to the south, on the twenty- fifth day of the month Ab. And when thou seest me approaching to thee, array thy forces against me, like a man that is ready for battle: for ambassadors of Pharaoh the king of Egypt are Io It 12 ARABIC to Pharaoh king of Egypt. ‘Let there be peace between thee and me, O mighty king! If at the time of this letter reaching thee thou wilt arise and go to Assyria and Nineveh to the plain of Nisrin, I will deliver up to thee the kingdom without war and without fighting.’ And the writing of Nadan was like to the writing of his uncle Haiqar. Then he folded the two letters, and sealed them with the seal of his uncle Haiqar ; they were nevertheless in the king’s palace. Then he went and wrote a letter likewise from the king to his uncle Haiqar: ‘Peace and health to my Vizier, my Secretary, my Chancellor, Haigar. O Haiqar, when this letter reaches thee, assemble all the soldiers who are with thee, and let them be perfect in clothing and in numbers, and bring them to me on the fifth day in the plain of Nisrin, and when thou shalt see me there coming towards thee, haste and make the army move against me as an enemy who would fight with me, for I have with me 9-12 ARMENIAN writing, and had sealed it with my seal. And when the forces of the king asked to go home to their homes, Nathan alone remained before the king, and said: O King, live for ever. I that have eaten bread and salt in thy house, God forbid that I should see evils before thee. Khikar my father, who was in honour and greatness before thee, hath lied to me and to thee, and hath taken the side of thy enemies. And the letter which Nathan had written in my words, and had likened his handwriting to my handwriting therein, he took, and read the dispatch which he himself had sealed, before the king. And when the king heard it, he was very much distressed, and said: What wrong have I done to Khikar, that he has so behaved to me? And at once Nathan wrote by the command of the king a letter thus con- ceived : When thou readest this writing, thou shalt muster thy hosts and shalt come to the plain of the Eagles on the twenty-fifth day of the month Hrotitz. And whenever thou thee this dispatch, thou shalt prepare my forces which are under thy hand; exactly on the twenty-fifth day of the month Hrotitz thou shalt come to meet me on the plain of Eagles. face to face against my forces, as if it were being prepared against thine enemies. are come unto me to see our forces and tremble. And this letter Nathan sent to me as if by the command of the king. And he himself, Nathan, stood before the king and said: King, live for ever. I should deceive my king. I have eaten bread and salt in thy house. And when thou comest near draw up For the envoys of Pharaon God forbid that For my father Khikar, whom thou didst send unto rest, unto honour, unto glory, hath not done according to the command of your kingship, but hath played false to God and your kingship. And he had given the letter to certain trusty men of the king, and they gave it to the sovereign ; and the sovereign gave it to Nathan and said: Read. And Nathan read it before the king; and the king was sorely troubled, and asked those who gave him the letter: Who gave into your hands this letter? And as Nathan had charged them, they answered with one mind, saying: Travellers that were going into Egypt. They had the letter, and we thy servants found them and took them by force. And when we asked them: Whence are ye? they answered, We are native slaves of Khikar. And the king was troubled and said to the trusty men: What harm then have I done to Khikar, that he hath devised such a snare for me? Wherefore hath he returned evil for good? Nathan replied and said: Be not troubled, O mighty king. But let us go to the plain of the Eagles, as is written in the dispatch, and let us see if it is so; then let thy behests be done. SYRIAC come to me, that they may see what forces I have.’ And my son Nadan sent this letter to me by the hands of two of the king’s servants. And thereupon my son Nadan took the letters that he had written, as if he had actually found them; and he read them before the king ; and when my lord the king heard them, he lamented and said, ‘O God, wherein have I sinned against Ahikar, that he should do unto me on this fashion ?’ And my son Nadan answered and said to the king, ‘ My lord, do not fret nor rage. Arise and let us go to Eagles’ dale on the day that is written by him in the letter. And if it be true, then all that thou commandest shall be done.’ So my son Nadan took the king my lord,and they came to me at Eagles’ dale: and they found me having with me great forces that were gathered there. And when I saw the king, I put my forces in array against him, as it was written in the letter. And when the king saw it, he was much afraid. ARABIC the ambassadors of Pharaoh king of Egypt, that they may see the strength of our army and may fear us, for they are our enemies and they hate us.’ 13 Then he sealed the letter and sent it to Haiq4r by one of the king’s servants. And he took the other letter which he had written and spread it before the king and read it to him and showed him the seal. And when the king heard what was in the letter he was perplexed with a great perplexity and was wroth with a great and fierce wrath, and said, ‘ Ah, I have shown my wisdom! what have I done to Haiqar that he has written these letters to my enemies? Is this my recompense from him for my 14 benefits to him?’ And Nadan said to him, ‘ Be not grieved, O king! nor be wroth, but let us go to the plain of Nisrin and see if the tale be true or not.’ 15 Then Nadan arose on the fifth day and took the king and thesoldiers and the vizier, and they went to the desert to the plain of Nisrin. And the king looked, and lo! Haiqdér and the army were set in array. And when Haiqar saw that the king was there, he approached and signalled to the army to move as in war and to fight in array against the king as it had been found in the letter, he not knowing what a pit Nadan had digged for him. And when the king saw the act of Haiqdr he was seized with anxiety and terror and perplexity, and was wroth And Nathan took the king and went to the plain of the Eagles. setting out of the king, prepared my forces and set them over against him, as had been written in the dispatch by behest of the king. ARMENIAN shalt see me, thou shalt draw up in battle array against me. For the messengers of Pharaon are come to me to see my hosts, He brought the letter to me, 13. _and he himself went to the king. He stood before the king and said : Grieve not, O ruler; butt! come, let us go to the plain of the Eagles, and let us see whether this be so. Then what thou commandest is done. And Senegerim took his army 1 and came to the plain of the Eagles, and found me with my army ; and I drew up my forces over against him as he had commanded. When the king saw this, he was very grieved. But I, Khikar, when I learned of the When the king saw my forces, he was sore troubled. The king said: If thou bringest Khikar before me, mighty presents will I give thee, and all the royal affairs shall be discharged by thee; for thou hast been found a trusty servant before me. And the king went back into his palace. , SYRIAC Then my son Nadan answered and said to him: ‘Let it not disturb thee, my lord the king. Return and come into thy cham- ber ' in peace : and I will bring Ahikar before thee.’ Then my lord the king return- ed to his house. And my son Nadan came to me and said to me, ‘All that thou hast done, thou hast done finely: and much hath the king praised thee ; and he commands thee to dismiss thy forces that they may go every man to his own place and his own district. And do thou come to me thy- self alone.’ Thereupon I came before the king, and when he saw me, he said unto me, ‘ Art thou come, Ahikar, my Secretary and the foster-child of Assyria and Nine- veh, thou whom I caused to come into honour? but thou hast turned back and taken the part of my enemies.’ Taking the word as equivalent of the Greek κοιτῶνα. ARABIC 16 with a great wrath. And Nadan said to him, ‘ Hast thou seen, O my lord the king! what this wretch has done? but be not thou wroth and be not grievednor pained, but go to thy house and sit on thy throne, and I will bring Haiqar to thee bound and chained with chains, and I will chase away thine enemy from thee without toil.’ And the king returned to his throne, being provoked about Haiqdr, and did no- 17 thing concerning him. And Nadan went to Haiqdr and said to him, ‘Wallah, O my uncle! The king verily rejoiceth in thee with great joy and thanks thee for having done what he com- manded thee. And now he hath sent me to thee that thou mayst dismiss the sol- diers to their duties! and come thyself to him with thy handsbound behind thee,and thy feet chained, that the ambassadors of Pharaoh may see this, and that the king may be feared by them and by their king. Then an- swered Haigqar and said, ‘To hear is to obey.’ And he arose straightway and bound his hands behind him, and 41chained his feet. And Nadan took him and went with him to the king. And when Haiqar entered the king’s presence he did obei- sance before him on the ground, and wished for power and perpetual life to the king. Then said the king, “Ὁ Haiqar, my Secretary, the Governor of my affairs, my Chancellor, the ruler of my State, tell me what evil 1 Lit. ‘to the way of their path’. ARMENIAN Nathan began to speak and 16 said: Grieve not, O king, but let us go home. And I will bring my father Khikar before thee. Theking said to Nathan: If thou bringest Khikar before me, I will give thee very great presents and I will set thee in trust over all my affairs. And all the affairs of my kingdom shall be transacted by thee with ability. And the king returned to his 17 palace, and Nathan my sister’s son came to me and said: Senegerim the king hath sent me to thee and says, Come to me and let us be joyful together. And when I went, the king said 4 1 to me: Khikar, Notary and wise man, thou wast my counsellor and ruler, and giver of commands of the house of the Asores and Ninevites; and thou hast gone over to the side of my enemies. And Nathan came to me and said: My father Khikar, very honourable and pleasing hath seemed to the king this preparing of thy cavalry in array. Therefore hath he sent me to thee and saith, All thou hast done thou hast done well and wisely. So then give orders to thy forces to go to their place, and do thou come and let us make merry together. SYRIAC 2 And he gave me those letters that were written in my name and were sealed with the seal of my own ring. And when I read them, my tongue stammered and my limbs became faint: and I sought for a single word from the words of wisdom and I found me none. 3 And my son Nadan answered and said to me, ‘ Away with thee from the king’s sight, thou foolish old man: and give thy hands to bonds and thy feet to iron fetters.’ Then Sennacherib the king turned away his face from me, and he talked with Nabuse- makh? ... and said to him, ‘Arise, go slay Ahikar, and separate his head a hundred ells from his body.’ 4 Then I fell on my face on the ground and worshipped the king, and I said, ‘ My lord the king, live for ever. Seeing, my lord, that it hath pleased thee to kill me, thy will be done. I know, however, that I have not sinned against thee. But 5 command them, my lord the king, that they kill me at the door of my house: and let them give my body to burial.’ 6 And the king said to Nabuse- makh? ..., ‘Go, kill Ahikar at the door of his house, and 1“Yabusemakh Meskin Kanti’, which I do not understand ; the cor- rection of the first part of the name is obvious. Possibly it should be ‘NabuSumuSkin, my colleague’. Compare the form as given in the papyrus, and in the Arabic. * Ut supra, ARABIC have I done to thee that thou hast rewarded me by this ugly deed” Then they showed him the letters in his writing and with his seal. And when Haigar saw this, his limbs trembled and_ his tongue was tied at once, and he was unable to speak a word from fear ; but he hung his head towards the earth and was dumb. And when the king saw this, he felt certain that the thing was from him, and he straight- way arose and commanded them to kill Haiqar, and to strike his neck with the sword outside of the city. 3 Then Nadan screamed and said, ‘O Haiqar, O black- face! what avails thee thy meditation or thy power in the doing of this deed to the king ?’ 4 Thus says the story-teller. And the name of the swords- man was Ibn Samik. And the king said to him, ‘O swordsman! arise, go, cleave the neck of Haiqar at the door of his house, and cast away his head from his body 5a hundred cubits. Then Haiqar knelt before the king, and said, ‘Let my lord the king live for ever! and if thou desire to slay me, let thy wish be [fulfilled]; and I know that I am not guilty, but the wicked man has to give an account of his wicked- ness; nevertheless, O my lord the king! I beg of thee and of thy friendship, permit the swordsman to give my body to my slaves, that they may bury me, and let thy slave be thy sacrifice.’ 6 The king arose and com- manded the swordsman to do with him according to his ARMENIAN And that letter, which Nathan) had written in my? words and had likened therein his hand- writing to my handwriting, the king gave unto me and said Take and read. And when I read it, all my limbs were? dissolved, and tongue was shrivelled up 28 parchment ; and I was stupefied and became like one of those distraught. I sought for a word of wisdom and found no answer to give. Nathan began to speak, : and said to me: Get out of the presence of thyking, grey-haired one, perverted and inane*®. Give thy hand for the iron and thy foot for the fetter. And th δi king turned away his face from me and said to Abusmagq, his nayip: Lead away and slay yon. godless Khikar, and remove his head afar, about one hundred ells. And I fell on my face and} kissed the earth and said: e King, live for ever. Thou hast willed me to slaying, and not hearkened unto my words. — And I from my heart know I have not in any way wronged — thee, and in my heart there is no guile. Iam innocent. Th fore have pity on me and orde that in my own house they can me and give over my body - burial. And the king ordered Abus- 6 maq, that they should slay me in my own house. And when 1 Ven. omits ‘ my’. ἢ 2 Bodl. = ‘all the flesh of my limbs was’, % The Arm. word is obscure. SYRIAC ᾿ give his body to burial.’ There- upon I, Ahikar, sent to Esh- fagni my wife that she should bring forth from the daughters of my tribe maids a thousand and one: ‘and let them put on raiment of mourning, and let them wail and lament and weep over me. And let them come to meet me, and let them make a funeral feast! over me before _Idie. And prepare thou bread and a table and a banquet for Nabusemakh®. . . and his Par- thians that are with him, and come to meet them, and receive them and bring them into my house. And I too will come into the house as a guest.’ And Eshfagni my wife, for that she was exceeding wise, understood all my message, and did whatsoever I had sent to her to do; and she came forth to meet them, and she brought them into my house: and they did eat bread, and with her own hand she served them, until they fell asleep from drunken- ness, every man in his place. 9 Thereat I, Ahikar,entered and said to Nabusemakh*, ‘ Look towards God, and remember the love that there was between us. brother: and grieve not over my death: and remember that thee also did Sarhadum the father of Sennacherib deliver to me that I should slay thee, yet. I slew thee not, because I was aware that there was in thee no ground of offence; and I kept thee alive until the king desired thee, and when I brought thee before him, * Lit. ‘a house of weeping ’. ? Yabusemakh. 3 Ut supra. who are with me. ARABIC desire. And he straightway commanded his servants to take Haigar and the swords- man and to go with him naked that they might slay him. And when Haiqar knew for certain that he was to be slain he sent to his wife
107.  and said to her, ‘Come out and meet me, and let there be with thee a thousand young virgins,and dress them in gowns of purple and silk that they may weep for me before my death. And pre- pare a table for the swords- man and for his servants. And mingle plenty of wine, that they may drink.’
108.  And she did all that he commanded her. And she was very wise, clever, and prudent. And she united all possible courtesy and learning. And when the army of the king and the swordsman arrived they found the table set in order, and the wine and the luxurious viands, and they began eating and drink- ing till they were gorged and drunken.
109.  Then Haigar took the swordsman aside apart from the company and said, ‘O Abu Samik, dost thou not know that when Sarhadum the king, the father of Sen- nacherib, wanted to kill thee. I took thee and hid thee in a certain place till the king’s anger subsided and he asked for thee? And when I brought thee into his presence he rejoiced in thee: and now remember the kindness I did ARMENIAN I went forth from the king, I wrote a letter lamenting to Abestan my wife and said: When this letter reaches thee, do thou send out to meet mea thousand virgins ; and let them put on apparel of mourning and let them mourn for me and bewail me, that I may see with my own eyes even the wailers who bewail me in my lifetime. But* thou shalt make large loaves, to give to my execu- tioners, and dainty viands for them to eat and drink. And Abestan my wife was 8 very wise and! fulfilled my orders. She went out to meet me, and led them into the house, and set before them a table; and fed them, and gave them to drink old wine and unmixt, till they were fuddled and were drunk and fell asleep. Then I 9 and my wife fell at the feet of Abusmaq weeping, and I said to him: Abusmaq, my comrade, look up to heaven and behold God with thy eyes; and re- member the bread and salt which we have eaten together, and remember how that they betrayed thee to Seneqerim the king’s father; and I took and kept thee until the king asked for thee, and how, when I led thee before him, he gave me 1 Paris 92 and 58 alone add the words ‘was... and’. * The narrative that follows is given in MS. Canon in a form more closely resembling the Syriac as below: And they shall make and prepare a table, adorned with all good things, for Abusmaq and the Parthians Thou shalt go out to meet these and shalt lead them into the house. And Arphestan my wife did immediately what I had commanded; and we set out to my house. And Abusmaq and the Parthians reclined, and my wife set before them a table, and waited on them. And I entered with them to eat bread ; and they were fuddled with wine. And I said to Abusmaq my comrade, Look up to heaven and discern God with thy eyes and remember the love of our brotherhood. And sin not against my blood, for thou knowest that I am innocent. But SYRIAC he gave me great gifts, and many presents did I carry off 1ofrom him. And do thou too, II 12 now, preserve me alive and recompense me this kindness : and in order that the word come not abroad that I was not killed and that the king may not quarrel with thee, behold, I have in my prison-housea slave, Mar- zifan hight, and he is due to die: clothe this slave in my raiment and rouse up the Parthians against him and they will slay him: and I shall not die, because I have done no wrong.’ And when I spake thus, more- over Nabusemakh!. . . also was sore grieved over me, and he took my raiments and clad in them the slave that was in the prison-house. And he roused up the Parthians, and they arose in the fumes? of their wine, and they slew him and removed his head a hundred ells from his corse, and they gave over his body for burial. Then went forth the report in Assyria and Nineveh, that Ahikar the Secretary is killed. And Nabusemakh®. .. rose up, and Eshfagni my wife,and they made for me ἃ hiding-place underground ; its breadth was three cubits and its height five cubits, under the threshold of the 13 doorof my house. And they put bread and water with me, and went and showed to Senna- cherib the king that Ahikar, the Secretary, was dead: and when the men heard it, they wept; and the women disfigured‘ their 1 Ut supra. 2 Lit. ‘ taste’. 8 Ut supra. * Lit. ‘ scratched ’. Io ἘΣ 13 ARABIC thee. And I know that the king will repent him about me and will be wroth with a great wrath about my exe- cution. For I am not guilty, and it shall be when thou shalt present me before him in his palace, thou shalt meet with great good fortune, and know that Nadan my sister’s son has deceived me and has done this bad deed to me, and the king will repent of having slain me; and now 1 have a cellar in the garden of my house, and no one knows of it. Hide me in it with the knowledge of my wife. And I havea slave in prison who deserves to be killed. Bring him out and dress him in my clothes, and command the servants when they are drunk to slay him. They will not know who it is they are killing. And cast away his head a hundred cubits from his body, and give his body to my slaves that they may bury it. And thou shalt have laid upa great treasure with me.’ And then the swordsman did as Haigar had commanded him, and he went to the king and said to him, ‘ May thy head live for ever!’ Then Haiqar’s wife let down to him in the hiding-place every week what sufficed for him, and no one knew of it but herself. And the story was reported and repeated and spread abroad 9:19 ARMENIAN mighty gifts. Now therefore re keep me and render to me a return of the service I rendered thee, and to thee there will be mighty gifts as thy requital, good for good!. I have a man in prison, and very like unto me is he. He shed blood in my house and is under sentence of death, and his name is Seniqar, Take therefore my garments into the prison and dress him up in them and slay him; and so thou fulfillest the king’s command. And when I said this, Abus- 1 maq had pity on me, and did my will and what I told him. And the soldiers, fuddled, woke — up from sleep? at midnight, and slew Seniqar my slave, and re- moved his head from him one hundred ells. And the news1r went forth into the city of ? Asorestan, that Khikar, Notary and wise man, was dead. Then Abusmaq my comrade and Abestan my wife made me a house dug out underground, its® length seven ells, and its height equal to my head’s, hard by the door-posts of my house. a om And they shut me in and ee 3 beside me bread and water, and then Abusmaq went off to the king and told him that ‘ Khikar the wise is slain’. And all who heard of my death beat their breasts and were full of regret 1 Bodl. has will be a requital from” God’: Paris 92, ‘will be mighty gifts’. I render the Ven. MS. * So Ven. and Paris 92: the rest = ‘fuddled with wine, woke up at’. 3 Canon =‘ its height three ells and its length seven ells, equal to (o7 level with) the door-posts of my house’. remember also this, that the sire of Seneqerim gave thee into my hands for slaying ; and I wronged thee not, And I kept thee until the king made a request; and then I led thee for I knew that thou wast innocent. before the king, and the king gave me mighty gifts. slave whose name is Séniphar, and very like is he unto me. This do thou likewise and slay me not. And he is in prison, because he is under There is my sentence of death. So then lead me into prison and dress him up in my garments and cast him to the Parthians, for them to slay him. . . . 748 4 * ΞΥΕΙΑΟ faces and said: ‘ Alas for thee, Ahikar the wise Secretary, thou fence of the breaches of our country: for like thee there will never be any one to us.’ 4 Then Sennacherib the king called my son Nadan, and said to him. ‘Go make a funeral feast! for thy father Ahikar, and then return to me.’ 5 And when Nadan my son came, no funeral feast did he make for me, nor any remembrance at all; but gathered him the vain and lewd folk, and set them down at my table, with singing and with great joy; and my beloved ser- vants and handmaidens he stripped and flogged without mercy. 16 Nor had he any reve- rence for my wife Eshfagni, but sought to do with her the way of man with woman. 17 And I, Ahikar, was cast into darkness in the pit beneath. And I was hearing the voice of my bakers, cooks, and butlers as they wept and sobbed within my house. * Lit. ‘a house of weeping’. ARABIC in every place of how Haigar the Sage had been slain and was dead, and all the people of that city mourned for him. And they wept and said: ‘Alas for thee, O Haigar! and for thy learning and thy courtesy! How sad about thee and about thy know- ledge! Where can another like thee be found? and where can there be a man so intelligent, so learned, so skilled in ruling as to re- semble thee that he may fill thy place ?’ But the king was repenting about Haigdr, and his re- pentance availed him naught. 14 Then he called for Nadan and said to him, ‘Go and take thy friends with thee and make a mourning and a weeping for thy uncle Haigqar, and lament for him as the custom is, doing honour to 15 his memory. But when Nadan, the foolish, the ignor- ant, the hard-hearted, went to the house of his uncle, he neither wept norsorrowed nor wailed, but assembled heart- less and dissolute people and set about eating and drink- ing. And Nadan began to seize the maidservants and the slaves belonging to Hai- qar, and bound them and tortured them and drubbed them with a sore drubbing. 16 And he did not respect the wife of his uncle, she who had brought him up like her own boy, but wanted her to fall 17 into sin with him. But Haiqdr had been cast into the hiding-place, and he heard the weeping of his slaves and his neighbours, and he praised the Most High God, the Merciful One, 749 13-17 ARMENIAN and said: Alas for thee, O Notary! Whois there to decide the matters of thy kingdom with thy ability ? Then the king called Nathan 14 and said to him: Go, make lamentations for the house and mourning for thy father. Na- 15 than* came, and instead of lamenting he gathered together actors, and made great cheer ; and he very cruelly tormented my servants and handmaids. And even for Abestan my wife 16 he had no respect, but desired to fornicate with her, that had brought him up. And I from my subterranean chamber heard the weeping and groanings and the plaints of my servants. And 17 I moreover wept and my soul longed for a little bread and a morsel of meat andacup. And I was destitute of all my chattels, * MS. Canon has the narrative which follows in a form nearer to the Syriac. It is given below: And Nathan went off to the house of Khikar, but with him there was no concern for mourning. And’ he collected all his dear ones to drink wine and made great good cheer, instead of mourning as the king commanded. Using force to the dear ones of Khikar he tortured them and had no respect for Arphestan wife of Khikar, nay rather desired to fornicate with her. And I, Khikar, was hearing the voice of my stewards whom Nathan tortured and ill-treated. And I was My soul was longing for bread and a morsel of meat. SYRIAC 18 And after a few days came Nabusemakh'. . . and opened [ey prison] over me? and com- orted me; and set before me bread and water ; and I said to him, ‘When thou goest forth from me, remember me before God, and say, O God, just and righteous, and that showest grace upon the earth, hear the voice of Thy servant Ahikar,® and remember that he sacrificed to Thee fatted oxen like sucking 19 lambs. And now he is cast into the darksome pit where he seeth no light. And dost Thou not save him that crieth unto Thee? O Lord, hear the voice of my colleague,‘ [I pray Thee.’] Now when Pharaoh, king of Egypt, heard that I, Ahikar, had been slain, he was greatly rejoiced, and he wrote a letter to Sennacherib on this wise : nN ‘Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to Sennacherib, king of Assyria and Nineveh, greeting. I am planning to build a castle be- tween heaven and earth, where- fore seek out and send me from thy kingdom a man who is a skilled architect, that he may give me reply concerning all 3 that I shall ask him. And when thou shalt send me such a man, I will collect and send thee the revenue of Egypt for three » Ut supra. ? Lit. ‘on my eyes’. * Cf. Apoc. vi. 10, ‘ How long, O Lord, holy and true,’ &c. * This trifling but necessary emend- ation confirms our interpretation (vide supra) of the corrupt name. ARABIC and gave thanks, and he always prayed and besought the Most High God. 18 And the swordsman came from time to time to Haiqar whilst he was in the midst of the hiding-place: and Haiqar came and entreated him. And he comforted him and wished him deliverance. 19 And when the story was reported in other countries that Haiqar the Sage had been slain, all the kings were grieved and despised king Sennacherib, and they la- mented over Haiqdr the solver of riddles. And when the king of Egypt had made sure that Haiqar was slain, he arose straightway and wrote a letter to king Sen- nacherib, reminding him in it ‘of the peace and the health and the might and the honour which we wish specially for thee, my beloved 2 brother, king Sennacherib. I have been desiring to build a castle between the heaven and the earth, and I want thee to send mea wise, clever man from thyself to build it for me, and to answer me all my questions, and that I may have the taxes! and the cus- tom duties of Assyria for three years.’ Then he sealed Δ i.e. taxes in kind, agricultural produce. For this rendering of the Arabic word, see Dozy, vol. ii, p. 345. ARMENIAN And all the inhabitants of Asorestan and of Nineveh fled from me. When the king of Egypt: heard this, of how Khikar the Notary was dead, and of the Ninevites and all the land (that) they were fled, he was very glad. And the king of Egypt, Pharaon, wrote a letter as follows: To Senegerim, king of the Asores. Health be to thy Lord- ship and Kingship. Beit known to thee that I desire to build a palace hung betwixt heaven and earth. Look and send unto me a true and clever and wise man who can build, and also give answer to any question I ask. If however thou shalt neglect this request, then I will come And when Pharaon heard that Khikar was slain, he was very glad, and wrote a dispatch to the king Senegerim, riddles. And the king called Nathan and said: Write an answer to this letter. And Nathan said: Difficult is this matter. Who is able to give answer thereto ἢ And the king was distressed and said: Alas for Khikar my secretary and wise man! And when Pharaon learned that they could not give an answer to his writing, he sent puissant forces and they took tribute from Seneqerim. And as long as Khikar languished in the prison, the burden of Pharaon was multiplied on Asorestan and Nineveh. Those who were under the hand of Seneqerim also were much impoverished and all the land laid waste, and the chambers of the royal treasury were emptied. 75° SYRIAC years: and if thou send me not a man who shall give me reply concerning all that I ask him, then do thou collect and send me the tribute of Assyria and Nineveh for three years, by the hands of these ambassadors that come to thee.’ And when this letter was read before the king, he cried out to all the nobles and franklins of his kingdom, and said unto them: ‘ Which of you will go to Egypt to give reply to the king concerning all that he shall ask him? And he shall build him the castle that he planneth, and bring back the three years’ tri- bute of Egypt and come hither.’ And when the nobles heard this, they answered and said unto the king: ‘My lord the king, thou knowest that not only in the years of thy reign, but also in the years of thy father Sar- hadum, Abikar the Secretary was in the habit of resolving questions like these. And now, also, behold his son Nadan, he is instructed in his father’s book- lore and wisdom.’ And when my son Nadan heard these things, he cried out before the king and said: ‘ The gods them- selves cannot do things like these; let alone men’! And when the king heard 1 Cf. Dan. ii. 11. _ Khikar. And the king said: Alas for Khikar, secretary and wise man ! many chattels would I give him, even to the half of my kingdom. And Abusmaq revealed it not to the king, that he might be in stress and know the value to him of THE STORY OF AHIKAR 5. ARABIC the letter and sent it to Sen- 3 nacherib. He took it and read it and gave it to his viziers and to the nobles of his kingdom, and they were perplexed and ashamed, and he was wroth with a great wrath, and was puzzled about 4 how heshouldact. Then he assembled the old men and the learned men and the wise men and the philosophers, and the diviners and the astrologers, and every one who was in his country, and read them the letter and said to them, ‘ Who amongst you will go to Pharaoh king of Egypt and answer him his 5 questions?’ And they said to him, ‘O our lord the king ! know thou that there is none in thy kingdom who is ac- quainted with these questions except Haigar, thy vizier and 6 secretary. Butas for us, we have no skill in this, unless it be Nadan, his sister’s son, for he taught him all his wisdom and learning and knowledge. Call him to thee, perchance he may untie this hard knot.’ Then the king called Nadan and said to him, ‘Look at this letter and understand what is in it. And when Nadan read it, he said, ‘O my lord! who is able to build a castle between the heaven and the earth?’ 7 And when the king heard Surely then not men? 751 5. ἢ ARMENIAN and take away thy kingdom and will lay waste thy land. When 4 the king heard this he was very grieved, and sent and mustered his satraps to ask their advice, saying: What shall we do? The! satraps say: O King, who 5 else can answer this question except Nathan, who hath learned of Khikar and knoweth his lore and hath been brought up in his house? He will be able to give an answer to this de- mand which the king of Egypt hath written. Then the king called Nathan and showed him the counsel; and he gave him the dispatch, and Nathan read it. When he had read aloud 6 the letter, he cried out with a loud voice and said: This? is a matter which even the gods* cannot settle or give answer to. How shall I be able to give answer ? When the king heard, he rose 7 1 Canon: ‘And they perplexed said: To such a matter Khikar would give an answer, and now Nathan who is in his place.’ 2 Canon: ‘ Such a matter the gods cannot answer, much less men. When the king heard, he was sorely troubled; He roses... 37 3 The Arm. word used is dgz, i. e. the devs. One who should give thee to me alive, And Pharaon sent a dispatch to king Seneqerim which had this tenor: From Pharaon to Senegerim, health. I desire to build a palace. .. . : This when Nathan heard, he cried with a loud voice and said: King, live for ever. the gods could not make answer to. F When the king heard this he was very distressed. He rose from his throne and sat on sackcloth, beat his Such a matter as that SYRIAC these words, he was much per- turbed, and he descended from his throne and sat on the ground, and spake thus:! ‘Alas for thee, Ahikar the wise, that I destroyed thee for the words of a boy! Who will give thee to me for such a time as this? I would give him thy weight in gold.’ And when Nabusemakh?... heard these words, he fell down before the king and said to him: ‘He who has contemned the commandment of his lord, is guilty of death ; and I, my lord, have contemned the command of thy kingship. Command, therefore, that they crucify me. 1 Cf. Ezek. xxvi. 16 κaὶ καταβήσονται ἀπὸ tῶn θρόνων αὐτῶν πάντες oἱ ἄρχον- Tes... ἐπὶ γῆn καθεδοῦνται... κaὶ ; NN SOAS Inte pty eee στενάξουσιν ἐπὶ σέ κaὶ λήψονται ἐπὶ σὲ θρῆνον κaὶ ἐροῦσίν σoi... . 2 Ut supra. person and said: Alas for Khikar, able notary and wise! On the words of a lying man I slew him. There And there is no successor like thee in the royal gate. is none like thee. weigh him against gold and buy thee. Khikar, and now he is still alive. ARABIC the speech of Nadan he sor- rowed with a great and sore sorrow,andstepped downfrom histhroneandsat in the ashes. and began to weep and wail over Haiqar, saying, ‘O my grief! O Haiqdr, who didst know the secrets and the riddles ! woe is me for thee, O Haiqar! O teacher of my country and ruler of my kingdom, where shall I find thy like? O Haiqdr, O teacher of my country, where shall I turn for thee? woe is me for thee! how did I destroy thee! and listened to the talk of a stupid, igno- rant boy without knowledge, without religion, without manliness. Ah! and again Ah for myself! who can give thee to me just for once, or bring me word that Haiqar is alive? and I would give him the half of my kingdom. Whence is thisto me? Ah, Haigar! that I might see thee just for once, that I might take my fill of gazing at thee, and delighting in thee. Ah! O my grief for thee to all time! O Haiqar, how have I killed thee! and I tarried not in thy case till Ihad seen the end of the matter.’ And the king went on weeping night and day. 8 Now when the swordsman saw the wrath of the king and his sorrow for Haigqar, his heart was softened to- wards him, and he ap- proached into his presence and said tohim: ‘O my lord! command thy servants to cut off my head.’ Then 1 B.M. MS. ‘is crucified’. 752 If any one gave thee to me, I would When Abusmaq learned the deep distress of the king, he said: My lord king, he that contemns the behests of his lord and fulfils them not is guilty of death. Now then this word of mine is fulfilled in me. For I fulfilled not the behest of my lord. ‘Thou didst make behest to slay ARMENIAN from his golden throne and sat in the ashes, and with his own hands he smote his face and plucked out his beard and said: Alas for thee, Khikar, Notary and wise, I have through the tittle-tattle of men destroyed thee! For thou didst arrange the affairs of our kingdom. Now if any one gave thee unto me, I would give him whatever he asked of me, no matter how great a treasure of gold and silver. When Abusmaq my comrade heard this, he stood before the king and said: O King, live for ever. He that doeth not the king’s commands is sentenced to death, for the commands God and of the king are one, Thou didst bid slay Khikar, and he is still living. ζ΄. SYRIAC For Ahikar, whom thou didst command me to slay, is yet alive.’ 9 And when the king heard these words, he answered and said, ‘Speak on, speak on, Nabusemakh!; speak on, thou ‘ood and clever man, unskilled in evil. If it is indeed as thou sayest, and thou show me Ahikar alive, then I will give thee presents of silver, a hun- purple, fifty talents in value,’ 3 And Nabusemakh® answered and said, ‘ Swear to me, my lord the king, that, if there be not found before thee other sins of mine, this sin shall not be re- membered against me. And the king gave him his right hand on this matter. 1 Cod, ‘ Yabusemakh’. 3 Dan. v. 16. ® Cod. ‘ Yabusemakh ’. 1106.2 dred talents in weight, and of |. many good things hast thou become worthy. one hundred thousand talents of gold. ARABIC said the king to him: ‘ Woe to thee, Abu Samik, what is thy fault?’ And the swords- man said unto him, ‘O my master! every slave who acts contrary to the word of his master is killed!, and I have acted contrary to thy command. Then the king said unto him, ‘Woe unto thee, O Abu Samik, in what hast thou acted contrary to my command?’ And the swordsman said unto him, 9‘O my lord! thou didst command me to kill Haiqar, and I knew that thou wouldst repent thee concerning him, and that he had _ been wronged, and I hid him in a certain place, and I killed one of his slaves, and he is now safe in the cistern, and if thou command me I will bring him to thee’ And the king said unto him, ‘Woe to thee, O Abu Samik! thou hast mocked me and I am thy lord” And the swordsman said unto him, ‘Nay, but by the life of thy head, O my lord! Haiqar is safe and alive’ And when the king heard that saying, he felt sure of the matter, and his head swam 3, and he fainted from joy, and he com- manded [them] to bring to [Haiqar]*. And he said to the swordsman, ‘O trusty servant! if thy speech be true, I would fain enrich thee, and exalt thy dignity above that of all thy friends.’ And the swordsman went along rejoicing till he came to Haiqdr’s house. And he opened the door of the hiding-place, and went down and found Haiqar sitting, praising God, and thank- ing Him. And he shouted 1 B.M. MS. ‘is crucified ’. 2 Lit. ‘ his reason flew’. * Cod: “him”. ARMENIAN The king 9 said: Speak, Abusmaq, my servant and trusty one. If thou canst show me Khikar alive, I will give thee! byssus and purple and bestow on thee mighty pre- sents. And Abusmaq, when tὸ he heard this from the king, like a swiftly flying fowl, came unto me, and opened the door of my subterranean chamber, and led me forth. 1 Bodl. ‘ will array thee in’. And the king said: Speak, speak, my servant, well-doing and trusty. For thou hast not sinned. But of If thou showest me Khikar, I will give thee royal purples and 3C SYRIAC II And forthwith the king mounted his chariot, and came unto me in haste, and opened [my prison] over me, and I ascended and came and fell before the king; the hair of my head had grown down on my shoulders, and my beard reached my breast ; and my body was foul with the dust, and my nails were grown long like eagles’. 12 And when the king saw me, he wept and was ashamed to talk with me, and in great grief he said to me, ‘It was not I that sinned against thee, A hikar ; but thy son whom thou brought- est up, he it was that sinned against thee.’ 13 Thereupon I answered and said to him, ‘Because I have seen thy face, my lord, no evil is in my mind.’ And the king said to me, ‘ Go to thy house, Ahikar, and shave off thy hair, and wash thy body, and recover thy strength ? forty days; and after that come to mes Δ Danna sss * Lit. ‘let thy soul come into thee’. ARABIC to him, saying, “Ὁ Haiqar, I bring the greatest of joy, and happiness, and delight!’ And Haiqar said to him, ‘What is the news, O Abu Samik?’ And he told him all about Pharaoh from the beginning to the end. Then he took him and went to the king. And when the king looked at him, he saw him in a state of want, and that his hair had grown long like the wild beasts’ and his nails like the claws of an eagle, and that his body was dirty with dust, and the colour of his facehad changed and faded and was now like ashes. I "μ 12 And when the king saw him he sorrowed over him and rose at once and embraced him and_ kissed him, and wept over him and said: ‘Praise be to God! who hath brought thee back to me. Then he consoled him and comforted him. And he stripped off his robe, and put it on the swordsman, and was very gracious. to him, and gave him great wealth, and made Haiqar rest. SYRIAC this letter. 1 Therefore I went to my house, 6 1 and I was in my house about thirty days, and when I was re- covered!, I came to the king, and the king answered and said to me: ‘Hast thou seen, Ahikar, what a letter Pharaoh, king of Egypt, has written me?’ * Lit. ‘my soul was in order upon Then the king brought the letter of Pharaon and gave it to me, THE STORY OF AHIKAR ARABIC mercy, and knew that thou wast wronged, and saved thee and delivered thee from being slain. But go to the warm bath, and shave thy head, and cut thy nails, and change thy clothes,andamuse thyself for the space of forty days, that thou mayst do good to thyself and improve thy condition and the colour of thy face may come back 15 to thee.” Then the king stripped off his costly robe, and put it on Haiqar, and Haiqar thanked God and did obeisance to the king, and departed to his dwelling glad and happy, praising the Most High God. And the people of his household re- joiced with him, and _ his friends and every one who heard that he was alive re- joiced also. And he did as the king commanded him, and took a rest for forty days. Then he dressed himself in his gayest dress, and went riding to the king. with his slaves behind him and before him, rejoicing and delighted. But when Nadan his sister's son per- ceived what was happening, fear took hold of him and terror, and he was perplexed, not knowing what to do. And when Haigar saw it he entered into the king’s presence and greeted him, and he returned the greeting, and made him sit down at his side, saying to him, ‘O my darling Haiqar! look at these letters which the king of Egypt sent to us, after he had heard that thou wast slain. They have provoked us and overcome us, and many of the people of our country have fled to Egypt for fear of the taxes that the king of Egypt has sent to demand from us. Then 755 6. 1 ARMENIAN tian has sent and that which is said, that the inhabitants of Nineveh and Asorestan are fled? And I said to the king: There- fore let a herald proclaim at the gate of thy palace, that Khikar is alive ; and all who shall hear it will return, each man to his place. And the king com- manded a herald to cry, saying : Khikar is alive; and that all the dwellers in Nineveh and Asorestan returned, each man to his place. and said: Read and give an answer to OΣ SYRIAC And I answered and said, ‘ My lord the king, let there be no trouble to thee over this affair. I will go to Egypt and build the king a castle: and I will make him answer concerning all that he may ask me: and I will bring back with me the three years’ tribute of Egypt.’ And when the king heard these things he rejoiced with a great joy: and he gave me gifts: and as for Nabusemakh! . . . he set him at the head of all. And after this I wrote a letter to Eshfagni my wife, as follows: ‘When this letter reaches thee, command my huntsmen that they catch me two young eagles: and command the workers in flax, that they make me hempen ropes ; the length of each one of them shall be a thousand ells, and their thickness that of one’s little finger. And bid the car- penters to make me cages for the young eagles: and deliver over Ubael and Tabshelim, the two boys, who do not yet know how to talk, and let them teach them to say on this wise: ‘“‘ Give the builders mud, mortar, tiles, bricks, for they are idle.”’ 1 Ut supra. And I took and read it, and said to the king: Send yon envoys to go to their place. out and fulfil the behests of Pharaon. ARABIC . Haiqar took the letter and read it and understood all its 2 contents. Then he said to the king, ‘ Be not wroth, O my lord! I will go to Egypt, and I will return the answers to Pharaoh, and I will dis- play this letter to him, and I will reply to him about the taxes, and I will send back all those who have run away; and I will put thy enemies to shame \with the help of the Most High God, and for the happiness of thy kingdom.’ 3 And when the king heard this speech from Haigar he rejoiced with a great joy, and his heart was expanded and he showed him favour. And Haiqér said to the king: ‘Grant me a delay of forty days that I may consider this question and manage it.’ And the king permitted this. 4 And Haiqér went to his dwelling, and he commanded the huntsmen to capture two young eaglets for him, and they captured them and brought them to him: and he commanded the weavers of ropes to weave two cables of cotton for him, each of them two thousand cubits long, and he had the car- penters brought and ordered them to make two great boxes, and they did this. 5 Then he took two little lads, and spent every day sacri- ficing lambs and feeding the eagles and the boys, and making the boys ride on the backs of the eagles, and he bound them with a firm knot, and tied the cable to the feet of the eagles, and let them soar upwards little by little every day, to a distance of ten cubits, till they grew accustomed and were edu- cated to it; and they rose all the length of the rope till they reached the sky; the ARMENIAN And I said to the king Sene- G qerim: Concerning this matter which the Egyptian has sent, do thou not be anxious. I will 2 go and give him answer and will bring to thee the tribute from Egypt. When the king 3 heard this he was glad, and established Abusmaq at the head of the divan. And on the morrow I wrote to Abestan my wife and said as follows: When thou readest this 4 writing, do thou have caught two nestlings of an eagle, and two children not yet able to talk, and two nursing women to nurse the little ones. And they shall say: Clay, lime, mortar, brick. The artisans stand idle. And have two ropes spun, the length thereof two hundred ells, and the thickness thereof one ell. And cause a5 carpenter to fit together two cages for the children; and give food to the eagles, every day two lambs. And cause the children to be bound upon the eagles, and to make little flights, until they form the habit. And in this way habituate them until they soar aloft two hundred — ells. And I will later set — And when they were gone, I, Khikar, Secretary, sent and had brought two eaglets. . SYRIAC 6 And Eshfagni my wife did all that I commissioned her: then I said to the king: ‘Command, my lord,and send me that I goto Egypt. And when the king commanded me to go, I took me a force of soldiers and went. 7 And when we came to the first _ halting-place, I let out the young eagles and bound the ropes to their feet and made the boys ride on them; and they took them and went up to a height, and the boys cried out as they had been taught, ‘ Mud, mortar, tiles, bricks supply to the builders who are idle.’ Then I pulled them in again. . And when we came to Egypt, I went to the king’s gate: and his nobles told the king, ‘ There is come the man whom the king of Assyria has sent.’ And the king commanded and gave mea place to reside in; and on the follow- ing day I came in before him and worshipped him and inquired after his health’. 1 Lit. ‘asked after his peace’. ARABIC boys being on their backs. Then he drew them to him- self. 6 And when Haiqar saw that his desire was fulfilled he charged the boys that when they were borne aloft to the sky they were to shout, say- ing, ‘ Bring us clay and stone, that we may build a castle for king Pharaoh, for we are idle.” And Haiqar was never done training them and exer- cising them till they had reached the utmost possible point (of skill). Then leav- ing them he went to the king and said to him, ‘O my lord! the work is finished accord- ing to thy desire. Arise with me that I may show thee the 7 wonder.’ Sotheking sprang up and sat with Haiqar and went toa wide place and sent to bring the eagles and the boys, and Haigar tied them and let them off into the air all the length of the ropes, and they began to shout as he had taught them. Then he drew them to himself and put them in their places. And the king and those who were with him wondered with a great wonder: and the king kissed Haiqar be- tween his eyes and said to him, ‘Go in peace, O my beloved! O pride of my kingdom! to Egypt and answer the questions of Pharaoh and overcome him by the strength of the Most High God.’ 8 Then he bade him farewell, and took his troops and his army and the young men and the eagles, and went towards the dwell- ings of Egypt; and when he had arrived, he turned to- wards the country of the king. And when the people of Egypt knew that Senna- cherib had sent a man of his Privy Council to talk with Pharaoh and to answer his questions, they carried the news to king Pharaoh, ARMENIAN And Abestan my wife was 6 very wise and did everything at once which I told her. Then the king commanded me to depart to Egypt. And when I 7 reached the gate of Egypt, I brought the children’s cages, even as they were habituated. And I bound them upon the eagles; they flew up and soared aloft, and the children cried out and said: Clay, lime, mortar, brick. The artisans stand idle. And I, Khikar, took a rod, and 8 I went after all whom 1 met and struck them blows (and said): Hurry up, give what the artisans ask for. The king of Egypt came up and was very astonished, and was glad and bade us make (the birds) come down. And he said: Come, rest them from their labours. Eat, drink, and be merry, and on the morrow come to me. Io SYRIAC And the king answered and said unto me, ‘What is thy name?’ And I said to him, ‘ My name is Abi- kam: one of the contemptible ants of the kingdom.’ And the king answered and said to me, ‘Am I thus despised of thy lord, that he has sent me a despised ant of his kingdom? Go, Abi- kam, to thy lodging, and come to me early in the morning.’ Then the king commanded his nobles, ‘On the morrow clothe yourselves in red,’ and the king dressed himself in fine linen, and sat on his throne. And he commanded and I came into his presence: and he said to me, ‘To what am I like, Abikam, and to what are my nobles like ?’ And I answered and said to him, ‘My lord the king, thou art like unto Bel, and thy nobles are like unto his priests.’ And again he said to me, ‘Go to thy lodging, and come to me on the morrow.’ And the king commanded his nobles, ‘On the morrow clothe yourselves in robes of white linen,’ and the king himself put on white and sat on his throne. And he commanded and I came into his presence: and he said to me, ‘ To what am I like, Abikam, and to what are my nobles like?’ And I said to him, ‘ My lord the king, thou art like to the sun, and thy nobles to his rays. And again he said to me, ‘Get thee to thy lodging, and come to me to- morrow.’ ARABIC and he sent a party of his Privy Councillorstobring him before him!. And he came and entered into the presence of Pharaoh,and did obeisance to him as it is fitting to do 9 to kings. And he said to him: ‘O my lord the king! Sennacherib the king hails thee with abundance of peace and might, and honour ; and he has sent me, who am one of his slaves, that I may answer thee thy questions, and may fulfil all thy desire: for thou hast sent to seek from my lord the king a man who will build thee a castle between the heaven and the earth.
110.  And I by the help of the Most High God and thy noble favour and the power of my lord the king will build [it] for thee as thou desirest. But, O my lord the king! what thou hast said in it about the taxes of Egypt for three years—now the stability of a kingdom is strict justice, and if thou win- nest and my hand hath no skill in replying to thee, then my lord the king will send thee the taxes which thou hast mentioned, and if I shall have answered thee in thy questions, it shall re- main for thee to send what- ever thou hast mentioned to my lord the king.’ And when Pharaoh heard that speech, he wondered and was perplexed: by the free- dom of his tongue and the pleasantness of his speech. It 1 Lit. ‘ betwixt his hands’. 758 9-11 ARMENIAN And when it was dawn the king 9 called me and said: What is thy name? And I said: Abi- kam is my name. For I ama serf of Seneqerim the king. And when the king heard, he was grieved exceedingly, and said: Have I seemed so con- temptible in the eyes of Sene- qerim the king of Asorestan, that he has sent a serf unto me to give me answer? And he said to me: Go unto thy house and to-morrow come to me. And when on the morrow I went, the king gave command to his forces to dress themselves in scarlet chlamid; and the king himself was arrayed in purple raiment, and sat on his throne, and his forces around him. He commanded and called me to him and said: Abikam, unto whom am I like? Or my forces, whom are they like? 1 said, Thou art like to the dig" and thy satraps to their priests. He said to me: Go to thy lodg- ings, and to-morrow come unto — me. When I had gone to myr house and came the next day — to him, he had arrayed his forces in linen, and he himself was arrayed in scarlet, and he said_ to me: Unto whom am 1 like, or my forces, to whom are they like? And I said: Thou art like the sun and thy satraps are like its rays. lie. ‘to God’. The plural dig literally = ‘demons’, but is used like the Hebrew Elohim as a singular. The same use is found in the Arm. version of Eusebius’ Chronicon, Bk. 1. In the Arm, O, Tὶ it is used as ἃ plural. SYRIAC SYRIAC [the God of Heaven] and his nobles to the lightnings that are in the clouds: for when he wills, he fashions the rain and the dew [and] the hail ; and if he thun- ders, he restrains the sun from rising, and its rays from being seen; and he will restrain Bel from coming in and from going forth in the street, and his nobles from being seen; and he will hinder the moon from rising and the stars from appearing.’ Perhaps the original text was ‘the God of Heaven’, which was erased to make way for ‘the idol Bel’, but this correction was a stupid one, see- ing that Pharaoh has himself been compared to the great god Bel; hence perhaps a final erasure. The Arabic has ‘ my lord is the God of Heaven’, which is sufficiently audacious to invite correction. Mrs. Lewis by the use of a reagent has brought up the word Bel, and perhaps the whole expression ‘ our god Bel’. ARABIC said to him, ‘O Abiqam, whom am I like? and the nobles of my kingdom, to whom are they like?’ And Haigar said to him, ‘O my lord the king! thou art like the idol Bel, and the nobles of thy kingdom are like his servants. He said to him, “Go, and come back hither to-morrow.’ So Haiqdr went as king Pharaoh had com- manded him. ARABIC ARMENIAN the king is like unto Bélshim, and his satraps to the lightnings. When he willeth, he weaveth the rain!; and he shooteth out the dew on high, he sendeth it forth in his empery. He thun- ders, and imprisons the rays oὗ the sun. And when he willeth, he doth bring hail and grindeth to dust tree, green herb and dry; and he makes the dawn break and smiteth the shoots of green grass. 1 Bod]. = ‘the material of rain’, And on the morrow Haiqar went into the presence of Pharaoh, and did obeisance, and stood before 18 the king. And Pharaoh was dressed in a red colour, and the nobles were dressed in white. And Pharaoh said to him, ‘O Abiqaém, whom am I like? and the nobles of my kingdom, to whom are they like?’ are like [its] beams.’ And Abigq4m said to him, ‘O my lord! thou art like the sun, and thy servants” And Pharaoh said to him, ‘Go to thy dwelling, and come hither to-morrow.’ 19 Then Pharaoh commanded his Court to wear pure white!, and Pharaoh was dressed like them and sat upon his throne, and he commanded them to fetch Haiqdr. And he entered and sat down before zohim. And Pharaoh said to him, ‘O Abiqam, whom am I like? and my nobles, to whom are they like?’ And Abiqdm said to him, ‘O my lord! thou art like the moon, and thy nobles are like the planets and the stars.’ And Pharaoh said to him, ‘Go, and to-morrow be thou here,’ 21 Then Pharaoh commanded his servants to wear robes of various colours, and Pharaoh wore a red velvet dress, and sat on his throne, and commanded them to fetch Abiqam. And he entered and 22 did obeisance before him. And he said,‘O Abiqdm, whom am I like? and my armies, to whom are they like ?’ And he said, ‘O my lord! thou art like the month of April, and thy armies are like” 23 its flowers.’ And when the king heard it he rejoiced with a great joy, and said,‘O Abiqam! the first time thou didst compare me to the idol Bel, and my nobles to his servants. And the second time thou didst compare me to the sun, and my nobles to the sunbeams. And the third time thou didst compare me to the moon, and my nobles to the planets and the stars. And the fourth time thou 24 didst compare me to the month of April, and my nobles to its flowers. But now, O Abiqam! tell me, thy lord, king Sennacherib, whom is he like ? and his nobles, to whom are they like?’ And Haiq4r shouted with a loud voice and said: ‘ Be it far from me to make mention of my lord the king and thou seated on thy throne. But get up on thy feet that I may tell thee whom my lord the king is like and to whom his nobles are like.’ 25 And Pharaoh was perplexed by the freedom of his tongue and his boldness in answering. Then Pharaoh arose from his throne, and stood before Haiqdr, and said to him, ‘ Tell me now, that 261 may perceive whom thy lord the king is like, and his nobles, to whom they are like.’ And Haiqar said to him: ‘ My lord is the God of heaven, and his nobles are the lightnings and the thunder, and when he wills the winds blow and the rain falls. And he commands the thunder, and it lightens and rains, and he holds the sun, and it gives not its light, and the moon and the stars, and they circle not. And he commands the tempest, and it blows and the rain falls and it tramples— on April and destroys its flowers and its houses.’ ? Or a dress completely white. SYRIAC 1 And when the king heard these things he was exceeding wroth, and said to me, ‘ By the life of thy lord, I adjure thee tell me what is thy name?’ ἢ And I ~ answered and said to him, ‘Iam Ahikar the Secretary and Great Seal of Sennacherib king of Assyria and Nineveh.’ 9 And the king said to me, ‘ Did I not cer- tainly hear that thy lord had killed thee?’ And I said to him, ‘I am yet alive, my lord the king: and God saved me from something which my hands did not.’ } And the king said to me, ‘Go, Ahikar, to thy house, and come to me to-morrow, and tell me a word which I never heard nor any one of my nobles, and which was never heard in the city of my kingdom.’ 27 30 ARABIC And when Pharaoh heard this speech, he was greatly perplexed and was wroth with a great wrath, and said to him: ‘O man! tell me the truth, and let me know who thou really art.’ And he told him the truth. ‘I am Haiqar the scribe, greatest of the Privy Coun- cillors of king Sennacherib, and I am his vizier and the Governor of his kingdom, and his Chancellor.’ And he said to him, ‘ Thou hast told the truth in this saying. But we have heard of Haiqar, that king Senna- cherib has slain him, yet thou dost seem to be alive and well.’ And Haiqar said to him, ‘ Yes, so it was, but praise be to God, who knoweth what is hidden, for my lord the king commanded me to be killed, and he be- lieved the word of profligate men, but the Lord delivered me, and blessed is he who trusteth in Him.’ And Pharaoh said to Hai- qar, ‘Go, and to-morrow be thou here, and tell me a word that I have never heard from my nobles nor from the peo- ple of my kingdom and my country.’ ARMENIAN The king said: Tell me, what 17 is thy name? I said: Khikar ismyname. Hesaid: Wretch, 18 hast thou come to life? And I said: Since I have seen thy face, O king, I am alive. The king said: May this day be blessed, for I have seen Khikar with my own eyes alive, with my own eyes. And I fell on my face and did homage to him and kissed him. The king said: Expound this saying. There stands a pillar, and upon that pillar twelve cedars, and upon them thirty wheels, and upon each wheel two couriers}, the one black and the other white. And I said: O king, this the cowherds of the Asores know. The pillar of which thou spakest is the year and the cedars are the twelve months. The thirty wheels are the days of the months. The two couriers, the one black and the other white, are dawn and nightfall *. 4 Ὁ The king said, What is this 22 story, that from Egypt as far as Nineveh there are 500 leagues —how did our mares hear the neighing of your stallions and miscarry? I, Khikar, went out from him, and I took a cat and scolded and tortured it. Then they told the king, saying: Khikar flouts the dg and tor- tures the cats. The king called meand said: Khikar, wherefore dost thou flout our dig and torture the cats? And I said: 23 Yon cat has done harm enough to me. Aforetime the king gave to me a cock; sweet of voice was it, and at each hour it awoke me, to go to the king’s palace. This very night (the cat) went off and bit off the head of the cock and came back here. And the king said to me 24 as follows: It appears that as thou growest old, in the same 1 The Arm. word has this meaning. ? After the explanation of the pillar MS. Canon passes direct to the rope of sand incident, as does the Syriac, SYRIAC 7:1 Then I sat down and me- ditated in my heart and wrotea letter as follows: ‘From Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to Sennacherib, king of Assyria and Nineveh, greeting. 2 ‘Kings have need of kings and brethren of brethren: and at thistime my gifts are become scant, because silver is scarce in my treasury: command, there- fore, to send me from thy treasury goo talents of silver, and in a little while I will return them to their place.’ 3 This letter, then, I folded and held it in my hands: and the king commanded and I came into his presence, and I said to him, ‘Perhaps in this letter there is a word that was never heard by thee. And when I read it before the king and before his nobles, they cried out, as they were ordered by the king to do, and said, ‘ This has been heard by all of us, and it is so.’ 4 Whereupon I said to them, ‘Behold, [in that case] there is a debt of goo talents from Egypt to Assyria.’ And when the king heard this, he marvelled. 5 Then he said to me, ‘I am planning to build a castle between earth and heaven. Its height from the earth shall be one thousand fathoms.’ ARABIC And Haiqar went to his dwelling, and wrote a letter, saying in it on this wise: ‘From Sennacherib king of Assyria and Nineveh to Pharaoh king of Egypt. 2 ‘Peace be to thee,O my brother ! and what we make known to thee by this is that a brother has need of his brother, and kings of each other, and [my] hope from thee is that thou wouldst lend me nine hundred talents of gold, for I need it for the victualling of some of the soldiers, that I may spend [it] upon them. And after a little while I will send it thee. Then he folded the letter, and presented it on the morrow to Pharaoh. 3 And when he saw it, he was perplexed and said to him, ‘Verily I have never heard anything like this language 4 from any one. Then Hai- qar said to him, ‘ Truly this is a debt which thou owest to my lord the king.’ And Pharaoh accepted this, say- ing, ‘O Haigqar, it is the like of thee who are honest in the service of kings. Blessed be God who hath made thee perfect in wisdom, and hath adorned thee with philo- sophy and knowledge. And now, O Haiqar, there re- mains what we desire from thee, that thou shouldst build us a castle between heaven and earth.’ 762 TΠ ou ARMENIAN measure your words and wisdom are changed round. From Egypt to Nineveh there are 5001 leagues. How then in a single night could a cat bite off the head of the cock and come back hither? But I said: How could your mares hear the neighing and miscarry ὃ The king said: Leave this. 3 Come and weave me a rope of sand. When I had gone out from him, the king said to all those with him: Whatever Khikar says, ye shall say, ‘We know and have heard this say-— ing.’ And I took and wrote a letter’ thus: From Senegerim king, all hail to Pharaon king of Egypt. Brethren have need of brethren 2 to behold them and kings of kings. In this season expenses — and debts enough have there been and silver is wanting in~ our treasuries. So then give orders and have brought to me — by dispatch a hundred talents — of silver. And I fastened up 3 the letter and went in to the © king and said: In this dispatch I have written of a matter, oἵ. which neither your city? nor your satraps have heard. # they all said: We have heard and we know this matter of yours. But I said: If ye have heard, say then before ye have opened the letter. And they could not say, but opened and read it. I said: Ye have heard what is written. The king said*®: 4 If a rope of sand thou weavest — not for me, thou shalt not carry 1 MS. Canon has 360, 4 3.92 adds ‘nor your king’. , 8 Canon =‘and Pharaon said: — Weave me a rope of sand, in len é nine ells. And I said: My lord king, order them to bring forth from your treasury a model that I may see according to the model make it, that it be not too thick or too thin. id Pharaon said: In my treasury 1S ~ none. But unless thou weave it, thou carriest not off the silver, which by — thy wisdom thou hast sought and [ promised,’ SYRIAC Then I brought out the young eagles and bound the “ropes to their feet, and set the boys on their backs; and they were saying, ‘ Provide mud, ‘mortar; [foreman, mix] tiles and bricks for the builders, because they are idle.’ And when the king saw it, he was confounded. Then I, Ahikar, - took a switch and beat the king’s nobles, till they all took to flight. Then the king was indignant with me, and said to me, ‘ Thou art gone clean mad, Ahikar: who is able to carry up any- thing to these boys?’ And I said to him, ‘Concerning the affairs of Sennacherib my lord, say ye nothing; for if he had been at hand, he would have built a couple of castles in one day.’ And the king said to me, ‘Have done with the castle, Ahikar, and go to thy lodging ; ; ARABIC Then said Haiqar, ‘To hear is to obey. Iwill build thee a castle according to thy wish and choice ; but, O my lord! prepare us lime and stone and clay and workmen, and I have skilled builders who will build for thee as 6 thou desirest’, And the king prepared all that for him, and they went to a wide place; and Haiqar and his boys came to it, and he took the eagles and the young men with him; and the king and all his nobles went and the whole city assembled, that they might see what Haiqar would do. Then Haiqar let the eagles out of the boxes, and tied the young men on their backs’, and tied the ropes to the eagles’ feet, and let them go in theair. And they soared upwards, till they remained between heaven and earth. And the boys began to shout, saying, ‘Bring bricks, bring clay, that we may build the king’s castle, for we are standing idle!’ 4» And the crowd were aston- ished and perplexed,andthey wondered. And the king and his nobles wondered. And Haiqar and his servants began to beat the workmen, and they shouted for the king’s troops, saying to them, ‘Bring to the skilled work- men what they want and do - not hinder them from their work.’ And the king said to him,‘ Thouart mad; who can bring anything up to 8 that distance?’ And Haiqar said to him, ‘O my lord! how shall we build a castle in the air? and if my lord the king were here, he would have built several castles in asingle day.’ And Pharaoh said to him, ‘Go, O Haiqar, to thy dwelling, and rest, for we have given up® building 1 Lit. ‘on the eagles’ backs’. 2 Lit. ‘we have passed away from’. 763 6-8 ARMENIAN away the tribute from Egypt. And I went into a deeply dug chamber, and perforated the wall of the chamber on the side whence the dawn shone; and when the dawn gleamed forth, it flashed into the chamber seven ells; and I took up dust of sand and cast it into the hole bored and blew into it. It appeared like woven twists, and I said: Give orders, O king, that they collect yon ropes and I will weave yet others. When the king saw this he aὶ laughed and said: Blessed art thou before the dig. And he gave me very great presents, and allowed the tribute from Egypt and well and gladly dis- missed me, and I departed. Io It SYRIAC And when it was morning, came into his presence, and he said to me, ‘Explain to me, Ahikar, the following matter. The horse of thy lord neighs in Assyria, and our mares hear his voice here, and their foals mis- carry.’ Then I went forth from the king’s presence, and com- manded my servants to catch me a cat, and I whipped it in the streets of the city ; and when the Egyptians saw it, they went and told the king that ‘ Ahikar has acted contemptuously of our people and makes mock of us. For he has caught a cat and whips it in the streets of our city.’ And the king sent for me and called me; and I came into his presence. And he said to me, ‘In what way art thou in- sulting us?’ and I answered and said to him, ‘ This cat has seriously damaged me in no slight matter; for a cock had been entrusted to me by my lord, whose voice was extremely beautiful, and by the time that he crowed I understood that my lord wished for me, and I went to the gate of my lord. And in this past night this cat went to Assyria and tore off the head of this cock of mine and returned. And the king an- swered and said to me, ‘ As far as I can see, Ahikar, since thou art grown old thou art become stark mad. For it is 360 para- sangs from here to Assyria; and how canst thou say that in a single night this cat went and cut off the head of the cock and came back?’ ." Then I said to him, ‘ And if it is 360 parasangs from Egypt to Assyria, how do thy mares in this place hear the voice of the horse of my lord, and their foals miscarry ?’ ARABIC the castle, and to-morrow come to me’, 9 Then Haiqdr went to his dwelling and on the morrow he appeared before Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said, ‘O Hai- qar, what news is there of the horse of thy lord? for when he neighs in the country of Assyria and Nineveh, and our mares hear his voice, they cast their young.’ And when Haigar heard this speech he went and took a cat, and bound her and began to flog her with a violent flogging till the Egyptians heard it, and they went and told the king about it. 10 And Pharaoh sent to fetch Haiqar, and said to him, ‘O Haiqar, wherefore dost thou flog thus and beat that dumb beast?’ And Haiqar said to him, ‘O my lord the king! verily she has done an ugly deed to me, and has deserved this drub- bing and flogging, for my lord king Sennacherib had given me a fine cock, and he had a strong true voice and knew the hours of the day and the night. And the cat got up this very night and cut off its head and went away, and because of this deed I have treated her to thisdrubbing.’ And Pharaoh said to him, ‘O Haiqar, I see from all this that thou art growing old and art in thy dotage, for between Egypt and Nineveh there are sixty- eight parasangs, and how did she go this very night and cut off the head of thy cock and come back ?’ And Haigqar said to him, “Ὁ my lord! if there were such a distance between Egypt and Nineveh, how could thy mares hear when my lord the king’s horse neighs and cast their young? — 764 II SYRIAC i And when the king heard this, he was sore vexed, and he said to me, ‘Ahikar, expound to me this riddle: A pillar has on its head welve cedars; in every cedar are thirty wheels, and in every wheel two cables, one white and one black.’ And I answered and said to him, ‘ My lord the king, the ox-herds in ‘our country understand _ this riddle that thou tellest. The pillar of which thou hast spoken to me is the year; the twelve s are the twelve months of the year ; the thirty wheels are he thirty days of the month; the two cables, one white and one black, are the day and the nicht.’ Again he said to me, ‘ Twine ‘me five cables from the sand of the river.’ And I said to him, *My lord the king, bid them bring me from thy treasury one rope of sand, and I will make one to match it.’ Then he said to me, ‘Unless thou do this, I will not give thee the Egyptian tribute.’ Thereupon I sat down and calculated in my heart how I should doit. And I went out from the king’s palace! and bored five holes in the eastern wall of the palace. And when the sun entered the holes I scattered sand in them, and the _ sun’s path” began to appear as ‘if pie sand] were twined in the 3 . Then I said to the king ; “My lord, bid them. take up these, and I will weave you others in their stead.’ And when the king and his nobles Saw it, they were amazed. And again the king com- manded to bring me an upper ‘millstone that was broken: and he said to me, ‘ Ahikar, sew up for us this broken millstone.’ I went and brought a nether® millstone, and cast it down before the king and said 1 Lit. ‘temple’, u¢ supra. eit, Saat - if ® Lit. ‘ the mortar of a millstone’. Na there ARABIC and how could the voice of the horse reach to Egypt?’ And when Pharaoh heard that, he knew that Haigar had answered his questions. 15 And Pharaoh said, ‘O Haigar, I want thee to make me ropes of the sea-sand.’ And Hai- qar said to him, ‘O my lord the king! order them to bring me a rope out of the treasury that I may make 16 one like it.’ Then Haigdr went to the back of the , house, and bored holes in the rough shore of the sea, and took a handful of sand in his hand, sea-sand, and when the sun rose, and pene- trated into the holes, he spread the sand in the sun till it became as if woven like ropes. And Haiqar said, ‘Command thy servants to take these ropes, and when- ever thou desirest it, I will weave thee (some) likethem.’ 17 And Pharaoh said, ‘O Hai- qar, we have a _ millstone here and it has been broken and I want thee to sewit up.’ Then Haiqar looked at it, and found another stone. 18 And he said to Pharaoh, ‘O — my lord! I am a foreigner, and I have no tool for sew- ing. But I want thee to command thy faithful shoe- SYRIAC to him, ‘ My lord the king, since I am a stranger here, and have not the tools of my craft with me, bid the cobblers cut me strips (?) from this lower mill- stone which is the fellow of the upper millstone ; and forthwith I will sew it together” And when the king heard it, he laughed and said, ‘The day in which Ahikar was born shall be blessed before the God of Egypt; and since I have seen thee alive, I will make it a great and appro- priate day.’ Then he gave me the revenue of Egypt for three years, and straightway I returned and came to my lord the king Sennacherib: and he came forth to meet me and received me. ARABIC makers to cut awls from this stone, that I may sew that millstone.’ Then Pharaoh and all his nobles laughed. And he said, ‘ Blessed be the Most High God, who gave thee this wit and knowledge.’ And when Pharaoh saw that Haigar had overcome him, and returned him hisanswers, he at once became excited, and commanded them to collect for him three years’ taxes, and to bring them to Haigar. And he stripped off his robes and put them upon Haiqar, and his soldiers, and his servants, and gave him the expenses of his journey. And he said to him, ‘ Go in peace, O strength of his lord and pride of his Doctors! have any of the Sultans thy like? give my greetings to! thy lord king Sennacherib, and say to him how we have sent him gifts, for kings are content with little.’ Then Haiqar arose, and kissed king Pharaoh’s hands and kissed the ground in front of him, and wished him strength and continuance, and abundance in his trea- sury, and said to him, ‘O my lord! I desire from thee that not one of our countrymen 23 may remainin Egypt. And Pharaoh arose and _ sent heralds to proclaim in the streets of Egypt that not one of the people of Assyria or Nineveh should remain in the land of Egypt, but that they should go with Haiqar. Then Haiqdr went and took leave of king Pharaoh, and journeyed, seeking the land of Assyria and Nineveh; and he had some treasures and a great deal of wealth. 19 2 Lal 1 Lit. ‘my peace upon’, THE ‘STORY SYRIAC 3 And he made ita great day and set me at the head of his house- hold: and he said to me, ‘ Ask what thou wilt, Ahikar’; and I worshipped the king and said, ‘Whatever thou willest to: give me, bestow it upon Nabuse- _makh .. .1; because he gave me my life; and for myself, my lord, bid them give me my son Nadan, that I may teach him a further lesson. For he has for- gotten my former teaching.’ σi supra. OF AHIKAR 7. 23 (24-26 Arab., 6-7 Arm.) ARABIC And when the newsreached king Sennacherib that Hai- qar was coming, he went out to meet him and rejoiced over him exceedingly with great joy and embraced him and kissed him, and said to him, ‘Welcome home, O kinsman! my brother Hai- qar, the strength of my king- dom, and pride of my realm. Ask what thou wouldst have from me, even if thou desirest the half of my kingdom and of my possessions. Then said Haiqar unto him, “Ὁ my lord the king, live for ever! Show favour, O my lord the king! to Abu Samik in my stead, for my life was in the hands of God and in his.’ Then said Sennacherib the king, ‘ Honour be to thec, O my beloved Haiqar! I will make the station of Abu Samik the swordsman higher than all my Privy Coun- cillors and my favourites.’ Then the king began to ask him how he had got on with Pharaoh from his first arrival until he had come away from his pfesence, and how he had answered all his questions, and how he had received the taxes from him, and the changes of raiment and the 26 presents. And Sennacherib the king rejoiced with a great joy, and said to Haigqar, ‘Take what thou wouldst fain have of this tribute, for it is all within the grasp of thy hand.” And _ Haiqar said: ‘Let the king live for ever! I desire naught but the safety of my lord the king and the continuance of his greatness. O my lord! what can I do with wealth and its like? but if thou wilt show me favour, give me Nadan, my sister’s son, that I may recompense him for what he has done to me, and grant me his blood and hold me guiltless of it.’ 24 1 sy here = dergleichen. 767 ARMENIAN When the king Seneqerim 6 heard of my coming, he went out to meet me with joy. When we had saluted each other, he took and led me into his palace and made me recline at the head of the couch; and made merry for several days, and bestowed on me very great presents, and said to me: O my father Khikar, ask of me other very great presents and I will give them to thee. And 7 I bowed to the earth to him and said: O king, live for ever. Whatsoever thou wouldst bestow on me, bestow on Abusmaq my comrade, who gave life to thy servant. But to me thou shalt give Nathan my sister’s son whom I taught. For he hath not well learned my former lore. 1 Canon = ‘sister's son, that] may teach him another teaching ’. SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN 24 And the king commanded and 2 And Sennacherib the king And the king gave Nathan 8 gave me my son Nadan; and said, ‘ Take him, I have given my sister’s son into my hands, the king said to me, ‘Go thy him to thee.’ And Haiqar and I* bound him with a single way, Ahikar, and work thy will took Nadan, his sister’s son, chain of iron, which was of the on thy son Nadan; for no man and bound his hands with weight of seven talents, at the shall rescue his body from thy chains of iron, and took him door of my portico; and I en- 25 hands.’ Thereupon I took Na- to his dwelling, and put a trusted him to Béliar myservant. dan my son, and brought him to heavy fetter on his feet, and And I ordered him to scourge my house; and I bound him tied it with a tight knot, and him on his back and belly. And with iron chains whose weight after binding him thus he I said to him in my coming in was twenty talents, and I fas- cast him into a dark room, and going forth: Whatsoever I tened the chains in rings, and I beside the retiring-place, and speak in proverbs with him, do fastened collars on his neck; and appointed Nebu-hal as sen- thou write on paper and keep it I struck him one thousand blows tinel over him and com- with thee ; and I gave to him a9 on the shoulders and a thousand manded him to give him a little bread and a little water. and one on his loins!; and I put loaf of bread and a little I began to speak and said as him in the porch of the door of water every day ; and when- follows : my palace, and gave him bread ever Haiqdr went in or out he by weight and water by measure. scolded Nadan, his sister’s 26 And I delivered him to my boy son, saying to him wisely : Nabuel to guard, and told my boy, ‘Write down in a tablet whatever I say tomy son Nadan, when I go in or come out.’ And I answered and said to my son Nadan as follows: The Parables of Ahikar, VIII. 1-41 81 ‘Myson, hewho does not hear 1 “Ὁ Nadan, my boy! I have Son, him that with his ears with his ears, they make him done to thee all that is good heareth not they make to hear hear with the nape of his neck.’ and kind, and thou hast re- through his back. warded me for it with what Nathan began to speak and: is ugly and bad and with said: Wherefore art thou angry killing. with me, my father? I havet ‘O my son! it is said in sinned against thee, my father the proverbs: He wholisten- Khikar. If thou wilt have eth not with his ear, they mercy on me, thy servant, I will make him listen with the will even become to thee dust scruff of his neck.’ and ashes and a servant all the 2 My son Nadan answered 2 And Nadan said, ‘For days of my life. and said to me, ‘ Wherefore art what cause art thou wroth And I said to him: thou so angry against thy with me?’ Son, on the throne of glory son?’ And Haiqar said to him, 1 seated thee, and from my I answered and said to him, ‘ Because I brought thee up, thronethoudidst hurl meto ruin. ‘My son,I set thee on the throne and taught thee, and gave Son, I in byssus and purples ; of honour; and thou hast cast thee honour and respect and clad thee, and thou with earth me down from my throne. And made thee great, and reared wouldst have destroyed my thee with the best of breed- body. a Cf the: quuistinentiot tan cise ing, and seated thee in my Son, I raised thee on high 4 obedient servant in the Gospel, δapή- place that thou mightest be rs es 1 . . . ? Ss BN : my heir in the world, and Canon, with Syriac, omits the words ‘I have . . . of my life’. ® For the text of MS. Canon, see below: Then I took Nathan, and led him to my house ; and bound (him to) my pillar of iron, of which the weight was seven hundred utres; and I placed a rope round his neck. And I smote a thousand blows (lit. trees) on his chest and a thousand on his back. And he was kept in the door of my portico. And I gave him bread by weight and water by measure ; and entrusted him to Beliar my servant, and I said to him: In my goings out and my comings in, whatever I say to Nathan write it in thy book. SYRIAC as for me, my righteousness! has saved me. 3 Thou hast been to me, my son, like a scorpion, which strikes at a rock. And the rock said to it, “ Thou hast struck at an unconcerned heart.” Andit struck at a needle, and they say to it, “Thou hast struck at a sting worse than thy own.” 4 My son, thou hast been to me like a gazelle that was standing over ἃ sumach-tree and eating it. And the sumach-tree said to it, “Why eatest thou me, seeing that they tan thy skin with me?” And the gazelle said, “I eat thee in my life, and when I am dead they will pluck thee up by thy roots.”? 5 My son, thou hast been to me like the man that threw a stone at the heaven, and it did not reach the heaven; but he in- curred sin against God. 6 My son, thou hast been like the man who saw his com- panion shivering from cold, and took a pitcher of water and threw it over him. Oὗ In the primitive sense of ‘alms- attic the point of the x point of the sto is missed, which is Phat the gang tree has its revenge on the gazelle: ‘thy skin shall be dyed with my roots presently.’ 1105.2 3 6 ARABIC thou didst treat me with killing and didst repay me with my ruin. But the Lord knew that I was wronged, and He saved me from the snare which thou hadst set for me, for the Lord healeth the broken hearts and hin- dereth the envious and the haughty. O my boy! thou hast been to me like the scorpion which, when it strikes on brass, pierces it. O my boy! thou art like the gazelle who was eating the roots of the madder, and it said to her, “ Eat of me to- day and take thy fill, and to- morrow they will tan thy hide in my roots.” O my boy! thou hast been to me like a man who saw his comrade naked in the chilly time of winter ; and he took cold water and poured it upon him. O my boy! thou hast been to me like a man who took a stone, and threw it up to heaven to stone his Lord with it. And the stone did not hit, and did not reach high enough, but it became the cause of guilt and sin. ARMENIAN like a tower, so that if the enemy should come to me, I might go forth and fortify myself in thee ; and thou thyself hast been found to be the enemy in my house. Son, I gave thee to glory 5 and honour; and thou didst betray me into the hands of enmity and death. Son, I nurtured! thee like 6 the cub of the fox; and thine eye was on thine hole and my finger smooth was on thy mouth and thy fingers were sharpened upon my eyes. Son, my righteousness and 7 innocency saved and rescued me; and thy injustice prospered thee not. Son, thou wast to me as a8 scorpion which struck the needle. The needle said?: Behold a sting which is worse than thine own. Again he struck the sole of the foot of the camel, and he set his foot hard upon that scorpion andcrushed it and said: Captive, knewest thou not that thy breath and soul were under my feet ? Son, thou hast been to me 9 like a goat which was eating madder. Says the madder: Why eatest thou me? Knowest thou not that with my root they dye thy skin?? Said the goat: I in my lifetime eat thee, after my death they pluck up thy root and prepare (1212. build) my skin, Son, thou hast been to me tὸ like him that shot his arrow up to the heavens ; and he was not able to reach thereunto, but reaped the reward of his lawless- ness, and the arrow returned upon his head. 1 T render swoutzi of MS. Canon instead of ousoutzi = " taught’ of the other MSS. MS. Canon has the rest of the saying thus: ‘like the young of the eagle, and thy fingers were sharpened against my eyes. For thine eye was evil to look upon me.’ 2 I supply the words ‘ The needle said’ from MS. Canon. The other copies omit it through homozoteleuton. So MS. Canon; the other MSS. less well: ‘with me they work thy skin.’ 3D SYRIAC My son, not when thou hadst killed me, wouldst thou have been able to stand in my place; for be well aware, my son, that even if the tail of the swine should grow to seven ells, he would never take the place of the horse: and even if his hair should become soft and woolly, he would never ride on the back of a free man.! My son, I said that thou shouldst be in my place; and thou shouldst acquire my house and my wealth, and inherit them. But God was not pleased therewith and has not heard thy voice. My son, thou hast been to me as the lion that came upon an ass in the morning of the day and said to him, “ Welcome, my lord Kyrios.” But the ass said to him, “ May the same welcome that thou givest me be the por- tion of him that tied me up last night, and did not make my halter fast, so that I had not seen thy face.” My son, a snare was set? upon a dunghill, and there came a sparrow and looked at it and said, ‘ What doest thou here? ” And the snare said, “Iam pray- ing to God.” The sparrow said, “And what is that in thy mouth?” The snare said, “ Bread for guests.’ Then the sparrow drew near and took it, and the snare caught him by the neck. And the sparrow said, as he was being shaken, “Tf this is thy bread for guests, may the God to whom thou prayest never listen to thy voice.” My son, thou hast been to me as an ox that was bound with a lion; and the lion turned and crushed him. ? We should expect ‘ the free man would never ride on his back’. * A Syriac play of words be- tween tὰ ὃς = disposuit lagueos and «Δ ces which follows. ARABIC 7 Omy boy! if thou hadst honoured me and respected me and hadst listened to my words thou wouldst have been my heir, and wouldst have reigned over my domi- nions. 8 O my son! know thou that if the tail of the dog or the pig were ten cubits long it would not approach to the worth of the horse’s even if it were like silk. 9 O my boy! I thought that thou wouldst have been my heir at my death; and thou through thy envy and thy insolence didst desire to kill me. But the Lord de- livered me from thy cunning. O my son! thou hast been to me like a trap which was set up on the dunghill, and there came a sparrow and found the trap set up. And the sparrow said to the trap, “What doest thou here?” Said the trap, “I am praying here to God.” And the lark! asked it also, “ What is the piece of wood that thou holdest?” Said the trap, “That is a young oak-tree on which I lean at the time of prayer.” Said the lark: “And what is that thing in thy mouth?” Said the trap: “That is bread and victuals which I carry for all the hungry and the poor who come near tome.” Said the lark: “Now then may I come forward and eat, for I am hungry?” And the trap said to him, ‘Come forward. And the lark approached that it might eat. But the trap sprang up and seized the lark by its neck. And the lark answered and said to the trap, “ If that is thy bread for the hungry Io 1 For this rendering of oni See Payne Smith’s 7hes. Sy. col. 3555, sub PAaZAAD. SYRIAC © 2 My son, thou hast been to me like the weevil that is in the corn, which destroys kings’ granaries, and is itself of no account. 3 Myson, thou hast been to me like the pot, to which they made golden handles}, but its bottom was not cleansed from blackness. 4 Myson, thou hast been to me like a husbandman that sowed a field with twenty measures of barley ; and when he reaped it, it made him twenty measures. And he said to it: “What I scattered, I have gathered, but thou art shamed with thine evil name, in that thou hast made a bushel into a bushel?: and I, [how] am I to live?” My son, thou hast been to me like the ... bird that could not save himself from death, and by his voice slaughtered his companions.* 6 My son, thou hast been to me like the buck that led his com- —— into the slaughter- ; and yet he did not save his own life. My son, thou hast been to me like the dog that came to the potters’ oven to warm himself, and after he was warm rose up to bark at them. 1 Lit. ‘ears’. 5 Cf. Matt. xxv. 24-7. * Reading salma. ARABIC God accepteth not thine alms and thy kind deeds. And if that is thy fasting and thy prayers, God accepteth from thee neither thy fast nor thy prayer, and God will not perfect what is good concern- ing thee.”
111.  O my boy! thou hast been to me (as) a lion who made friends with an ass, and the ass kept walking before the lion for a time; and one day the lion sprang upon the ass and ate it up. O my boy! thou hast been to me like a weevil in the wheat, for it does no good to anything, but spoils the wheat and gnaws it. tὰ"
112.  O my boy! thou hast been like a man who sowed ten measures of wheat, and when it was harvest time, he arose and reaped it, and garnered it, and threshed it, and toiled over it to the very utmost, and it turned out to be ten measures, and its master said to it: “O thou lazy thing! thou hast not grown and thou hast not shrunk.” ἢ
113.  O my boy! thou hast been to me like the partridge that had been thrown into the net, and she could not save herself, but she called out to the partridges, that she might cast them with her(self) into the net.
114.  O my son! thou hast been to me like the dog that was cold and it went into the potter’s house to get warm. And when it had got warm, it began to bark at them, and they chased it out and beat it, that it might not bite them. 1 This meaning of yw will be found in Lane, p. 1776, col. 3. ARMENIAN Son, thou hast been torr me like the sower, who sowed ten bushels, and gathered five bushels, and the rest failed. THE SYRIAC My son, thou hast been to me like the swine that had been to the baths, and when it saw a muddy ditch, went down and washed in it, and cried to its companions, “Come and wash.” My son, my finger is upon thy mouth, and thy finger is upon my eyes. Why have I brought thee up, thou jackal, that thy eyes look thus upon apples ? 18 t9 20 My son, the dog that eats of his hunting will become the por- tion of wolves: and the hand that is not industrious shall be cut off from its shoulder: and the eye in which there is no vision the raven shall pluck it out. What good hast thou done me, my son, that I remembered thee and that my soul had com- fort in thee ?? My son, if the gods steal, by whom shall they make them to swear? And a lion that steals a piece of land, how will he sit down and eat it? My son, I caused thee to be- hold the face of the king, and brought thee to great honour : and thou hast chosen to do me evil. My son, thou hast been to me like the tree that said to its woodcutters, “If there had not been somewhat from me in your hands, ye had not fallen upon me. 21 1 We should have expected, ‘ that I might remember thee and that my ARABIC O my son! thou hast been to me like the pig who went into the hot bath with people of quality, and when it came out of the hot bath, it saw a filthy hole! and it went down and wallowed in it. 16 O my son! thou: hast been to me like the goat which joined its comrades (on their way) to the sacri- fice, and it was unable to save itself. O my boy! the dog which is not fed from its hunting becomes food for flies, O my son! the hand which does not labour and plough and (which) is greedy and cunning shall be cut away from its shoulder. O my son! the eye in which light is not seen, the ravens shall pick at it and pluck it out. 15 to 20 ©O my boy! thou hast been to me like a tree whose branches they were cutting, and it said to them, “If (something) of me were not in your hands, verily you would be unable to cut me.” 1 Gire means a hollow place, sién is presumably from the Hebrew ἢ to be soft or sticky and the Syriac limus, coenum. 1 can find no justification for s#dg, the reading of the MSS. used by Salhani and Lidz- barski. 7272 ARMENIAN Son, thou hast been Ὁ Said the Wert! thou not from me, thou couldst not overcomeme. Thus? didst thou imagine saying: I will fill his place. But if pig’s tail were about five e long, it would not fill the p of the horse. And if its fi were as purple, it could not likened to the body of a king 1 MS. Canon, better: ‘Were not what is in thy hand from me, th wert not able to overcome me.’ 2 MS. Canon, better: * My thou didst imagine thus, saying: I f the place of Khikar, but were thi pig’s tail nine ells long,’ &c. SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN The maggot of the bread ate 127 the body of a king, but was itself of no use to any one nor profitable, but vile. My son, thou hast been to me Son, thou hast been to me 13 Ὁ - like the young of the swallow Bee the young es cx which fell out of its nest, and caught them and said to them, a weasel found it and said: If it tt tad not been for me, had not been for me’, then a Ipreat evil would have befallen great evil would have befallen you.” They answered and said you. The nestling said to the “to her, “Is that why thou hast oe nἀ φανδα κa ἠνλϑιθο ' 2 Ps ast done to me shall return mee Us in Sy mouth? upon thine head. . 1 Lit. ‘if it had been apart from me’. ARMENIAN Son, a dog which itself eats the quarry, will become the prey of wolves. An eye that gives me 14 no light, the ravens dig it out. Hand which helps me not, from the shoulder let them lop it off. Son, thou hast been to me like the lure which lay buried in the dung. A sparrow found it and 15 said: What doest thou?* And it said: I am engaged in prayer unto God. Said the sparrow: And that which is in thy mouth, what isit? Itsaid: A little loaf for the hungry. The sparrow darted in to takethe bread and was caught by the neck and said: If this was a little loaf for the hungry, God even so heareth thy prayer. Son, they said to the wolf: Keep away from the fold. It answered: If I live away, I am 16 blinded; for the dust isa remedy for my eyes and benefits them. Son, thou hast been to me as the wolf that encountered an ass, and said: Peace be unto thee. 17 The young ass said: Peace to yonder master of mine, who hath loosed the cord of my feet, and let me behold thy face evil and bloodthirsty.® Son, thou hast been to me like one who saw his fellow a-shivering. Taking water he threw 18 over him. Son, thou hast been to me like the dog which went into the oven of the potter. When he 19 was warm, he began to bark at the potter. ? So Paris 69: the rest = ‘ What art thou?’ * Canon omits ‘ evil and bloodthirsty ἡ. SYRIAC ARABIC ARMENIAN My son, thou hast been to me 21 O my boy! thou art like Son, they said to the cat, 20 like the cat, to which they say, the cat to whom they said: Give up thy habitual affair+, “Leave off thy thievish ways,and “Leave off thieving till we and the privilege* is extended thou shalt go out from and come make for thee a chain of gold to thee to enter the palace and in to the king’s palace, accord- and feed thee with sugar and quit it. The cat said: If my ing to thy heart’s wish.” And almonds.” And she said, eyes were gold and my paw of she answered and said, “If I “TI am not forgetful of the silver, I would yet not give up should have eyes of silver and craft of my father and my the habitual thing ° ears of gold, I will not leave off mother.” my thieving.” 7 My son,thou hast beentome 22 O my son! thou hast Son, thou hast been to me as 21 like a serpent that was mounted been like the serpent riding a snake that wound itself round on a thorn-bush and thrown into on a thorn-bush when he was a bramble and fell into a river. ariver; anda wolfsaw them and in the midst of a river, and A wolf saw it and said: Lo, the aid to them: “Bad rides on a wolf saw them and said, evil is mounted on the evil, and bad, and worse than either “‘ Mischief upon mischief, and evil is that which drives them arries them off.” The serpent let him who is more mischiev- along. said to him, “If thou hadst been ous than they direct both of aad : here, thou shouldst have paid them.” And the serpent μ ees hectare aes top the reckoning for the she-goats said to the wolf, “The lambs 44 = ‘word’, and this said prt and their young ones.” and the goats and the sheep ably be read all through. My son, I have seen a she- which thou hast eaten all thy 7.3 SYRIAC goat brought into the slaughter- house, and because its time was not yet come, it returned to its place and saw its children and its children’s children. My son, I have seen colts that have become slayers of their mothers. 29 My son, I fed thee with every pleasant meat: and thou, my son, hast fed me with bread of ashes!, and I was not satisfied therewith. 30 My son, I salved thee with sweet salves, and thou, my son, hast fouled my body with dust. 31 My son, I trained up thy stature like a cedar, but thou hast humbled me in my life, and hast made me drunken with thy wickedness. 32 Myson,I raised thee like a tower and said, “If the enemy should come upon me, I will go up and dwell in thee”: and thou, when thou sawest my enemy, didst bow before him. 33 Myson,thou hast been to me like the mole that came up out of the earth that he might get pos- session 2 of the sun, because he had no eyes; and an eagle saw him and struck him and carried him off? whitacdust: Σ Lit. ‘receive’. But perhaps the original was ‘that he might see the sun, though he had no eyes’. ARABIC life, wilt thou return them to their fathers and to their par- Said the wolf, “No.” And the serpent said ents or no?” to him, “I think that after my- self thou art the worst of us.” 23 O my boy! I fed thee with good food and thou didst not feed me with dry bread.? 24 O my boy! I gave thee sugared water to drink and good ‘syrup, and thou didst not give me water from the well to drink. 25 O my boy! I taught thee, and brought thee up, and thou didst dig a hiding-place for me and didst conceal me. 26 O my boy! I brought thee up with the best up- bringing and trained thee like a tall cedar; and thou hast twisted and bent me. 2 O my boy! it was my hope concerning thee that thou wouldst build me a fortified castle, that I might be concealed from my enemies in it, and thou didst become to me like one bury- ing in the depth of the earth ; but the Lord took pity on me and delivered me from thy cunning. 28 O my boy! I wished thee well, and thou didst reward me (with) evil and hateful- ness, and now I would fain tear out thine eyes, and make thee food for dogs, and cut out thy tongue, and take off thy head with the edge of the sword, and recompense thee for thine abominable deeds.’ * For this meaning of Wil» πῶς cf. Lane, Book I, part 2, p. 598, and Badger, p. 272. 774 ARMENIAN Son, thou hast been to me as a mole which came out of its hole and one with another went forth because of their eyes not seeing. And an eagle swooped and seized him; and the mok said: If there had been ne senses in my case, I should have remained in my place an lived a peaceful life. Son, they gave teaching to the wolf’s cub, and said: Say thou, ayb, ben, gim+; and ἢ said ayts, bouts, garhn (i.e. goat kid, lamb). : ' Son, they took the swine ἴa the bath, and he plunged int it, then rolled himself in the bog, saying: You wash in yout own, and 1 will in mine. Ps 1 i.e. the first three letters of th Armenian alphabet. «ὦ SYRIAC My son Nadan answered and said to me, ‘ My father Ahikar, such things be far from thee: do to me according to thy mercy: for God also forgives the fault of men: and thou also, forgive me this my folly: and I will tend thy horses and feed thy pigs which are in thy house, and I shall be called evil : but thou, devise not evil against me.’ 34 I answered and said to him, ‘My son, thou hast been to me like that palm-tree that stood by a river, and cast all its fruit into the river, and when its lord came to cut it down, it said to him, “ Let me alone this year, and I will bring thee forth carobs.” And its lord said unto it, “Thou hast not been indus- trious in what is thine own, and how wilt thou be industrious in what is not thine own? ” 36 My son, they say to the wolf, “Why dost thou follow after the sheep?” He said to them, “Their dust is exceeding good for my eyes.” Again they brought him into the school- house!: the master said to him, “ Aleph, Beth”; the wolf said, “Kid, Lamb.” 3] +My son, I taught thee that there is a God: and thou risest up against good servants, and beatest those that have not sinned; and like as God has kept me alive on account of my righteousness so hath He destroyed thee for thy works. 38 My son, they set the head of the ass over a dish at the table, and he rolled off and fell in the dust. And they say, “ He spites ' Lit. ‘house of the scribe’. 3 Query, ‘ almsgiving’? ut supra. ARABIC 29 And when Nadan heard this speech from his uncle Haiqar, he said: “Ὁ my uncle! deal with me accord- ing to thy knowledge, and forgive me my sins, for who is there who hath sinned like me, or who is there who for- gives like thee? Accept me, O my uncle! Now I will serve in thy house,and groom thy horses and sweep up the dung of thy cattle, and feed thy sheep, for I am the wicked and thou art the righteous: I the guilty and thou the forgiving.’ And Haigqar said to him, “Ὁ my boy! thou art like the tree which was fruitless beside the water, and its master was fain to cut it down, and it said to him, “Remove me to another place, and if I do not bear fruit, cut me down.” And its master said to it, “Thou being beside the water hast not borne fruit, how shalt thou bear fruit when thou art in another place?” 31 O my boy! the old age of the eagle is better than the youth of the crow. 32 O my boy! they said to the wolf, “ Keep away from the sheep lest their dust should harm thee.” And the wolf said, “The dregs of the sheep’s milk! are good for my eyes.” 433 O my boy! they made the wolf go to school that he might learn to read, and they said to him, “Say A, B.” He said, “ Lamb and goat?in my belly.” O my boy! they set the ass down at the table and he fell, and began to roll himself in the dust, and one said, “Tet him roll himself, for it 30 1 This is evidently a pun, ghabar meaning dust, and g/wér the last milk in the udder. 2 The animals mentioned by the wolf had names which doubtless began with A, B. In the Arabic and English this is lost. 775 34-38 ARMENIAN Nathan began to speak and 24” said: My father Khikar, men sin unto God, and He forgives them, when they say: I have sinned. Father, I have sinned unto thee. Forgive me, and I will be to thee a slave hence- forth for ever.! And I spake to Nathan thus: Son, thou hast been to me 25 like a palm-tree which was grow- ing with roots on the bank of the river. When the fruit ripened, it fell into the river. The lord of the tree came to cut it down, and the tree said: Leave me in this place’, that in the next year I may bear fruit. The lord of the tree said: Up to this day hast thou been to me useless, in the future thou wilt not become useful. Son, God hath rescued me 26? because of my innocence, but hath destroyed thee because of thy lawlessness. God passes judgement between me and thee. For the tail of the dog gives 26” bread and his mouth a cudgel.* 1 Canon adds: ‘like one of the sinners ’. 2 Canon = ‘Leave me for this year’. ἊΣ THE STORY OE AHIKAR 8. SYRIAC himself; he does not receive honour.” My son, thou hast verified the proverb, which is current : “Call him whom thou hast begotten, thy son, and him whom thou hast purchased, thy slave.” My son, the proverb is true that is current : “ Take thy sis- ter’s son under thy arm and dash him against a stone.” But God is He that hath kept me alive, and He will judge be- tween us.’ Thereat Nadan swelled up like a bag and died. And to him that doeth good, what is good shall be recompensed : and to him that doeth evil, what is evil shall be rewarded. And he that diggeth a pit for his neighbour, filleth it with his own stature. And to God be glory, and His mercy be upon us. Amen. The proverbs of Ahikar the sage and secretary of Senna- cherib king of Assyria and Nineveh are ended. J. R. HarRRIs. 1 Lit. ‘He shall be rewarded evil’. ARABIC is his nature, he will not change.” O my boy! the saying has been confirmed which runs: “If thou begettest a boy, call him thy son, and if thou rearest a boy, call him thy slave.” 36 Omy boy! he who doeth good shall meet with good ; and he who doeth evil shall meet with evil, for the Lord requiteth a man according to the measure of his work. O my boy! what shall Isay more to thee than these sayings? for the Lord know- eth what is hidden, and is acquainted withthe mysteries and the secrets. And He will requite thee and will judge betwixt me and thee, and will recompense thee according to thy desert.’ And when Nadan heard that speech from his uncle Haigar, he swelled up im- mediately and became like a blown-out bladder. And his limbs swelled and his legs and his feet and his side, and he was torn and his belly burst asunder and his entrails were scattered, and he per- ished, and died. And _ his latter end was destruction, and he went tohell. For he who digs a pit for his brother shall fall into it ; and he who sets up traps shall be caught in them. This is what hap- pened and (what) we found about the tale of Haiqar, and praise be to God for ever. Amen, and peace. This chronicle is finished with the help of God, may He be exalted! Amen, Amen, Amen. 35 A. S. LEWIS. * The text of MS. Canon is as follows : ἐς Said Khikar: He that doeth well to the good will meet with good. And he who diggeth a pit for his fellow, with his own person filleth it. He who loves evil is hateful to many, and he who pursues the good inherits it. 776 38-41 ARMENIAN In the same hour Nathan swelled up and all his body burst asunder, and I said: Son,* he that doeth good, 2 winneth good ; and he that digs a pit for others, himself falls into the pit. The good endeth in good and the evil in evil. Here endeth Khikar. F. C. CONYBEARE. 1 The last three words in Codex Ven. alone. AETHIOPIC FRAGMENTS OF THE SAYINGS OF AHIKAR. The following is the translation of the fifteen sayings of Ahikar, published by Cornill in his Mashafa Falésfé Tabtbéin, or Book of the Wise Philosophers. These sayings are taken from two _M<SS., one at Frankfort and the other at Tiibingen. They apparently come from an Arabic collec- tion of ethical maxims, and not from a complete story of Ahikar. We should have inferred that the precepts were in separate circulation in Arabic, from the title of a MS. in the Vatican described by Assemani which is said to contain Hicari philosophi Mosulani praecepta. Instruction of Haikar the Wise. He spake as follows: ‘Hear, my son, and keep in remembrance my discourse, so that thou rememberest God the High and the Mighty. My son, if thou hearest a discourse, hide it in thy heart and disclose it not to thy neighbour, that it become not to thee asa coal and burn thy tongue, and bring derision upon thee and make thee hateful to God. 2 . Myson, make fair thy discourse and thy behaviour; for the wagging of a dog’s tail gives him bread, but his j jaw brings him stones. 4 My son, do not tarry with him, in whom there is strife: for strife brings controversy: and strife gives for an inheritance revengefulness and murder. My son, if a house could be built by talk without action, an ass would build two houses a day. 5 My son, it is better to haul stones with a wise and understanding man, than to drink wine with a fool. ᾿ 6 My son, so long as there are shoes on thy feet, tread down the thorns, and level the way for thy children and thy children’s children. 4 My son, if the rich man eats a snake, they say of him, “ He seeks a medicine therein ” ; if, however, the poor man eats it, they say of him, “ It was from hunger.” 8 My son, if there come to thee a slenderer and poorer man than thyself, rise up to receive him. 9 My son, the wicked falls and rises not again; but the good man falls and rises immediately and _ remains in his condition. o . My son, cease not to beat thy son; for the chastisement of a child is good for it, even as dung makes the land good; and as the land which is not rugged and on which there is grass delights the cattle, so doth a well-brought up son delight his father. t My son, keep thy son in curb, as long as he is small, that he may not grow up and thou have no more control over him, and be fain to blush over his corrupt behaviour. 2 A fair repute is better than a fair appearance; for the fair repute abides for ever, but the fair appearance and form pass away. 13 My son, it is better to stumble with the foot than with the tongue; and bring no discourse out of _ thy mouth, before thou hast entered into counsel with thine own self. 14 My son, ‘if the course of water should turn backwards, and if birds should fly without wings, and if the raven should become white as snow, then may a fool become wise. 5 My son, if thou wilt be wise, refrain thy tongue from lying and thy hands from stealing.’ : J. R. Harris. THE ARAMAIC FRAGMENTS FROM ELEPHANTINE. The following represents roughly the narrative portion of the Ahikar-legend, and the most impor- tant of the Parables and Proverbs of Ahikar preserved in the papyrus: ae Ahikar was his name, a wise and erudite scribe, who instructed hisson...... He eat The son will be...... for me- before. «7 tς Ahikat iain arene = the Great Seal of Sennacherib, king of Assyria...... and there was no son to me...... and Sennacherib, 3 king of Assyria, had fulfilled (his days) and Sennacherib died ...... his son, named Esarhaddon,
115.  and he was king of Assyria in the place of his father (Sennacherib) ...... Assyria. Thereupon I (took) my son...... and I instructed him and virtue...... in the Palace along with . I presented him before Esarhaddon, the king of Assyria. And wisdom ...... what he had asked him. And thereon Esarhaddon, the king of Assyria, loved him and said, (Long) life the wise scribe, the counsellor of all Assyria, who has appointed as his son, and no son πo eς., and I bowed down and worshipped, I, Ahikar, before Esarhaddon (the king) of Assyria. a . Ahikar, and when I saw the face of Esarhaddon, the king of Assyria, SDE I rose up . ΤΕῸΝ (as I was deni Sennacherib fd ee who was pve PaaS — . - . . 5 . Io It I shall not be able to serve (the king) in the gate of this palace ...... whose name is Nadin, my grown-up son, and he shall succeed me as Secretary ...... (and Great) Seal shall he be; and also my wisdom and...... the king of Assyria. And he said to me, (like thyself). ..... and in thy stead he shall do thy work. ...... I went to my house...,... and I set him in the gate of the palace...... and I said, he will seek after what is good ...... (my son Nadin) whom I have brought up, think on... . . . the king Sennacherib, thy father. ..... he is wise and according to his counsel and advice. ..... will much disquiet theking. Listen...... as a son, who is not my son; as a son ; A (Answered) Esarhaddon the king and SAI th seattle “whom my ‘father hath made great, who (ate) the bread of my father...... thou wilt seek, where thou canst find ...... that old man Ahikar. He is a wise secretary ..... whether he can corrupt the country against us, after that. ..... Assyria; he attached to him two men, in order tosee...... that officer (2) Nabusumiskun, riding upon a swift horse... .. with him after yet three days ...... and the others who were with him, as I was walking in the vineyards. NabuSumiskun, the officer, rent his garment,and lamented ...... the wise Secretary — and master of good counsel who...... by whose counsel and words all Assyria was directed annette (Nadin, thy son) whom thou hast appointed in the gate of the Palace, hath undone thee. AR eee Then was I much: afeard, even I Ahikar; and I answered and said to NabuSumiskun stecbss stage Iam he who aforetime saved thee from undeserved death ...... the father of the present king, Esarhaddon, of angry) Within thee atic: tῶn I brought thee to my house, thither was 1 pene thee : : : : : ‘ : : : ΐ 3 (I treated thee) as a man treats his brother, and I hid thee from the presence of (king Sennacherib). I said, I have killed him, until at another time and after yet many days I presented thee before king Sennacherib, and caused thy sins to pass away before him: and no evil did he to thee. And with me also king Sennacherib was well pleased, because I had preserved thee alive and not slain thee. And now do thou also to me in the same fashion as I did to thee. Slay me not, but bring me into thy house until other days. King Esarhaddon is merciful as one...... towards another. He will remember me and will long for my advice. Thou wilt then present me before — him, and he will suffer me to live. Thereupon answered NabuSumiSkun and said to me, Fear not. Thou shalt live, Ahikar, the father of all Assyria, according to whose counsel Sennacherib and all — the Assyrian army were wont to make war. NabuSumiskun, the officer, spake to those two men, his companions, who were with him, (Listen) and I will give you a piece of advice, and it is good advice too. The two men answered and said to him, Tell it us then. And NabuSumiskun answered and said to them, Listen to me. Yonder is Ahikar, a great man. He is the Great Seal of Esarhaddon. According to his counsel and word is the whole army of Assyria governed. Do not let us kill him. There is a eunuch whom I have, and whom I will give you. He must be killed in the mountain; he shall be a substitute for Ahikar...... other people (may come and) see the ΠY of yonder Ahikar, for the body of the Tune: man, the eunuch, whom I have....... until our brother Esarhaddon (shall have regret) over our brother and the heart of Esarhaddon ..... ᾿ I will give you much treasure...... and the soul (of the officer) was content with his two companions. (And they said,) Do as thou counsellest ...... Thereupon they slew the aforementioned eunuch in the stead of Ahikar .:. 5 2... At that time report was made in the king’s palace, (and they said) _ to the king, He hath been slain. Thereupon NabuSumiSkun (brought me to his house, and he caused to be supplied to me there (meat and drink) and said, Let these things be furnished to my lord (Ahikar). Likewise he brought much treasure...... Thereupon Nabusumiskun, the’ officer, went to Esarhaddon the king (of Assyria), and informed him, saying, I went my way, (as directed) and I found Ahikar (walking in his vineyards), and I have put him to death, And do thou, O king, inquire of the two men whom thou didst appoint. So spake he...... until that Esarhaddon (believed his words). (This is all of the narrative which has been preserved: the extant portions of the proverbial and allegorical parts of the book are very fragmentary in character, and uncertain as to their restoration, to order, and sense. The most important are as follows :— What is stronger than a braying ass? .-..... The son who is instructed and disciplined, and who has on his feet ...... Do not withhold thy son from beating, ifthou...... My son, if I beat thee, thou diest not. And if I leave on thy heart ...... Smite the boy, like ...... even so to all thy servants The lion will be. ..... the stag in the secret of his den(?)...... And he pours out his blood and eats his flesh ...... The ass has'left...... and does not carry it. Hetakesup...... from his companions, een xe aἰnὰ which was not his. _ Watch carefully over thy mouth ...... and make thy heart slow (?), for the word spoken is like a bird, and he who utters it is like a man without ...... the craft of the mouth is mightier than the craft. ..... Do not conceal (?) the word of a king They deal with trees by fire, with flesh by a knife, and with man ne yen Let not thy heart rejoice in the multitude of children and over their fewness (be not thou dis- couraged). (Cf. Armenian sayings, No. 34.) A king is as a merciful man, also his voice is higher than that of him who stands before him . . The king is fair to look on as the sun, and for them that walk the earth, his adornment is costly... ‘ (My son,) I have lifted sand, and I have carried salt, but there was nothing heavier than. ..... T have lifted straw and handled (?) the plough. ..... and there was nothing lighter than the man who dwells in. ‘ ; : : : ‘ ; : : : : ‘ : : ‘ The panther met the goat, and it was naked. And the panther answered and said to the goat, Come and I will cover thee with my skin. The goat answered and said to the panther, Why ...... my skin? Take it not from me The wolf came to the lambs (?)...... and I will be silent. The lambs answered and said to him, Take what thou wantest from us ...... Nothing lies in a man’s power, to lift up his foot or to set it down. ..... (Do not bend) thy bow and shoot an arrow at the upright, lest God should ...... and cause it to return upon thyself. 4 (Thou hast bent) thy bow and shot thy arrow at one who is more righteous than thou. That is a sin against our God. A loan is heavy, and borrow thou not froma man...... and if thou contractest a loan, give thy soul no peace until : BP aia. eo os in thine ears, for the charm of a man is his trustiness, and his hatred is lying with his lips (?). The son of my body has spied out my house ...... he has told strangers ...... He has become a false witness against me : And who will now declare my righteousness ? With him that is higher than thyself δ δύ t With him that is stronger... «on than thyself, do not ip; . Σ . . and be not insolent to thy father The thorn-bush sent to the pomegranate (and said) : The thorn-bush to the pomegranate. How numerous are thy thorns for him who handles thee! The pomegranate answered and said to the thorn-bush, Thou art all thorns for him who handles thee. δ. xxiii δ. XXIV GREEK VERSION OF THE LEGEND OF AHIKAR. The following is the portion of the story of Aesop which shows coincidence with Ahikar. Fabulae Romanenses Graece Conscriptae (ed. Eberhard). Mera δὲ τοῦτο tῆς νήσου ἀπάpaς, περιήει tὴn οἰκουμένην, toῖς ἁπανταχοῦ tῶn φιλοσόφων διαλεγό- μενος" ἀφικόμενος δὲ κaὶ πpὸς Βαβυλῶνα κaὶ tὴn ἑαυτοῦ σοφίαν ἐπιδειξάμενος, μέγaς πapὰ tῷ βασιλεῖ Λuκήpῳ ἐγένετο. βασιλεῖς πpὸς ἀλλήλouς εἰρήνην ἔχοντες κaὶ tέpψέως χάριν προβλήματα tῶn σοφιστικῶν πpὸς ἀλλήλouς γράφοντες ἔπεμπον. ἅπep oἱ μὲn ἐπιλυόμενοι φόρους ἐπὶ ῥηtoῖς πpὸς tῶn πεμπόντων ἐλάμβανον" eἰ δὲ μή, toὺς ἴσouς παρεῖχον. ὃ τοίνυν Aἴσωπoς tὰ πεμπόμενα tῶn προβλημάτων Λuκήpῳ συνὼν ἐπέλue, κaὶ εὐδοκι- μeῖn ἐποίει tὸn βασιλέα. κaὶ aὐtὸς δὲ δiὰ Λυκήρου ἕτερα toῖς βασιλεῦσιν ἀντέπεμπεν, ὧn ἀλύtωn μενόν- tωn, φόρους ὁ βασιλεὺς ὅti πλείστους εἰσέπραττεν. Aἴσωπoς δὲ μὴ παιδοποιησάμενος, ἕna τινὰ tῶn εὐγενῶν, ἜἜννον tὴn κλῆσin, εἰσεποιήσατό te κaὶ ὡς γνήσιον πaῖδa tῷ βασιλεῖ προσενέγκας συνέστησε. μetὰ δ᾽ oὐ πoλὺn χρόνον toῦ “Evvov tῇ toῦ θεμένου πaλλaκῇ συμφθαρέντος, Aἴσωπoς τοῦτο γnoὺς, ἀπe- λαύνειν ἔμeλλe tῆς oἰκίaς. ὁ δέ, tῇ κat᾽ ἐκείνου ὀpγῇ ληφθeίς, ἐπιστολήν te πλασάμενος πap᾽ Αἰσώπου δῆθen πpὸς toὺς ἀντισοφιζομένους Λuκήpῳ, ὡς αὐτοῖς ἕτοιμός ἐσti προστίθεσθαι μᾶλλon ἢ tῷ Λuκήpῳ, tῷ βασιλεῖ ἐνεχείρισε, tῷ toῦ Αἰσώπου ταύτην σφραγι- σάμενος δακτυλίῳ. ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς tῇ te σφραγῖδι πεισθεὶς κaὶ ἀπαραιτήτῳ ὀpγῇ χρησάμενος, παραχρῆμα tῷ Ἑpμίππῳ κελεύει, μηδὲn ἐξετάσαντα oἷa δὴ πpo- δόtηn διαχειρίσασθαι Αἴσωπον. ὁ δὲ Ἕρμιππος φίλoς te ἦn tῷ Aἰσώπῳ κaὶ τότε δὴ tὸn φίλon ἐπέ- δειξεν. ἔn τινι γὰp tῶn tάφωn μηδenὸς εἰδότος κpύψaς tὸn ἄνθρωπον, ἐn ἀπορρήτοις ἔτρεφεν. Εννος δέ, toῦ βασιλέως κελεύσαντος. πᾶσan tὴn διοίκησιν Αἰσώπου παρέλαβε. Μετὰ δέ τινα χρόνον Νεκτεναβὼ βασιλεὺς Aἰγu- πtίωn πυθόμενος Αἴσωπον τεθνηκέναι, πέμπei Λuκήpῳ παραχρῆμα ἐπιστολήν, οἰκοδόμους aὐtῷ ἀποστεῖλαι κελεύουσαν, oἱ πύργον οἰκοδομήσουσι μήt᾽ οὐρανοῦ μήte γῆς ἁπτόμενον, ἀλλὰ κaὶ tὸn ἀποκρινούμενον ἀeὶ πpὸς πάnθ᾽ ὅσa ἂn ἐpωtῴη" κaὶ τοῦτο ποιήσαντα, φόρους εἰσπράττειν, eἰ δὲ μή, κατατίθεσθαι. ταῦτα tῷ Λuκήpῳ ἀναγνωσθέντα eἰς ἀθυμίαν ἐνέβαλε, μηδenὸς tῶn φίλωn δυναμένου tὸ πρόβλημα tὸ πepὶ toῦ πύργου συνεῖναι. ae ‘ ‘ , € κat᾽ ἐκείνους yap toὺς χρόνους ot After this he set sail from the island, and went c. about the world, in discourse everywhere with the philosophic; and having reached Babylon, he then also exhibited his wisdom and acquired renown with Lykeros the king. In those days the kings were at peace with one another, and used to amuse themselves by sending one another sophistical questions to answer; and those who could resolve them used to get for their answers tribute from those who proposed them; if, how- ever, they failed, they paid in turn the like amount. So Aesop, who was associated . with Lykeros, used to solve the problems which were sent to him, and caused the king to become famous. And he himself sent through Lykeros counter-challenges to the kings, the non-solution of which brought an abundance of revenues to the king. Now as Aesop himself had no children, hee annexed a certain young man of noble birth named Ennus, and brought him to the king, with commendation as his proper son. And when, not long after, Ennus played false with the concubine of his adoptive father, Aesop, becoming aware of it, would have banished him the house. But he, seized with rage against him, and having forged a letter, to wit, from Aesop to the kings who were in contest with Lykeros, to the effect that he was prepared to take their side rather than that of Lykeros, went and put the letter into the king’s hands, having first sealed it with Aesop’s signet. So he, being persuaded thereby, and under the influence of implacable anger, forthwith directs Hermippus to make away with Aesop without a trial, on the ground that he was a traitor. Hermippus, however, was a friend of Aesop, and showed himself so at the time. Without any one knowing it, he concealed Aesop in one of the tombs, and secretly maintained him. Meanwhile Ennus, by the king’s orders, took over all Aesop’s affairs. Some time after, Nectenabo, the king of thee Egyptians, having ascertained that Aesop was — dead, forthwith sends to Lykeros a letter, com- manding him to send builders to construct him a tower that should not touch either heaven or earth, and a man withal who should make him continual answer to all his questions; if thus he would do, he should revenues acquire; but if the contrary, he should pay them over. When these THE STORY 6 μέντοι βασιλεὺς κaὶ κίονα tῆς ἑαυτοῦ βασιλείας ἔλεγεν ἀπολωλεκέναι tὸn Αἴσωπον. Ἕρμιππος δὲ tὴn toῦ βασιλέως δi᾿ Αἴσωπον λύπηn μaθώn, προσῆλθε tῷ βασιλεῖ. κaὶ Civ ἐκεῖνον εὐηγγέλίσατο, προσθεὶς ὡς τοῦδε χάριν αὐτὸν oὐκ ἀνεῖλεν, eἰδὼς ὡς μεταμελήσει πotὲ tῷ βασιλεῖ tῆς ἀπoφάσeως. toῦ δὲ βασιλέως διαφερόντως ἐ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἡσθέντος, Aἴσωπoς ῥuπῶn κaὶ αὐχμῶν ὅλoς προσηνέχθη, κaὶ toῦ βασιλέως, ὡς εἶδεν αὐτόν, δακρύσαντος κaὶ λούσασθαί te κaὶ tῆς ἄλλης ἐπιμελείας ἀξιωθῆναι κελεύσαντος, Aἴσωπoς μetὰ τοῦτο κaὶ ὑπὲp ὧn κατηγορήθη tὰς αἰτίας ἀπεσκευάσατο. ἐφ᾽ oἷς κaὶ toῦ βασιλέως tὸn Ἔννον ἀναιρεῖν μέλλοντος, Aἴσωπoς. aὐtῷ συγγνώμην ἠτήσατο. ἑπoμέnως δὲ τούτοις 6 βασιλεὺς tὴn toῦ Αἰγυπτίου ἐπιστολὴν tῷ Aἰσώπῳ ἐπέδωκen 4 ἀναγνῶναι. ὃ δὲ αὐτίκα tὴn λύσin συνεὶς toῦ προβλήματος, ἐγέλaσέ te κaὶ ἀντιγράφειν ἐκέλευσεν, ὡς ἐπειδὰν χειμὼν πapέλθῃ, πεμφθῆναι toύς te tὸn πύργον οἰκοδομήσοντας κaὶ tὸn ἀποκρινού- μενον πpὸς tὰ ἐρωτώμενα. ὃ βασιλεὺς oὖn toὺς μὲn Αἰγυπτίους πρέσβεις ἀπέστειλεν, Aἰσώπῳ δὲ tὴn ἐξ ἀpxῆς διοίκησιν ἐνεχείρισεν ἅπασαν, ἔκδοτον aὐtῷ παραδοὺς κaὶ tὸn "Ervoy. ὁ δὲ Aἴσωπoς παραλαβὼν tὸn ἜἜννον, oὐδὲn ἀηδὲς αὐτὸν ἔδρασεν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς uἱῷ πάλin προσσχών, ἄλλouς te κaὶ τούτους ὑπετίθει toὺς λόγouς. 1 “Τέκνον, πpὸ πάντων σέβου tὸ θεῖον ; tὸn βασιλέα 5 δὲ tίμa" κaὶ toῖς μὲn ἐχθροῖς σou δεινὸν σεαυτὸν παρασκεύαζε, ἵna μὴ καταφρονῶσί σou" toῖς δὲ φίλoiς πρᾶον κaὶ εὐμετάδοτον, ὡς εὐνουστέρους σoi μᾶλλon 3 γίνεσθαι. ἔti δὲ toὺς μὲn ἐχθροὺς νοσεῖν εὔχου κaὶ πένεσθαι, ὡς μὴ οἵους te εἶναι λυπεῖν σe’ toὺς δὲ φίλouς κatὰ πάντα eὖ πράττειν βούλου. aἰeὶ tῇ 4 γυναικί σou χρηστῶς ὁμίλei, ὅπως ἑτέρου ἀnδpὸς πειρᾶν μὴ ζγtήσῃ λαβεῖν. κοῦφον γὰp tὸ tῶn γυναικῶν ἐσti 5 φῦλon κaὶ κολακευόμενον ἐλάttω φρονεῖ κaκά. ὀξεῖαν μὲn πpὸς λόγon κτῆσαι tὴn ἀκoήn, tῆς δὲ γλώttης 6 ἐγκρατὴς ἔσo. toῖς eὖ πράττουσιν μὴ pOdver, ἀλλὰ σύγχαιρε:' φθονῶν γὰp σεαυτὸν μᾶλλon βλάψεις. 7 tῶn οἰκετῶν σou ἐπιμελοῦ ἵna μὴ μόνον ὡς δεσπότην 8 σe φοβῶνται, ἀλλὰ κaὶ ὡς εὐεργέτην αἰδῶνται. μὴ 9 αἰσχύνου μανθάνειν ἀeὶ tὰ κρείττω. tῇ γυναικὶ ὶ μηδέ- ποτε πιστεύσῃς ἀπόρρητα, ἀeὶ γὰp ὁπλίζεται πῶς σou Io κυριεύσει. κaθ᾽ ἡμέραν κaὶ eἰς tὴn αὔριον ἀποταμιεύου" βέλτιον γὰp τελευτῶντα ἐχθροῖς καταλεῖψαι, ἣ ἣ ζῶντα It tῶn φίλωn ἐπιδεῖσθαι. εὐπροσήγορος ἔσo toῖς συναν- τῶσιν, eἰδὼς ὡς κaὶ tῷ κυναρίῳ ἄρτον ἡ oὐpὰ πpoσ- 13 πορίζει. ἀγaθὸς γενόμενος μὴ μετανόει. ψίθυρον ᾿ ἄνδρα ἔκβαλε σῆς oἰκίaς, tὰ γὰp ὑπὸ σoῦ λεγόμενα 14 κaὶ πραττόμενα ἑτέροις φέpωn ἀναθήσει. πρᾶττε μὲn tὰ μὴ λυπήσοντά σe, ἐπὶ δὲ toῖς συμβαίνουσι μὴ 15 λuπoῦ. μήte πονηρὰ βουλεύσῃ πotὲ μήte τρόπους κaκῶn μiμήσῃ.᾽ OF AHIKAR things were read to Lykeros, they put him in a sad muse, seeing that none of his friends could understand the riddle about the tower. Where- upon the king was saying that he had lost in Aesop the very pillar of the kingdom. Her- mippus, however, when he learned the king’s grief over Aesop, came to the king, and gave him the good news that he was yet alive, adding that it was for this very reason that he had not done him to death, because he knew that the king would some time repent him of the sentence. And when the king was mightily pleased thereat, Aesop was brought in to him, all filthy and be- grimed, and the king, when he saw him, wept, and bid him to the bath and to be attended with all care, and after this Aesop cleared himself of all the accusations that had been made against him. Whereupon the king would in turn have slain Ennus, but Aesop asked that he would pardon him. Thereafter the king put into Aesop’s hand the letter of the Egyptian to read. And he, promptly divining the solution of the riddle, laughed and bid them dispatch a reply to the effect that, on the approach of winter, he would send him both the builders of the tower, and the person who should answer his questions. So the king sent ambassadors to Egypt, and to Aesop he entrusted all his ancient affairs, handing over to him Ennus, to boot. So Aesop took to him Ennus, nor wrought he him any unpleasant- ness, but dealing with him again as with a son, he imparted to him the following and kindred instructions. ‘My child,’ said he, ‘first of all revere the divine; c. xxvi. 1 and honour the king; to thine enemies make 2 thyself dread that they despise thee not: but to thy friends be gentle and generous, that they in turn may be better affected to thyself. Further, let it be thy prayer that poverty and 3 sickness may be the lot of thy enemies, that they may not have it in their power to annoy thee ; but for thy friends desire good fortune in every- -thing. Ever talk kindly to thy wife, that she 4 may not seek to make experiment of another man. For the female sex is a slight thing, and when flattered makes little of mishap. Keep 5 thine ear attentive to discourse, but be retentive of thy speech. Envy not the prosperous, but be 6 glad with them: for by envying thou wilt rather damage thyself. Have such care of thy servants 7 that they not merely fear thee as lord, but revere thee, too, as benefactor. Take no scorn to be 8 always learning better. Never entrust secrets 9 to the wife, for she ever sets her camp to have mastery over thee. Every day, and for the to morrow, do thou store up: for it is better to die and leave one’s estate to enemies than to live and 11 be dependent on friends. Be affable to those whom thou meetest, knowing that even for the 12 dog his tail provides him bread. When thou o. XXVii C. XXVili τούτοις toῦ Αἰσώπου tὸn “Evvov νουθετήσαντος, ἐκεῖνος toῖς te λόγoiς κaὶ tῇ oἰκeίᾳ συνειδήσει oἷά τινι βέλει πληγeὶς tὴn ψυχήν, μet᾽ oὐ πoλλὰς ἡμέpaς tὸn βίον μετήλλαξεν. Aἴσωπoς δὲ toὺς ἰξευτὰς πάντας προσκαλεσάμενος, ἀετῶν νεοττοὺς τέτταρας συλληφθῆναι κελεύει. σuλ- ληφθέντας oὖn oὕtως ἔθρεψεν, ὡς λέγεται, κaὶ ἐπaί- δευσεν, ὅπep oὐ πάnu tί μe πειθόμενον ἔχει, ὡς πaῖδaς δiὰ θuλάκωn αὐτοῖς προσηρτημένων βαστάζοντας els ὕψoς αἴρεσθαι, κaὶ oὕtως ὑπηκόouς toῖς παισὶν εἷναι, ὡς ὅποιπερ ἂn ἐκεῖνοι βούλοιντο ἵπτασθαι ἄn te eἰς ὕψoς ἄn te eἰς γῆn χαμαζέ. tῆς δὲ χειμερινῆς ὥpaς παρα- δραμούσης κaὶ ἦpoς διαγελάσαντος, ἅπαντα tὰ πpὸς tὴn ὁδὸn συσκευασάμενος Aἴσωπoς, κaὶ toύς te πaῖδaς λαβὼν κaὶ toὺς ἀετούς, ἀπῆρεν eἰς Αἴγυπτον, πoλλῇ φαντασίᾳ κaὶ δόξῃ πpὸς κατάπληξιν tῶn ἐκeῖ κεχρη- μέnoς. Νεκτεναβὼ δ᾽ ἀκoύσaς παραγεγονέναι tὸn Αἴσωπον, ‘ ἐνήδρευμαι,᾽ φησὶ toῖς φίλoiς, “μeμaθη- kos Αἴσωπον τεθνηκέναι. tῇ δ᾽ ἐπioύσῃ κελεύσας 6 βασιλεὺς πάντας toὺς ἐn τέλει λeuκὰς περιβαλέσθαι σtoλάς, aὐtὸς δὲ κιρρὰν ἐνεδύσατο κaὶ δiάδημa κaὶ διάλιθον κίταριν. κaὶ κατεσθεὶς ἐφ᾽ ὑψηλoῦ δίφρου, κaὶ tὸn Αἴσωπον eἰσa- “ ΄, Gees ΓΆP. ἄnt, ΄ χθῆναι κελεύσας, τίνι μe εἰκάζεις, εἰσελύοντι φησίn, “Aἴσωπe, κaὶ toὺς σὺn ἐμoί; 3? κaὶ ὃς, “σὲ μὲn ἡλίῳ ἐαρινῷ, toὺς δὲ πepί σe τούτοις ὡραίοις στάχυσι. κaὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς θαυμάσας αὐτὸν κaὶ δώροις ἐδεξιώσατο. ἢ δὲ μet᾽ ἐκείνην ἡμέpᾳ πάλin 6 μὲn βασιλεὺς στολὴν tῇ δὲ μi είνην ἡμέpᾳ ὁ μὲn Bac i λευκοτάτην ἐνσκευασάμενος toῖς δὲ φίλoiς φοινικᾶς ,ὔ΄ “- > , ‘ » Ἂς κελεύσας λαβεῖν, εἰσελθόντα tὸn Αἴσωπον tὴn προτέραν aὖθiς πεῦσιν ἐπύθετο. κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς, “σὲ μέn, εἶπεν, ‘ eἰκάζω ἡλίῳ, toὺς δὲ πepί σe τούτοις ἀκtῖσi. κaὶ ὁ Νεκτεναβώ, ‘ οἶμαι. μηδὲn εἶναι Λυκῆρον πpός γe tὴn ἐμὴn βασιλείαν" ἈΠ N ΄ 4. a ,ὔ “μὴ εὐχερῶς oὕtω πepὶ ἐκείνου, ὦ βασιλεῦ, λογίζου. πpὸς μὲn γὰp tὸ ὑμέτερον ἔθnoς ἡ ὑμῶn ἐπιδεικνυμένη βασιλεία δίκηn, ἡλίou σελαγεῖ; eἰ δὲ Λuκήpῳ παρα- bληθeίη, oὐδὲn ἃ ἂn δέoi μὴ tὸ φῶς τοῦτο ζόφon. ἀποδει- χθῆναι. κaὶ ὁ Νεκτεναβὼ tὴn tῶn λόγωn εὐστοχίαν ἐκπλaγeίς, © ἤνεγκας ἡμῖn, ἐφη, " toὺς μέλλοντας tὸn πύργον οἰκοδομεῖν" κaὶ ὅς" “ ἕτοιμοί εἰσιν, eἰ μόνον ὑποδείξεις tὸn τόπον. μetὰ τοῦτο ἐξeλθὼn ἔξω tῆς πόλeως ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ tὸ πεδίον, ὑπέδειξε διαμετρήσας tὸn χῶρον. ἀγaγὼn τοίνυν Aἴσωπoς ἐπὶ tὰς ὑποδειχθείσας toῦ τόπου γωnίaς τέτταρας toὺς τέτταρας tῶn ἀετῶν ἅμa toῖς πaiσὶ δiὰ tῶn θuλάκωn ἀπηρτημένοις, κaὶ οἰκοδόμων toῖς πaiσὶ κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς μειδιάσας ἔφη, " hast been kindly do not regret it. Turn the tᾷ whisperer out of thy house, for he will carry off and deposit with others whatever thou sayest or dost. afterwards, but over things that happen grieve thou not. the ways of bad men.’ When thus Aesop had admonished Ennus, the latter was compunct in soul as with an arrow at his words, and by his own conscience, and not many days after he departed this life. Aesop then called to him all the hunters, and ec. directed the capture of four eaglets. When these were caught he reared them (so.it is said) and trained them (a thing which does not altogether convince me) to carry boys, attached to them by bags, up into the air, and to be so under the boys’ direction as to fly wherever they willed, whether to the heaven above or the earth beneath. Winter being now past and smiling spring arrived, Aesop made all things ready for his journey, and taking with him the boys and the eagles, he hied him to Egypt, employing much splendour and great array for the astonishment of the people in that country. Now when Nectenabo heard of the arrival of Aesop, he said to his friends, ‘I have been entrapped by the information of Aesop’s death.’ On the next day, then, the king bid all his ec, officials to robe them in white raiment, whereas he clad him in a suit of orange, with a diadem and a jewelled turban. He took his seat ona lofty throne and bid Aesop to be summoned. To whom entering said he, ‘To whom dost thou compare me, Aesop, and those who are with me?’ Whereat he, ‘ Thee to the sun in spring, and them that are around thee to its beauteous ears of corn.’ The king marvelled at him, and honoured him, too, with gifts. On the next day the king arrayed him in purest white, and bid his friends be clad in purple, and upon Aesop’s entrance he asked him again his former question. Whereat Aesop, ‘ Thee,’ said he, ‘ I compare to the sun, and them that are about thee to his rays.’ Whereat Nectenabo, ‘I think,’ said he, ‘that Lykeros has nothing to compare with this kingdom of mine.’ Aesop smiled, and said, ‘Reckon not so readily, O king, concerning him. To your people your vaunted kingdom hath indeed the splendour of the sun: but if it should be compared with Lykeros, it would take nothing to convert that light into mirk.’ Nectenabo, amazed at his witty words, inquired, ‘ Hast thou brought us those who are to build the tower?’ Said he,* They are ready, if only you show us the place.’ After that the king went out into the plain, c. and pointed out and measured the spot. There- upon Aesop, bringing to the four corners: of the place indicated the four eaglets with the boys — fastened to them by bags, and giving to the 782° Do such things as will grieve thee not tᾷ Devise thou not evil, nor ever imitate 15 THE STORY μetὰ χεῖρας δoὺς ἐργαλεῖα, ἐκέλευσεν ἀ ἀναπτῆναι. oἱ δὲ πpὸς ὕψoς γενόμενοι, “δόte ἡμῖn, ἐφώνουν, “λίθouς, δόte κονίαν, δόte ξύλa, κaὶ tἄλλa tῶn πpὸς οἰκοδομὴν ἐπιτηδείων. 6 δὲ Νεκτεναβὼ toὺς πaῖδaς θεασάμενος eἰς ὕψoς ὑπὸ tῶn ἀετῶν ἀναφερομένους ἔφη" “πόθen ἐμoὶ πτηνοὶ ἄνθρωποι: κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς: “ ἀλλὰ Avxijpos ἔχει: σὺ δὲ θέλeiς ἄνθρωπος ὧn ἰσoθέῳ ἐρίζειν βασιλεῖ :᾿ κaὶ ὁ Νεκτεναβώ" " Aἴσωπe, ἥttη- μai. ἐρήσομαι δέ σe, σὺ δέ μoi ἀπόκριναι κaὶ φησίn" ς eἰσί μoi θήλειαι ὧδe ἵππoi, αἵπερ ἐπειδὰν ἀκoύσωσi tῶn ἐn Βαβυλῶνι ἵππωn χρεμετιζόντων, eὐθὺς σuλλaμ- βάνουσιν. eἴ σoi πpὸς τοῦτο πάρεστι σoφίa, ἐπίδειξαι.᾽ κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς" “ αὔριον ἀποκρινοῦμαί σoi, βασιλεῦ. ἐλθὼn δὲ oὗ κατήγετο, αἴλουρον toῖς παισὶν ἐκέλευσε συλλαβεῖν, κaὶ συλληφθέντα δημoσίᾳ περιάγεσθαι μαστιζόμενον. oἱ δὲ Αἰγύπτιοι tὸ ζῶon σεβόμενοι, oὕtω κaκῶς πάσχον aὐtὸ θεασάμενοι, συνέδραμον, κaὶ tὸn αἴλουρον tῆς χειρὸς tῶn μαστιγούντων ἐκσπά- σαντες, ἀναγγέλλουσιν ὡς τάχος tῷ βασιλεῖ tὸ πάθoς" 6 δὲ κaλέσaς tὸn Αἴσωπον, “oὐκ ἤδeiς, φησίn, «Aἴ ὡς θeὸς σεβόμενος Tap ἡμῖn ἐσtὶn αἴλουρος ; ἴσωπe, ὡς μ p ἡμ poς ; ἵna tί γoῦn τοῦτο πεποίηκας ;” κaὶ ὅς" ‘ Λυκῆρον tὸn βασιλέα ἠδίκησen, ὦ βασιλεῦ, tῆς παρελθούσης νυκτὸς οὗτος 6 αἴλουρος" ἀλεκτρυόνα γὰp αὐτοῦ πεφόνευκε μάχιμον κaὶ γενναῖον, προσέτι μὴn κaὶ tὰς ὥpaς aὐtῷ tῆς νυκτὸς σημαίνοντα. κaὶ ὁ βασιλεύς" : oὐκ αἰσχύνῃ ψευδόμενος, Aἴσωπe; πῶς γὰp ἐn μiᾷ νυκτὶ αἴλουρος ἀπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου ἦλθen eἰς Βαβυλῶνα ; 3 ᾿ κaκeῖ- vos μειδιάσας φησί" ‘Kal πῶς, ὦ βασιλεῦ, ἐn Βαβυ- λῶni tῶn ἵππωn χρεμετιζόντων aἱ ἐnθάδe θήλειαι ἵππoi συλλαμβάνουσιν 3’ δδὲ βασιλεὺς ταῦτα ἀκoύσaς, tὴn αὐτοῦ φρόνησιν ἐμακάρισε. μetὰ δὲ ταῦτα μεταπεμψάμενος tῶn ap ᾿Ηλίου πόλeως ἄνδρας ζητημάτων σοφιστικῶν ἐπιστήμονας, κaὶ πepὶ toῦ Αἰσώπου διαλεχθεὶς αὐτοῖς, ἐκάλεσεν ἅμa tῷ Aἰσώπῳ ἐπ᾽ εὐωχίαν. ἀνακλιθέντων oὖn αὐτῶν, tῶn Ἡλίou πολιτῶν tίς φησi πpὸς tὸn Αἴσωπον" ᾿ ἀπεστάλην πapὰ toῦ θeoῦ μou πeῦσίn τινα πυθέσθαι σou, ὡς ἂn αὐτὴν ἐπiλύσῃς. κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς" ‘ ψeύδῃ" θeὸς γὰp πap᾽ ἀνθρώπου oὐδὲn δεῖται μαθεῖν. σὺ δὲ oὐ μόνον σαυτοῦ κατηγορεῖς, ἀλλὰ κaὶ toῦ θeoῦ cov.’ ἕτερος πάλin εἴπεν" "ἔσti naὸς μέγaς κaὶ ἐn aὐtῷ σtῦλoς, δώδeκa πόλeiς ἔxωn, ὧn ἑκάσtη τριάκοντα δoκoῖς ἐστέγασται, τούτους δὲ περιίασι δύo γυναῖκες. κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς ἔφη" “ τοῦτο tὸ πρόβλημα κaὶ oἱ map” ἡμῖn ἐπιλύσονται πaῖδeς" naὸς μὲn γάp ἐστιν οὗτος ὁ κόσωoς, σtῦλoς δὲ ὁ ἐνιαυτός, aἱ δὲ πόλeiς, oἱ μῆneς, κaὶ δoκoὶ aἱ τούτων ἡμέραι, ἡμέpa δὲ κaὶ nὺξ aἱ δύo γυναῖκες, ai παραλλὰξ ἀλλήλaiς διαδέχονται." tῇ δὲ ἐφeξῆς ἡ ἡμέpᾳ συγκαλέσας toὺς φίλouς ἅπαντας ὃ Νεκτεναβώ φησi" “δiὰ tὸn Αἴσωπον τοῦτον ὀφλήσo- μen φόρους tῷ βασιλεῖ Λuκήpῳ.᾽ eἷς δέ tiς αὐτῶν eἶπe' “κελεύσωμεν aὐtῷ προβλήματα φράσαι ἡμῖn, OF AHIKAR hands of the boys the builders’ tools, bid them fly away. But they, mounted on high, kept crying out, ‘Give us stones, give mud, give timber, whatever else is proper for building.’ Nectenabo, regarding the lads high borne in the air of the eagles, said, ‘Whence shall I get me winged men?’ But Aesop said, ‘Yea! but Lykeros hath such: and wilt thou, a man, strive with a king, the mate of gods?’ Whereat Nec- tenabo: ‘I am beaten, Aesop,’ quoth he. ‘I will, however, ask thee somewhat, and answer thou me.’ Says he, ‘I have mares here, which, when they hear the horses in Babylon neighing, straightway conceive offspring. If thou hast aught of wisdom for that matter, show it.’ Said Aesop, ‘To-morrow, O king, I will answer thee.’ When he came to his lodging, he bid his boys to catch a cat, and when caught to drag it about in public and whip it. But the Egyptians who reverence that beast, seeing it suffer thus, ran together, and pulling the cat out of the hands of those that were whipping it, report imme- diately to the king its sufferings. He, then, called Aesop, and said, ‘ Knowest thou not, Aesop, that the cat is worshipped amongst us as a god? Wherefore hast thou done thus?’ Said he, ‘ This cat, O king, in the past night, did wrong to King Lykeros, for he killed his cock, a game bird and well bred, which, further, used to tell him the hour of the night.’ To whom the king: ‘Dost thou not blush, Aesop, thus to lie? How came a cat in one night from Egypt to Babylon ?’ He, smiling, made reply: ‘ And how, O king, do thy mares here conceive when the horses neigh in Babylon?’ When the king heard this, he commended his understanding. Afterthishe sent for men from Heliopolis, expert in sophist questions, and having discoursed with them about Aesop, he invited them and him to a banquet. When they were set at meat, one of the citizens of Heliopolis says to Aesop: ‘I have been sent by my god with an inquiry for thee to resolve.’ ‘Liar!’ said Aesop. ‘God needeth not lore from man. Thou accusest not thyself only, but thy god!’ Another again said: ‘There is a great temple, and in it is a pillar, it has twelve gates, whereof each is roofed with thirty beams, and round these go two women.’ And Aesop replied: ‘Even boys in our country can solve that riddle; For the temple is this world, and the pillar is the year, the gates are the months, and their beams are the days: moreover night and day are the two women who succeed one another alternately.’ On the following day, Nectenabo called to him all his friends and said: ‘Through this Aesop we shall incur revenue debts to King Lykeros.’ But one of them said, ‘ Let us bid him 1 Sic! lege πύλaς. 783 Cc. XXX CUXXXXI Cc. XXXii THE STORY OF ἈΗΙΚΑΛΈ. πepὶ ὧn oὔt᾽ εἴδομεν oὔt᾽ ἠκούσαμεν. ἀρεστὸν oὖn τοῦτο tῷ Νεκτεναβῷ δόξan, κaλέσaς tὸn Αἴσωπον Edn’ “φράσον ἡμῖn, Aἴσωπe, πρόβλημα πepὶ oὗ oὔt᾽ εἴδομεν oὔt᾽ ἠκούσαμεν.᾽ κaὶ ὅς" ἰ αὔριον πepὶ τούτου ὑμῖn ἀποκρινοῦμαι. ἀπeλθὼn oὖn κaὶ συνταξάμενος γpaμ- ματεῖον, ἐn ᾧ περιείχετο Νεκτεναβὼ ὁμολογῶν χίλια τάλαντα tῷ 'Λuκήpῳ͵ ὀφείλειν, πpωίaς ἐπανελθὼν tῷ βασιλεῖ tὸ γραμματεῖον ἐπέδωκen. oἱ δὲ toῦ βασιλέως φίλoi, πpὶn ἀνοιχθῆναι tὸ γραμματεῖον, πάντες ἔλεγον" « κaὶ εἴδομεν τοῦτο κaὶ ἠκούσαμεν, κaὶ ἀληθῶς ἐπi- otdpeba. κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς" “ χάριν ὑμῖn oἷδa tῆς ἀπoδόσeως ἕνεκεν. ὁ δὲ Νεκτεναβὼ tὴn ὁμολογίαν tῆς ὀφeiλῆς ἀναγνοὺς εἶπεν" “ἐμoῦ; Λuκήpῳ μηδὲn ὀφείλοντος ᾿ πάντες ὑμeῖς μαρτυρεῖτε 5 ° κἀκεῖνοι κμετα- βαλόντες εἶπον" “ oὔt᾽ εἴδομεν oὔt᾽ ἠκούσαμεν. κaὶ ὁ Aἴσωπoς" “κaὶ eἰ taῦθ᾽ oὕtως ἔχει, λέλυται tὸ Cytovpevov. κaὶ ὁ Νεκτεναβὼ πpὸς ταῦτα" “ μaκά- piός ἐσti Λυκῆρος τοιαύτην σοφίαν ἐn tῇ βασιλείᾳ ἑαυτοῦ κεκτημένος." toὺς oὖn συμφωνηθέντας φόρους παραδοὺς tῷ Alcor, ἐn εἰρήνῃ ἀπέστειλεν. Aἴσωπoς δ᾽ eἰς Βαβυλῶνα παραγενόμενος, δieξῆλθέ te Λuκήpῳ tὰ ἐn Aἰγύπtῳ πραχθέντα ταῦτα κaὶ toὺς φόρους ἀπέδωκe. Λυκῆρος δ᾽ ἐκέλευσεν ἀνδριάντα χρυσοῦν tῷ Aἰσώπῳ ἀνατεθῆναι. 784 enounce riddles, of things we never heard no; r saw. This seemed agreeable to Nectenabo, so he called Aesop and said: ‘Enounce us, Aesop, a riddle of somewhat we nor heard nor saw. Said he, ‘I will answer thee of this to-morrow.” So he went away and composed a letter in which it was contained that Nectenabo admits that owes a thousand talents to Lykeros, and on morrow he returned to the king and gave hi the document. But the friends of the before the paper was opened, cried out togeth ‘We both know this and have heard it, and we truly understand it.’ Said Aesop, ‘Thank you for your answer.’ But Nectenabo took and read the admission of the debt. Said he: *Y all bear witness that I owe nothing to Lyke And they took him up and said, ‘We nei saw nor heard of it.’ Whereat Aesop: ‘And the thing is really so, your inquiry is answ: To which Nectenabo said, ‘Happy is Ly! who has such wisdom in his kingdom.’ handed over to Aesop the tribute as agreed, sent him away in peace. And Aesop, when he reached Babylon, coursed to Lykeros of all that had taken ἢ and delivered to him the tribute. And Ly bid that a statue of gold should be set up tc Aesop. ".


# The Fragments of a Zadokite Work

4.  But when He remembered the covenant of the forefathers, He left a remnant to Israel And gave them not over to destruction.
5.  [And in the period of the wrath three hundred and ninety years after He had given them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babylon He visited them], And He made to spring forth from Israel and Aaron A root of His planting to inherit His land, And to grow fat through the goodness of His earth.
6.  And they had understanding of their iniquity, And they knew that they were guilty men, And had like the blind been groping after the way twenty years.
7.  And God considered their works ; for they sought Him with a perfect heart And He raised them up a Teacher of righteousness To lead them in the way of His heart. maa And He made known to later generations What He had done [to a later generation] to a congregation of treacherous men : Those who turned aside out of the way. This was the time concerning which it was written: As a stubborn heifer So hath Israel behaved himself stubbornly : When there arose the scornful man, Who talked to Israel lying words, And made them go astray in the wilderness where there was no way, [to bring low the pride of the world]. So that they should turn aside from the paths of righteousness, And remove the landmark which the forefathers had set in their inheritance: ‘the Messiah’, ii. to, viii. 2, ix. 10(B); 29 (B), xv. 4, xviii. 8. There is no ground against identifying ‘ the teacher of righteousness’ and ‘the unique teacher’. If this identification is right, then ‘the teacher of righteousness’ and ‘the Messiah’ are two different personages, ix. 29. The former prepares the way for the latter, but does not immediately precede him; for an undetermined interval elapses between them, which is longer than forty years at all events, ix. 40, but in reality nearer one hundred and forty. lead them in the way of His heart. Cf. Isa. xlii. 16. 8-17. A difficult and important question of interpretation arises here as to the time with which these verses deal. First of all, it seems clear that the phrase ‘later generations’ refers to the generations subsequent to the coming of ‘a teacher of righteousness’ in v. 7. But there appears to be no way of determining the incident so vaguely described in v. 8, ‘What He had done... to a congregation of treacherous men.’ In any case this incident belongs to some earlier date. It is mentioned here apparently only in the way of admonition and warning against apostasy or unfaithfulness on the part of the Zadokites. We now come to v.9. To which of the two periods implied in the preceding verse, i.e. the ‘later generations’ or the earlier time of judgement on the ‘treacherous congregation’, do the words ‘this was the time concerning which’, &c. apply? If we take v. 9 as referring to the period of the ‘later generations’, the time implied by the ‘later generations’ can hardly refer to any period earlier than the first century B.c., since the ‘Teacher of righteousness’ came after 176 8. c., and the ‘later generations’ must be two or more generations later than his time. If this interpretation is right, then vv. 9-17 would refer to the events of the first century B.c., and the persons attacked would probably be the Pharisees. Against them, at any rate, our author could bring the charge of removing ‘the landmark which the forefathers had set’, i.e. of introducing innovations in the ritual of the Temple and the interpretation of the Law. It is to be remembered in this connexion that although in the earlier years of Jannaeus the Pharisees were persecuted, in the later years of this king they were on friendly terms with him, whereas the Sadducean priesthood was mercilessly dealt with by him. So as to make cleave unto them The curses of His covenant, To deliver them to the sword That avengeth with the vengeance of the covenant. Because they sought after smooth things, And they chose deceits, And kept watch with a view to lawless deeds. And they chose the best of the neck,} And justified the wicked, And condemned the righteous : And transgressed the covenant, And violated the statute, And attacked the soul of the righteous. And all that walked uprightly their soul abhorred, And they pursued them with the sword, And rejoiced in the strife of the people. And so the wrath of God was kindled against their congregation, So that He laid waste all their multitude, And their deeds were uncleanness before Him. Yet in all of them He raised Him up men called by name, In order to leave a remnant to the earth, And to fill the face of the earth with their seed. And through His Messiah He shall make them know His holy spirit, And he is true, and in the true interpretation of his name are their names: But them He hated He made to go astray. III-IV. 1. Exhortation to choose God's Will and to shun the evil Inclination, 1-2; through it fell the mighty Men of old, the Watchers and their Children, 3-5; and all Flesh and also the Sons of Noah, 6-iv. 1. Now therefore, children, hearken unto me, And I will open your eyes to see, And to understand the works of God. And to choose what He approveth, And to reject what He hateth : To walk uprightly in all His ways, And not to go about in the thoughts of an evil imagination And (with) eyes (full) of fornication. and Israelites exactly as in our text. According to Taanith 15 4 these men had to arrange the proper prayers for the various days in order that the sacrifices might be favourably received. ‘The head of this body was called soynn wx (Tam. v. 6). In Taanith 27 ὁ it is said that if these duties were not fulfilled heaven and earth would cease to exist (YAN) DYY WO"PNI xd nvnyp ροῦν). Again, in Bikk. iii. 2, these ty ΣN, whose chief was called tnynn wx (Tam. v. 6), are described as having to gather in the firstfruits from the districts under their charge. The country was divided into twenty-four districts, corresponding to the twenty-four orders of the Priests (1 Chron. xxiv. 7-18). The chief city of each such division was called Inyo by Ὃn. This office existed among the Essenes, amongst whom the ma‘amad constituted the district authority: see Jewish Encyc. v. 230. The ma‘amad in our text was composed of Priests, Levites and Israelites, as we may fairly assume from the constitution of the party as a whole: cf. xvii. 2, 3, v. 7: it would thus consist of the same elements as the ma‘amad in Taanith. the number and exact statement of their periods, i.e. ΠN WIND) WADD. This is very irregular Hebrew. It is found, however, three times in the O.T., i.e. in Isa. xi. 2; Ezek. xxxi.16; Dan.i. 4. Perhaps the suffix in pnsp refers, as in Aramaic, to what follows pd ssw ὅθ. This construction may recur at the end of the verse: cf. also v. 1 ¢ note. exact statement, i.e. wimp. Cf. mwop in Esther iv. 7, x. 2. I have rendered the word wind variously as ‘statement’ (vi. 3), ‘true interpretation’ (ii. 10): 7WB (vi. 10) ‘this means’ &c. that ... have been, i.e. nYnI—referring to the past as in Sir. xlii. 19: so also Lagrange. moreover whatsoever, i.e. 72 Ti. So I punctuate the text nD Jy. Lévi takes it to be the equivalent of the Syriac Not. : For many were led astray by them, And mighty men of valour stumbled by them from of old [and until this day]. Because they walked in the stubbornness of their heart the watchers of heaven fell. By them were they caught because they kept not the commandment of God. And their children whose height was like the loftiness of the cedars And whose bodies were like the mountains fell thereby. - All flesh that was on dry land perished thereby, And they were as though they had not been. Because they did their own will, And kept not the commandment of their Maker, Until His wrath was kindled against them. By them went astray the sons of Noah and their families: Because of them they were cut off. yan 7y. ὍN alone has this meaning in Sir. xv. 14 ἸἼN ἋΣ WIN... INA EἼΣ on onbs = ‘God created man ...and put him into the hand of his inclination’. On the two inclinations see T. Asher i. 3 (note on my edition): 2 Baruch, pp. 92~3 (in my edition) and the literature referred to there. eyes (full) of fornication. Reading °»y for Ὁ" with Schechter, who compares Sifre 35 @ nit Ἵ OD y. We might compare Sir. xxvi. g πορνεία γυναικὸς ἐn μετεωρισμοῖς ὀφθaλμῶn... .. γνωσθήσεται, and xxiii. 4; also T. Issach. vii. 2 ‘I never committed fornication by the uplifting of my eyes’ and T. Benj. vi. 3; Prov. vi. 25 ; 2 Pet. ii. 14 ὀφθaλμoὺς... μεστοὺς μοιχαλίδος. Lévi retains )} and compares Sir. xlii. 8 mya AY and Eccles. i. 13. He renders ‘1’attrait de la luxure’. IV. 2-9. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob walked not after the evil Inclination of the Heart, 2-3; but the Sons of Israel did in Egypt and in the Wilderness and were punished accordingly, 4-9. Abraham did not walk in them, And he was (recorded) friend because he kept the commandments of God, And chose not the will of his own spirit. And he delivered (the commandment) to Isaac and Jacob, And they observed (it) and were recorded as friends of God, And members of the covenant for ever. The sons of Jacob went astray through them, And they were punished according to their error. And their children in Egypt walked in the stubbornness of their heart, So that they took counsel against the commandments of God, And every man did that which was right in his own eyes. [And they eat blood], and He cut off their males in the desert (when He said) to them in Kadesh: Go up and possess (the land, but they hardened) their spirit : And they hearkened not unto the voice of their Maker [The commandments of their Teacher] but murmured in their tents, And so the wrath of God was kindled against their congregation : And their children [perished by it And their kings] were cut off by it, And their mighty men perished by it, And their land was made desolate by it. By it the first that entered into the covenant incurred guilt, And they were delivered unto the sword, Because they forsook the covenant of God: And they chose their own will, And went about after the stubbornness of their heart, Every man doing his own will. ON, God confirms the Covenant with the faithful through fresh Revelations, 1-3; when Israel (en ay te again God forgave them, 4-6; and confirmed His Covenant with them through sektel, 6-7. But with them that held fast by the commandments of God, [Who were left of them], God confirmed the covenant of Israel for ever, Revealing unto them the hidden things Wherein all Israel had erred : His holy Sabbaths and His glorious festivals, His righteous testimonies and His true ways, And the desires of His will [the which if a man do, he shall live by them] He opened before them. And they digged a well of many waters: And he that despises them shall not live. But they wallowed in the transgression of man, And in the ways of the unclean woman, And they said that fit belongs to usf. But God wondrously pardoned their sins, And forgave their transgression, forsook the covenant of God: And they chose their own will. Cf. iii. 7 ad. Io. chose their own will. Cf. iii. 7 a, iv. 2¢, 5¢, Io Ἢ. went about after. The rare construction ‘InN 1)n which occurs here is found in Num. xv. 39, which we know was in the mind of the author when writing iii. 2 dc. See iii. 4 note. stubbornness of their heart. Cf. iii. 4 note. Every man doing, ἄς. See iv.1oanote. Cf. Esther i. 8 ‘to do according to each man’s pleasure’. V. 1. that held fast by, &c., i.e. 3 oypyny. Cf. ix. 4, 12, 50; Prov. iii. 18; Isa. lvi. 4; T. Naph. iii. 1. [Who were left of them]: i.e. The Remnant. Cf. i. 44, note. But it appears to be an interpolation. the covenant of Israel. I have, with some hesitation, so rendered sued ynna—an Aramaism, such as we find in ii. 8. But Sse may be a gloss. In that case we should render ‘His covenant’. Schechter gives the natural rendering ‘ His covenant with Israel’, but this does not go properly with the preceding line. the hidden things: i. 6. those in the next verse. And He built them a sure house in Israel [the like of which never arose from of old nor until this day]. 6 They who hold fast to Him are for the life of eternity, And all the glory of man is for them ; As God confirmed it to them through Ezekiel the prophet, saying: ‘The priests and the Levites and the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of My Sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from them, they shall bring near unto Me fat and blood, VI. Migration of the Penitents to Damascus. Sons of Zadok hold office in the end of the Days, 1-3. Law to be obeyed and relations with Fudah broken off in the Period in which Belial is let loose, 4-12. 1 The priests are the penitents of Israel who went forth out of the land of Judah: and (the 2 Levites are) they who joined them. And. the sons of Zadok are the elect of Israel called by 3 the name, that are holding office in the end of the days. Behold the statement of their names according to their generations, and the period of their office, and the number of their afflictions, and the years of their sojournings, and the statement of their works. 4 The first saints whom God pardoned, Both justified the righteous, And condemned the wicked. 5 And all they who come after them must do according to the interpretation of the Law, In which the forefathers were instructed Until the consummation of the period of these years. 6 In accordance with the covenant which God established with the forefathers built them a sure house (ΠN) m2 ond 72%). The phrase is found in 1 Sam. ii. 35, 1 Kings xi. 38. The sure house is the pontifical dynasty of Zadok. [the like of which... this day]. An interpolation. In order to pardon their sins, So shall God make atonement for them. And on the consummation of the period [of the number] of these years They shall no more join themselves to the house of Judah, ἡ But shall every one stand up against his net. The wall shall have been built, The boundary been far removed. ) And during all these years Belial shall be let loose against Israel, as God spake through Isaiah _ the prophet, the son of Amos, saying: ‘ Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant }of the land.’ This means the three nets of Belial, concerning which Levi the son of Jacob spake, t by which he caught Israel and directed their faces to three kinds of trighteousness}. The first is fornication, the second is the wealth (of wickedness), the third is the pollution of the Sanctuary. 2,3 {ἰπ|6.. But the fundamental principle of the creation is ‘Male and Female created He them.’ And FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 6. 12—7. 9
12.  He that cometh up from this shall be caught by that, and he that escapeth from this shall be caught by that. VII. 1-7. The Sin of Fornication. Divorce forbidden. 1 The builders of the wall who walk after law—the law it is which talks, of which He said: Assuredly they shall talk—are caught [by two] by fornication in taking two wives during their life- 4 they who went into the Ark, ‘ Two and two went into the Ark. And as to the prince it is written, 5 ‘He shall not multiply wives unto himself.’ But David read not in the Book of the Law that was sealed, which was in the Ark; for it was not opened in Israel from the day of the death of Eleazar and — 6 Joshua, and the Elders who served Ashtaroth. And it was hidden (and was not) discovered until 7 Zadok arose. Now they glorified the deeds of David save only the blood of Uriah, and God tabandoned them to himf. : VII. 8-18. The Sin of polluting the Sanctuary. 8 And they also pollute the Sanctuary since they separate not according to the Law, and lie with 9 her who sees the blood of her issue. And they take (to wife) each his brother’s daughter or his the pollution of the Sanctuary. I have here, of course, followed Schechter’s emendation of Ὁ into nuovo. The profanation of the sanctuary by the priesthood is a very frequent accusation in the O.T. Cf. Zeph. iii. 4 ‘her priests have polluted the sanctuary’: also 1 Sam. ii. 12, 17, 22; Ezek. xxii. 26, xliv. 7, 8, &c. ro sister's daughter. But Moses said ‘Thou shalt not approach thy mother’s sister: she is thy t mother’s near kin’. So the law of intercourse for males is written, and the same law holds for females ; and let not: the daughter of the brother uncover the nakedness of the brother of her - father: he is near of kin. 2 They also polluted their holy spirit and with a tongue of blasphemies they opened the mouth 8 against the statutes of the covenant of God, saying: They are not established. But abominations they speak regarding them. 4 They are all ‘kindlers of fire And setters aflame of firebrands’ : ‘The webs of spiders’ are their weavings And ‘the eggs of cockatrices’ are their eggs: He who comes near them shall not be innocent : He that chooseth them shall be held guilty [unless he was forced]. * Aforetime God visited their works, And His wrath was kindled because of their devices. For ‘it is a people of no understanding’: * They are a nation void of counsel,’ [Because there is no understanding in them]. 9 For aforetime arose Moses and Aaron through the prince of the Lights. But Belial raised Jochanneh and his brother with his evil device when the former delivered Israel. 10, Thou shalt not... kin (1.6. 7 JON NY JIN xd Jo mins by). This is a free reproduction of ‘Lev. xviii. 13 ὉΠ JOR ἼNΦ 15 dan xd Jo mins nv: cf. Jebam. 55 aὖ. VIII. When the Land was laid desolate God would raise up wise men who would restudy the Law and go in Exile to Damascus, 1-5; and according to its Precepts the repentant ones should wa till the Teacher of Righteousness arose (i.e. after 176 B.C.), 7-10. 1 And during the period of the destruction of the land there arose those who removed the landmark 2 and led Israel astray. And the land became desolate because they spake rebellion against the com- mandments of God through Moses [and also through His holy anointed one], and they prophesied a lie to turn away Israel from God. 3 But God remembered the covenant with the forefathers : And He raised up from Aaron men of understanding, And from Israel wise men: 4 And He made them to hearken, And they digged the well. 5 ‘A well the princes digged, The nobles of the people delved it By the order of the Lawgiver.’ 6 The well is the Law, and they who digged it are the penitents of Israel who went forth out of the land of Judah and sojourned in the land of Damascus, all of whom God called princes. 7,8 For they sought Him and His glory was not turned back in the mouth of one (of them). And th Lawgiver is he who studies the Law, in regard to whom Isaiah said, ‘ He bringeth forth an instrument into ny and renders ‘when I. was delivered for the first time’. But this would require nyn. I emend as follows: oxawein Ss nsx yenna. On this order of object and subject, cf. Gen. iv. 15; Joshua xiv. 115 2 Sam. xviii, 29; Isa. xx. 1, ἄς. The error arose through the transposition of the nx. ‘ The former’ are of course ‘ Moses and Aaron’. Here Lévi and Lagrange render A21wN7n NN ‘ pour la premitre fois’ ! VIII. 1-10. The period here referred to seems to be the same as ‘the period of wrath’ in i. 5 when evil men arose who rebelled against the commandments of God (Ὁ. 2). But God raised up men of understanding, studied the law (4-5) and went forth out of the land of Judah to Damascus (6). In this law and its prec they should walk till the Teacher of righteousness arose (10). We have already seen (see i. 7 note) that this teacher was raised up ‘in the period of the wrath’ (i. 5), which began or prevailed about 196 8. c. In 2. tὸ ane period is called ‘the end of the days’. . the period of the destruction of the land. Sce i. 5 and preceding note. gerne removed the landmark. Cf. i. ta note; ix. 13, 49. These wicked leaders may be the Hellenizers if the date is early, or the Pharisees if it is late. Perhaps the same as ‘the scornful man’ spoken of in i. 10; for he ‘talked to Israel lying words and made them go astray’ (i. 10; cf. viii. 2, 1) so that they ‘should ‘remoy 8 the landmark’ (i. xa: cf. viii. 1). g for his work.’ And the nobles of the people are those who came to dig the well by the precepts in the which the Lawgiver ordained that they should walk throughout the full period of the wickedness. ro And save them they shall get nothing until there arises the Teacher of Righteousness in the end of the days. VIII. 11-20. Conditions under which they can act as Priests in the Sanctuary. z And none who have entered into the covenant shall enter into the Sanctuary to kindle His altar but they shall shut the doors concerning whom God said, “Ὁ that there was one among you to shut the doors, So that ye might not vainly kindle the fire upon My altar, Unless they observe to do according to the true meaning of the Law until the period of the wickedness, and to sever themselves from the children of the pit, and to hold aloof from the polluted wealth of wickedness under a vow and a curse, and from the wealth of the Sanctuary :
13.  And in respect to robbing the poor of His people, So that widows may be their spoil, And they may murder the fatherless:
14.  And to make a difference between the clean and the unclean and to make men discern between
15.  the holy and the profane: And to observe the Sabbath according to its true meaning and the feasts and the day of the Fast according to the utterances of them who entered into the New
16.  Covenant in the land of Damascus: To contribute their holy things according to the true inter-
17.  pretation: To love every one his brother as himself, and to strengthen the hand of the poor
18.  and the needy and the stranger, and to seek every one the peace of his brother: To hold aloof from harlots according to the law: and that no man should commit a trespass against his next
19.  of kin: To rebuke every one his brother according to the commandment, and not to bear a grudge
20.  from day to day, and to separate from all the pollutions according to their judgements. And no man to hold aloof... from the wealth of the Sanctuary. Can this be a pregnant expression for ‘to hold aloof... from robbing the wealth, &c.’? If so, we might compare Test. Lev. xiv. 5 ‘ The offerings of the Lord ye shall rob, and from His portion ye shall steal choice portions’. The chief Pharisee of the time of Jannaeus, i.e. Simon ben Shetach, is said to have appropriated to his own use half the offerings of 300 Nazarites. See Schiirer’, i. 279 sq. But the text may mean that the priests of the Party are not to avail themselves of the wealth of the Temple. from the wealth, &c. Reading pin instead of pina. In vi. 11 ( The same charge appears here to be brought ‘against the wealth of the Sanctuary. If this is so, the Sanctuary in question cannot be the sanctuary of the Party ; for they would not in any case admit that its — (small) wealth was of this nature. Hence the text can only refer to the Temple in Jerusalem. ordinances, the covenant of God Text A. standeth fast unto them to preserve them to ἃ thousand generations. Xa: And if they settle in camps according to the order of the land and take wives and beget children, they shall walk according to the Law, _ and according tothe judgements of the ordinances according to the order of the Law as He spake, ‘between a man and his wife, and between a father and his son’. I 2 But as for all them that reject ... when God will bring a visitation upon the land they shall be requited with the recompense of the wicked ; when there shall come to pass the word which is written in the words of Isaiah the son of Amos 3 the prophet, who said : ‘ He will bring upon thee and upon thy people and upon thy father’s house days that have (not) come from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah.’ clauses recur in xvi. 12. into ovo’. Cf. xi. 2. changed Mi30N3 into nIONI as in the Psalms. be read as panxd and yniyn. IX. 1. camps. ‘camp’, referring to Elkan Adler D"5 "193, p. 3. XVii. I. to a Hebrew original. in Dan. vi. 3, 4, &c. πόδ σon A a IX. 4-9. Foundation of the Zadokite Party and its Expectations: the Law, the Prophets, and the Messiah. 4 When the two houses of Israel] separated, [Ephraim departed from Judah, and] all who proved faithless were delivered to the sword, and those who held fast escaped into the land of the North. 5 As He said, ‘And I will cause to go into captivity Siccuth your King and Chiun your images, 6 (the star of your god which ye made for yourselves) beyond Damascus.’ The books of the Law are the tabernacle of the King, as He said, ‘And I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is ἡ fallen.” The King is the congregation and Chiun the images are the books of the Prophets, whose 8 words Israel has despised. And the Star is he who studied the Law, who came to Damascus, as it is written, ‘There shall come forth a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall rise out of Israel.’ The 9 sceptre is the prince of all the congregation. IX. 10-20. The Messiah will destroy those who were faithless to the New Covenant: their moral Derelictions through Hellenizing Influences. A B to And when he arises ‘he shall destroy all the And ‘ they that give heed unto Him are ther sons of (battle) din’... . These shall escape during poor of the flock’. These shall escape during the the period of the [first] visitation, but those who period of thevisitation, but the rest shall be handed proved faithless shall be delivered to the sword. over to the sword when the Messiah comes from 4. [Ephraim ... and]. Bracketed as a dittograph from the preceding sentence. So Landauer. all who proved faithless. Cf. v. to. those who held fast. See v. 1 note. land of the North, i.e. Damascus. 5-9. The extraordinary piece of exegesis which we find in these verses has for its object the removal from the Messianic hopes of the expectation of a Messiah descended from David. No kingly but a priestly Messiah is to be looked for. A ti [Lost.] 12 And this also shall be the judgement of all them who have entered into His covenant, who will not hold fast to these (statutes): they shall be visited for destruction through the hand 13 of Belial. This is the day on which God shall visit (as He hath spoken) : ‘The princes of Judah were (like them that removed the landmark): Upon them will I pour out(My) wrath (like water).’ 14 For they are too sick to be healed, And they have been at the head of all the rebels. 15 Because they have not turned from the way of traitors, But have wallowed in the ways of harlots, And in the wealth of wickedness and (in) revenge. 16 And every man beareth a grudge against his brother, And every man hateth his neighbour. 17 And they committed trespass every man against his next of kin, And drew near to unchastity : 7. DPI ONT DwWINA. that avengeth...covenant. Cf. i. 12d. A And exalted themselves with a view to wealth and unjust gain, And every man did that which was right in his own eyes, 18 And they chose every man the stubbornness of his heart, And they separated not from the people, 19 And they cast off restraint with a high hand To walk in the way of the wicked, concerning whom God said : ‘ Their wine is the poison of dragons And the cruel venom of asps.’ 20 ‘The dragons are the kings of the Gentiles and their wine is their ways, and the venom of asps is the head of the kings of Javan, who came to execute vengeance upon them. IX. 21-23. Neither to these things nor to Moses dtd the Builders of the Wall give heed.
21.  But despite all these things they who builded the wall and daubed it with untempered mortar line recurs. But we might retain PO" and change "Nw3 into "Nw and derive the text from Isa. lviii. 7 and translate ‘hid themselves every man from his own flesh’. exalted themselves with a view to wealth and unjust gain. The text reads ysady nad ἘΣΣῚ where I have emended 1933n" into 133n* or 37339 (cf. B yaan) on the strength of Jub. xxiii. 21, ‘They will all exalt Here the Ethiopic word for ‘deceit’ is a rendering of πλεονεξία, which in turn is a rendering of yy3 in Judges v. 19: or of ἀδiκίa, which is similarly a rendering of the same Hebrew ysa is also rendered by ἀνομία. Thus our text is clearly dependent on Jub. xxiii. 19, which latter would be better rendered ‘they will all exalt themselves with a view to unjust gain In B the verb is y723n', ‘made themselves strong ’, which may be right, though it is not the word Its appearance here may be due to v. 54 ¢ in our text, where it occurs in a good sense. See iv. 5c. themselves with a view to deceit and wealth.’ word in Prov. xxviii. 16: cf. Ps. ix. 24. and wealth’. implied by Jub. xxiii. 21. every man did that which was right, &c. transposition of WW MN WN. A
22.  perceived not— For one who was Τρεγίυσγρεα
25.  Owing to the love of God for the forefathers who stirred up (the people to follow) after Him, He B to the love of God for the forefathers who admonished the people (to follow) after God, He loved them that came after them, for theirs perceived not— For one who }walked in wind 22 of spirit and talked liestalked to them— _ that and weighed stormsf, and talked lies to man the wrath of God was kindled against all His con- (talked)— that the wrath of God was kindled gregation: against all His congregation : 23 Nor that Moses said,‘ Not for thy righteous- Nor that Moses said to Israel, ‘ Not for thy 23 ness or for the uprightness of thine heart dost righteousness nor for the uprightness of thine thou go in to inherit these nations, but because heart dost thou go in to inherit these nations, but He loved thy fathers and because He would because He loved thy fathers and because He keep the oath.’ would keep the oath.’ IX. 24-27. The Penitents like the Forefathers were loved of God for their Faithfulness to the Covenant, but as He judged the Builders of the Wall, so shall those faithless to the New Covenant be judged. 24 And such is the case of the penitents of Israel Such is the case of the penitents of Israel (who) 24 (who) turned aside from the way of the people. turned aside from the way of the people. Owing 25 ample grounds for their opposition we learn from the words of Shammai, who lived in the first century B.c. This Rabbi said: ‘ We have two Toroth, the written Torah (an33y An) and the oral Torah (np Syaw mn).’ According to the Jer. Peah ii. 6 the latter are the ‘more precious’, while Rabbi Jochanan in Jer. Berakoth i. 7 declares that ‘the words of the Sopherim are .. . more beloved than words of Torah’ (see Taylor, of. cz#., p. 14). In Berakh. 8a, 13, B. Mez. 33 a, Chag roa the comparative values of the Torah and the Mishna and Talmud are dealt with, much to the disadvantage of the Torah. In the Aboda Zara 354 R. Dimi explained Canticles i. 2 as meaning: ‘the words of thy loved ones (i.e. the scholars) are better than the wine of the Law’ (An by TP any yn 737). In the late work Aboth R. N., Book i, p. 3, the consciousness of this evil is present to the writer, since it is urged that the fence (173) was not to be made excessive lest it should overpower the root or plant it was intended to protect ("ppm jo “n"). Another fact, i.e. our author’s use of yn instead of 3%, may point in the same direction. The latter means a fence round something and 3D is ‘to fence about’, but the former is a partition-wall. Now it is quite sets that our author may have deliberately used yn instead of "Ὁ. Thus by naming the fence pn the jokites implied that the Pharisees did not by this means so much protect the Law against profanation from without as create division among the ranks of the faithful within. We might compare St. Paul’s designation of ‘circumcision’ (περιτομή) as mere ‘mutilation’ (κατατομή) in Phil. iii. 2. It is worth noting in this connexion that whereas our author brands the abnormal growth of the oral law with the name ‘ partition-wall’, St. Paul, in Eph. ii. 14, brands the entire Law—written and oral—with the same designation, daubed it with untempered mortar (San mp). From Ezek. xiii, 10, 11, 14, 15, xxii. 28. A B
26.  the covenant of the fathers. But since He hated is the covenant of the fathers. But God hates 26 the builders of the wall His wrath was kindled. and abhors the builders of the wall and His wrath was kindled against them and against all
27.  And such (will be) the case of all who reject the who follow after them. And such (will be) the 27 commandments of God, and forsake them and case of all who reject the commandments of God, turn away in the stubbornness of their heart. and forsake them and turn away in the stubborn- ness of their heart. IX. 28-39. LExcommunication of those who fall away from the New Covenant.
28.  This is the word which Jeremiah spake to So are all the men who entered into the New Baruch the son of Neriah, and Elisha to his Covenant inthe land of Damascus and yet turned servant Gehazi. All the men who entered into backward and acted treacherously and departed the New Covenant in the land of Damascus. from the spring of living waters. B
29.  They shall not be reckoned in the assembly of the people, and in its register they shall not be written, from the day when there was gathered in the Unique Teacher until there shall arise the
30.  Messiah from Aaron and from Israel. And such is the case for all that enter into the congregation
31.  of the men of the perfection of holiness. And as for him who abhors doing precepts of upright men [he is the man who is melted in the furnace], when his deeds become known he shall be expelled from the congregation, as though his lot had not fallen among them that are taught of God. First of all 5y cannot stand. Next we might emend oyn into nya and add bind from a comparison of the last clause in the next verse in B. There God’s wrath is kindled against ‘all who follow after them’ (i.e. the builders of the party-wall). In contrast to these the people are exhorted to follow after God in the present verse. theirs is the covenant of the fathers. Cf. Rom. ix. 3-4 ‘Israelites whose . . . are the covenants’. B
32.  According to his trespass they shall record him as a perverted man until he come back to stand in
33.  the office of the men of the perfection of holiness. And when his deeds become known, in accor- dance with the midrash of the Law in which walk the men of the perfection of holiness, no man shall consent (to be) with him in wealth and labour ; for all the saints of the Most High have
34.  cursed him. And such shall be the case of every one who rejects the first and the last, who have
35.  placed idols upon their hearts and walked in the stubbornness of their hearts. They have no share
36.  in the House of the Law. With a judgement like unto that of their neighbours who turned away
37.  with the scornful men, they shall be judged. For they spake error against the statutes of righteousness, and rejected the covenant and the pledge of faith, which they had affirmed in the land
38.  of Damascus; and this is the New Covenant. And there shall not be unto them nor unto their
39.  families a share in the House of the Law. And from the day when there was gathered in the Unique Teacher until all the men of war were consumed who walked with the man of lies about forty years,
40.  [And during this period there shall be kindled the wrath of God against Israel as He said, ‘ there
41.  is no king and no prince’ and no judge, and none that rebuketh in righteousness,| Those who
42.  repented of transgression (in Jacob) observed the covenant of God. Then they spake each man
43.  with his neighbour (to strengthen one) another: ‘ Let our steps hold fast to the way of God.’ And God hearkened to their words and heard, and a book of remembrance was written (before Him) for them that feared God (and) that thought upon His name until salvation and righteousness be revealed B
44.  for (them that fear God. Then shall ye return and discern) between the righteous and wicked,
45.  between him that serveth God and him that serveth Him not. And He showeth mercy (unto thousands) of them that love Him and keep (His commandments) for a thousand generations. 46,47 +From the house of Peleg} that have gone out from the holy city. And they trusted in God throughout the period that Israel trespassed and polluted the Sanctuary and returned again to
48.  molten images. The people with few words shall all be judged, each according to his spirit in
49.  the counsel of holiness. And as for all those who have broken down the landmark of the Law amongst those who entered into the covenant, when there shall shine forth the glory of God to Israel, they shall be cut off from the midst of the camp, and with all those who do wickedly of Judah in the days of its testing. IX. 50-54. The faithful shall confess their sins and be forgiven and blessed.
50.  Βιυΐ all they who hold fast by these judgements in going out and coming in according to the Law, and listen to the voice of the Teacher and confess before God (saying)
51.  We have done wickedly, we and our fathers, Because we have walked contrary to the statutes of the covenant, And true is thy judgement against us:’
52.  And (who) lift not the hand against His holy statutes, His righteous judgement, and the testimony
53.  of His truth ; and are chastised by the first judgements with which the children of men were judged : and give ear to the voice of the Unique Teacher of Righteousness: and reject not the statutes of righteousness when they hear them:
54.  They shall rejoice and be glad, And their heart shall exult, And they shall make themselves strong against all the children of the world, And God will pardon them And they shall see His salvation ; For they trust in His holy name. A X. 1-6. A man is not to avenge himself or bear a Grudge. 1 Every man who puts under the ban a man [amongst men] according to the ordinances of the Gentiles is to be put to death: 2 And as for that which He hath said: ‘Thou shalt not take vengeance nor bear a grudge against the children of thy people, every man of those who have entered into the covenant, who brings a charge against his neighbour whom he had not rebuked before witnesses, and yet brings it in his fierce wrath or recounts (it) to his elders in order to bring him into contempt, 3 is taking vengeance and bearing a grudge. But naught is written save that, ‘He taketh vengeance 4 on His adversaries, and He beareth a grudge against His enemies.’ If he held his peace with regard to him from day to day, but in his fierce wrath spake against him in a matter of death, he hath testified against himself because he did not give effect to the commandment of God, Who said to him, 5,6‘ Thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour and not bear sin because of him.’ As regards the oath, touching that which He said ‘ Thou shalt not avenge thee with thine own hand’, the man who makes (another man) swear in the open field—that is, not in the presence of the judges, or owing to their commands—hath avenged himself with his own hand. I X. 7-9. The law as to lost property. 7 And as for anything that is lost, should it not be known who has stolen it from the property of the camp in which the thing has been stolen, its owner shall proclaim (it) by the oath of cursing, and 8 whoso hears, if he knows and declares it not, shall be held guilty. As for any restitution made by him who returns that which has [not] an owner, he who returns (it) shall confess to the priest, and 9 (that which was lost) shall be given back to him, besides the ram of the guilt-offering to the priest. And so everything (that was) lost (and) found and has no owner shall be given to the priests ; for he who found it knows not its law. If its owner is not found they shall take charge (of it). X. 10-17. The Number of Witnesses necessary in the case of Capital and other Offences. The Character of the Witnesses. o If a man in any matter trespasses against the Law and his neighbour and none but he sees it, if it be a matter of death, he shall make it known to the Censor in the presence of the accused in discharging the duty of reproof: and the Censor shall write it down with his own hand: If he do it again before another, he shall return and make it known to the Censor. " 7-9. These verses refer to lost property. vv. 7-8 refer to lost property, the owner of which is known: zv. 9 to lost property, the owner of which is unknown. This is clearly the meaning, though the text is corrupt and needs to be emended. ἡ. According to Deut. xxii. 1-3 restoration of a lost article was to be made fo its owner, if a ‘brother’ or ‘neighbour’. According to the Baba Kamma 1134 (where there is a long discussion on this and kindred questions) such restoration was not to be made to a Gentile. According to the Rabbis there was in Jerusalem a ‘stone of decision’ (? Σ᾽ j2N) to which the losers and finders of property came, and had its ownership settled (Baba Mez. 284). And as for anything that is lost, i.e. 321Nn 52). According to later Hebrew this could be translated ‘and as for any one who loses (anything)’. But the context is in favour of the classical meaning of 738 here. The question first and foremost is that of lost property, not of the losers of it. The latter question necessarily follows. When property is lost, the loser is either known or unknown. from the property of the camp, i.e. ΠOΠΩΠ INDY. This extraordinary use of this word recurs in xiv. ro. Else I would propose n1N = ‘ of the people of the camp’. Lévi feels dissatisfied and suggests Jin ‘from the midst of the camp’. proclaim, i.e. yw’ emended from Ὁ by Schechter. If we retain the text, render ‘shall adjure (the people concerned) by the oath of cursing’. 2,13 If he shall be caught again before another, his judgement shall be executed. And if they are ᾿ς two and they witness against him (each) on a different thing the man shall be only excluded from the Purity, provided that they are trustworthy, and that on the day on which they have seen the _14man they make it known to the Censor. And according to the statute (they shall) accept two 15 trustworthy witnesses, and not one to exclude the Purityt. And there shall arise no witness before the judges to cause a man to be put to death at his mouth, whose days have not been fulfilled so as 16 to pass over unto those that are numbered (and who is not) a man who fears God. None shall be believed as a witness against his neighbour who transgresses a word of the commandment with a high hand until they are cleansed through repentance. XI. Regulations as to the Judges of the Zadokite Party. 1.2 And this is the order in reference to the judges of the congregation. (They shall amount) to ten men selected from the congregation according to the time (defined) ; four of the tribe of Levi and Aaron, and six of Israel learned in the Book of {the Haguy and in the Ordinances of the Covenant, 3 from five and twenty years old even unto sixty years old. But none shall be appointed when he is’ 4 sixty years old and upward to judge the congregation. For through the trespasses of man his days were minished, and when the wrath of God was kindled against the inhabitants of the earth, He commanded their intelligence to depart from them before they completed their days. XII. Levitical Law as to Bathing. 12 t As to being cleansed in water. No man shall wash in water (that is) filthy or insufficient for a 2 man’s bath. None shall cleanse himself in the waters of a vessel. And every pool in a rock in which there is not sufficient (water) for a bath, which an unclean person has touched, its waters shall be unclean like the waters of the vessel. XIII. 1-11. Laws regarding the Sabbath. 13 1: As to the Sabbath, to observe it according to its law, no man shall do work on the sixth day from the time when the sun’s orb in its fullness is still without the gate, for it is He who has said, ‘ Observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy.’ 2,3. And on the Sabbath day no man shall utter a word of folly and vanity. No man shall lend aught 4,5 to his neighbour. None shall dispute on matters of wealth and gain. None shall speak on matters 6 of work and labour to be done on the following morning. No man shall walk in the field to do the » work of his business. On the Sabbath none shall walk outside his city more than ta thousand} 8 cubits. No man shall eat on the Sabbath day aught save that which is prepared or perishing (in the , to field). Nor shall one eat or drink unless in the camp. (If he was) on the way and went down to aἰ wash he may drink where he stands, but he shall not draw into any vessel. No man shall send the son of a stranger to do his business on the Sabbath day. XIII. 12. Laws as to unclean Garments. 12 No man shall put on garments that are filthy or were brought by a Gentile unless they were washed in water or rubbed with frankincense. XIII. 13-27. Laws regarding the Sabbath. 14 Noman shall fast of his own will on the Sabbath. No man shall walk after the animal to pasture 15 it outside his city more than two thousand cubits. None shall lift his hand to smite it with (his) fist. 16 If it be stubborn he shall not remove it out of his house. No man shall carry anything from the house to the outside or from the outside into the house, and if he be in the vestibule he shall not 17 carry anything out of it or bring in anything into it. None shall open the cover of a vessel that 18 is pasted on the Sabbath. No man shall carry on him spices to go out or come in on the Sabbath. 9, 20 None shall lift up in his dwelling house rock or earth. Let not the nursing father take the sucking 21 child to go out or to come in on the Sabbath. No man shall provoke his manservant or his maid- 22 servant or his hireling on the Sabbath. No man shall help an animal in its delivery on the Sabbath 3.24 day. And if it falls into a pit or ditch, he shall not raise it on the Sabbath. No man shall 25 rest ina place near to the Gentiles on the Sabbath. No man shall suffer himself to be polluted [the 26 Sabbath] for the sake of wealth or gain on the Sabbath. And if any person falls into a place of 27 water or into a place of ... he shall not bring him up by a ladder or a cord or instrument. No man shall offer anything on the altar on the Sabbath, save the burnt-offering of the Sabbath, for so it is written +‘ Excepting your Sabbaths *.+ XIV. 1-4. Levitical Laws as to Uncleanness. 1 Noman shall send to the altar burnt-offering or meat-offering or frankincense or wood through the hand of a man (that is) unclean through any of the uncleannesses allowing him to defile the altar, for it is written: ‘ The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, but the prayer of the righteous 2 is like an offering of delight. And none of those who enter into the house of worship shall enter 3 when he is unclean even though washed. And when the trumpets of the Congregation sound, it shall be (done) before or after, and they shall not put an end to the whole service: (the Sabbath) is holy. 4 No man shall lie with a woman in the city of the Sanctuary to defile the city of the Sanctuary by their impurity. XIV. 5. Law as to Necromancy. 5 Any man who is ruled by the spirits of Belial and speaks rebellion shall be judged by the judge- ment of the necromancer and wizard. Cf. Yoma viii. 6, 7, where it is said that the question of life takes precedence of other questions. The teaching in our text conflicts strongly with Luke xiv. 5. XIV. 6. Law as to the Sabbath. 6 And he whom he leads astray into profaning the Sabbath and the Feasts shall not be put to death ; but it shall be the duty of the sons of man to watch him; and should he be healed of it, they shall watch him seven years and then he shall come into the Congregation. XIV. 7-11. Laws as to Intercourse with the Gentiles. 7 None shall stretch out his hand to shed the blood of any man from among the Gentiles for the 8 sake of wealth or gain. Nor shall he take aught of their wealth lest they blaspheme, unless by g the counsel of the Community of Israel. No man shall sell an animal or bird that is clean to the to Gentiles, lest they sacrifice them. Nor shall he sell them aught from his threshing-floor or his tx winepress for all his property. Nor shall he sell them his manservant or maidservant who entered with him into the covenant of Abraham. XIV. 12-16. Laws as to unclean Foods and Causes of Uncleanness. 12 No man shall make himself abominable with any living creature or creeping thing, by eating of 13 them: or of the defilements of bees or of any living creature that moveth in the waters. Nor shall 14 fish be eaten unless they were split alive and their blood was shed. But all the locusts after their * kind shall come into fire or into water whilst they are still living, for this is the manner of their 15 creation. And all wood and stones and dust which are polluted by the uncleanness of man are 16 polluted like them. According to their uncleanness shall be unclean he who toucheth them. And every instrument, nail, or peg in the wall which is with the dead in the house shall be unclean, like the uncleanness of an instrument of work. XV. 1-3. Summary Reference to Laws of Uncleanness. 1 The regulation of the dwellers in the cities of Israel, according to these judgements, that a difference may be made between the unclean and the clean, and to make known (the difference) between the 2 holy and the common. And these statutes are to give instruction so that the whole nation may 3 walk in them according to the Law always. And according to this law shall walk the seed of Israel, and they shall not be cursed. XV. 4-6. The Ruler to be a Priest or a Levite. 4 And this is the regulation of the dwellers (according to which they should) act during the period of the wickedness until there arises the Messiah (from) Aaron and Israel, up to ten men at least, 5 to thousands and hundreds and fifties and tens. And when there arise ten, the man who is a priest learned in the Book of {πe Haguf shall not depart. According to his word shall they all be ruled. 6 And if he is not expert in all these, but a man of the Levites is expert in these, the lot shall be that all those that enter into the camp shall go out and come in according to his word. XV. 7-8. Law as to Leprosy. 7 And if there be a judgement regarding the law of leprosy which is in a man, then the priest shall 8 come and stand in the camp, and the Censor shall instruct him in the true meaning of the law. And (even) if he is lacking in understanding he shall shut him up ; for unto them (i.e. the priests) is the judgement. XVI. The Duties of the Censor. 1 And this is the regulation of the Censor of the camp. He shall instruct the many in the works of endless casuistry, our text simply declares that the uncleanness of a man affects the uncleanness of the objects he touches or is near. It is not certain, however, whether our text implies direct or indirect contact. It is probably the latter. If so, its teaching would agree with that of the Sadducees (as against the Pharisees), who extended — the power of pollution from direct to indirect contact, Yad. iv. 7. God, and shall make them understand His wondrous mighty acts, and shall narrate before them the 2 things of the world since its creation. And he shall have mercy upon them as a father upon his 3 children, and shall for(give) all that have incurred guilt. Asa shepherd with his flock he shall loose 4 all the bonds of their knots... oppressed and crushed in his congregation. And every one who joins his congregation, he shall reckon him according to his works, his understanding, his might, his 5 strength, and his wealth. And they shall record him in his place in accordance with his position 6 in a lot of the (camp). No man of the children of the camp shall have power to bring a man into ἡ the congregation (without) the word of the Censor of the camp. Nor shall any man of them who have entered into the covenant of God do business (with) the children of the pit (un)less hand to Shand. Noman shall do (a thing as buy)ing and sell(ing) un(less he has spoken) to the Censor of the camp, and he shall do (it in the ca)mp and not... and so to him who casts forth... they, gand he who is not connected with... And this is the settlement of the camps. All... 11 shall not succeed to settle in the land.... that have not come from the day that Ephraim 12 departed from Judah. And as for all who walk in these the covenant of God standeth fast unto them to save them from all the snares of the pit, for suddenly. . . . XVII. 1-5. Zhe four Orders of the Community. 2 And the regulation of the dwellers of all the camps is: They shall be numbered all by their names, 3 the Priests first, the Levites second, the children of Israel third, and the proselyte fourth. And they shall be recorded by their names one after another, the Priests first, the Levites second, the 4 children of Israel third, and the proselyte fourth. And so they shall be seated and so they shall 5 ask with regard to every matter. And the Priest who numbers. the many (shall be) from thirty years old even unto sixty years old, learned in the Book (of the Hagu and) in all the judgements of the Law to direct them according to their judgements. His wondrous mighty acts, i.e. wp ΠY 2). The text reads the second word as 'x>p. On the phrase cf. v. 5. things, ie. nym. Cf. ii. 7. since its creation. The text reads ΠῚ ἼΞ3 ‘in detail’, which I have emended into 1n™73». 19 6 7 old, a master in every counsel of men, and in every tongue. . . According to his word shall come 8 in those who enter the congregation every man in his due order. And as regards any matter on 1,2 3 judges. From it they shall give . . . and (from) it they shall strengthen the hand of the poor and 4 the needy. And to the aged man who... to the vagrant and him (who) was taken captive of 5 ἃ strange people. And to the virgin who has {no dot) (and to him whom) no man careth for: every 6,7 work ...and not... And this is the explanation of the settlement ... And this is the — 8 explanation of the judgements which . . . (The Messiah from) Aaron and Israel. And He will 9 PΛ our sins... in api and he ‘shall know. . . punishment six days and who shall © 10 Speak . . . against Mos(es) . XVII. 6-8. Duties of the Censor. And the Censor who is over all the camps shall be from thirty years old even unto fifty years — which it shall be incumbent for any man to speak, he shall speak to the Censor in regard to any — suit or cause. XVIII. 1-5. Almsgiving. And this is the regulation for the many in order to provide for all their needs. The wages of © two days every month is the rule. And they shall give it into the hands of the Censor and the XIX. Laws as to Oaths. . . (Shall not swe)ar either by Aleph Lamed or by Aleph Daleth, but by the oath (written) in 2.3 the curses of the covenant. But the Law of Moses he shall not mention, for. . . And if he swears _ 4nd transgresses he profanes the Name. And if by the curses of the covenant .. . the Judges. 5 And if he transgress he shall be held guilty: but if he confess and make restitution he shall 6 not bear (the penalty) of death. And whosoever in all Israel shall enter into the covenant by a statute for ever, together with their children who are (not of an age) to pass over into the number of those 7 who are enrolled by the oath of the covenant, shall confirm it on their behalf. And this is also the law throughout the entire period of the wickedness for every one who returns from his corrupt 8 way. On the day when he speaks with the Censor of the many they shall enrol him by the oath g of the covenant that Moses established with Israel—the covenant to re(turn to the Law of M)oses. . . with all (his) heart . . . (and with all his) soul: as regards that which there is found 10 to be done fby them} ... And no man shall make known to him the laws until he stand before the 11 Censor (who) shall search out concerning him when he examines him. And when he imposes it upon him to return to the Law of Moses with all his heart and all his soul... of him if... 12 And every thing that was revealed of the Law with regard to a suit... in him. . . the Censor him and shall command him ... . until . . . killed him . . . and the madman and all . . . (loss of 14 five lines) covenant with you and with the whole of Israel. Therefore the man shall impose it upon himself to return to the Law of Moses ; for in it everything is accurately treated. ᾿ XX.1. Reference to the book of Jubilees. x And as for the exact statement of their periods to put Israel in remembrance in regard to all these, behold, it is treated accurately in the Book of the Divisions of the Seasons according to their Jubilees and their Weeks. an oath. Only the oath of the covenant was allowed. In 2 Enoch xlix. 1-2 swearing by heaven or earth or any other ‘ created thing’ was forbidden. The Essenes forbade all swearing: cf. Jos. B. Z. ii. 8.6; Philo ii. 458. written. So Lévi supplies the lacuna. XX, 2-12. Laws as to Oaths and Vows. 2 And on the day on which the man imposes it upon himself to return to the law of Moses the 3 angel of Mastema will depart from him if he make good his word. Therefore Abraham was 4 circumcised on the day of his knowing it. As to what he said, ‘ That which is gone forth from 5 thy lips thou shalt keep’ to make it good—No binding oath, which a man imposes upon himself with a view to perform a commandment of the law, shall he cancel even at the risk of death. 6 Nothing which a man (imposes) upon himself with a view to (frustrate the la)w shall he make 7 good even at the risk of death. (As for) the oath of the woman, whose oath Mos(es sa)id should 8 be disallowed, no man shall disallow an oath which no man knew. It is to be confirmed. And whether it be to disallow or to transgress the covenant, he shall disallow it and not confirm it. 9 And so is also the law for her father. As to the law of the of(fer)ings no man shall vow anything 10 for the altar under compulsion. Nor shall the (prjiests take anything from the Israelites . . . 11 (Nor) shall a man dedicate the food . . . this is what he said, ‘ They hunt every man his brother 12 with a net.’ Nor shall de(vote) ... of all... his possession ... holy ... shall be punished he. . . who takes a vow... to the judge... history of the division of the days . . . of the events of the years, of their weeks, of their jubilees.’ Here, as in our text, ‘the weeks’ are ‘ weeks of years’.
