# The Letter of Aristeas

1.  SINCE I have collected material for a memorable history of my visit to Eleazar the High priest of the Jews, and because you, Philocrates, as you lose no opportunity of reminding me, have set great store upon receiving an account of the motives and object of my mission, I have attempted to draw up a clear exposition of the matter for you, for I perceive that you possess a natural love of learning,
2.  a quality which is the highest possession of man—to be constantly attempting ‘ to add to his stock of knowledge and acquirements’ whether through the study of history or by actually participating in the events themselves. It is by this means, by taking up into itself the noblest elements, that the soul is established in purity, and having fixed its aim on piety, the noblest goal of all, it uses this as its infallible guide and so acquires a definite purpose.
3.  It was my devotion to the pursuit of religious knowledge that led me to undertake the embassy to the man I have mentioned, who was held in the highest esteem by his own citizens and by others both for his virtue and his majesty and who had in his possession documents of the highest value to the Jews in his own country and in foreign lands for the interpretation of the divine law, for their
4.  laws are written on leather parchments in Jewish characters. This embassy then I undertook with enthusiasm, having first of all found an opportunity of pleading with the king on behalf of the Jewish captives who had been transported from Judea to Egypt by the king’s father, when he first \_ obtained possession of this city and conquered the land of Egypt. It is worth while that I should tell
5.  you this story, too, since I am convinced that you, with your disposition towards holiness and your sympathy with men who are living in accordance with the holy law, will all the more readily listen to the account which I purpose to set forth, since you yourself have lately come to us from the
6.  island and are anxious to hear everything that tends to build up the soul. On a former occasion, too, I sent you a record of the facts which I thought worth relating about the Jewish race,—the record
7.  which I had obtained from the most learned high priests of the Ὁ most learned + land of Egypt. As you are so eager to acquire the knowledge of those things which can benefit the mind, I feel it incumbent upon me to impart to you all the information in my power. I should feel the same duty towards all who possessed the same disposition but I feel it especially towards you since you have aspirations which are so noble, and since you are not only my brother in character no less than in blood
8.  but are one with me as well in the pursuit of goodness, For neither the pleasure derived from gold nor any other of the possessions which are prized by shallow minds confers the same benefit as the pursuit of culture and the study which we expend in securing it, But that I may not weary you by a too lengthy introduction, I will proceed at once to the substance of my narrative. -
9.  Demetrius oἵ Phalerum, the president of the king’s library, received vast sums of money, for the purpose of collecting together, as far as he possibly could, all the books in the world. By means of_ purchase and transcription, he carried out, to the best of his ability, the purpose of the king. On one occasion when I was present he was asked, How many thousand books are there zz 216 library? to and he replied, ‘ More than two hundred thousand, O king, and I shall make endeavour in the immediate future 20 gather together the remainder also, so that the total of five hundred thousand may be reached. Iam told that the laws of the Jews are worth transcribing and deserve a place in _ tt your library.’ ‘What is to prevent you from doing this?’ replied the king. ‘ Everything that is) necessary has been placed at your disposal.’ ‘They need to be translated,’ answered Demetrius, ‘for in the country of the Jews they use a peculiar alphabet (just as the Egyptians, too, have a special form of letters) and speak a peculiar dialect. They are supposed to use the Syriac tongue, but this is not the case; their language is quite different.’ And the king when he under- stood all the facts of the case ordered a letter to be written to the Jewish High Priest that his purpose (which has already been described) might be accomplished. =
12.  Thinking that the time had come to press the demand, which I had often laid before Sosibius of Tarentum and Andreas, the chief of the bodyguard, for the emancipation of the Jews who had been transported from Judea by the king’s father—for when by a combination of good fortune and courage he had brought his attack on the whole district of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia to a successful Assue, in the process of terrorising the country into subjection, he transported some of his foes and ‘others he reduced to captivity. The number of those whom he transported from the country of the tὸ Jews to Egypt amounted to no less than a hundred thousand. Of these he armed thirty thousand picked men and settled them in garrisons in the country districts. (And even before this time large numbers of Jews had come into Egypt with the Persian, and in an earlier period still others had been sent fo Egypt to help Psammetichus in his campaign against the king of the Ethiopians. But these were nothing like so numerous as the captives whom Ptolemy the son of Lagus transported.)
14.  As I have already said Ptolemy picked out the best of these, the men who were in the prime of ‘life and distinguished for their courage, and armed them, but the great mass of the others, those who were too old or too young for this purpose, and the women too, he reduced to slavery, not that he wished to do this of his own free will, but he was compelled by his soldiers who claimed them as a reward for the services which they had rendered in war. Having, as has already been stated, obtained an opportunity for securing their emancipation, I addressed the king with the following arguments. ‘Let us not be so unreasonable as to allow
15.  our deeds to give the lie to our words. Since the law which we wish not only to transcribe but also to translate belongs to the whole Jewish race, what justification shall we be able to find for our embassy while such vast numbers of them remain in a state of slavery in your kingdom? In the perfection and wealth of your clemency release those who are held in such miserable bondage, since as I have been at pains to discover, the God who gave them their law is the God who maintains your kingdom. They worship the same God—the Lord and Creator of the Universe, as all other men, as we ourselves, O king, though we call him by different names, such as Zeus or
16.  Dis. This name was very appropriately bestowed upon him by our first ancestors, in order to signify that He through whom all things are endowed with life and come into being, is necessarily the ruler and lord of the Universe. Set all mankind an example of magnanimity by releasing those who are held in bondage.’
17.  After a brief interval, while I was offering up an earnest prayer to God that He would so dispose the mind of the king that all the captives might be set at liberty—(for the human race, being the creation of God, is swayed and influenced by Him, Therefore with many divers prayers I called upon Him who ruleth the heart that ¢ie king might be constrained to grant my request. For I had
18.  great hopes with regard to the salvation of the men since I was assured that God would grant a fulfilment of my prayer. For when men from pure motives plan some action in the interest of righteousness and the performance of noble deeds, Almighty God brings their efforts and purposes to a successful issue)—zhe king raised his head and looking up at me with a cheerful countenance asked, ‘ How many thousands do you think they will number?’ Andreas, who was standing near,
19.  replied, ‘A little more than a hundred thousand.’ ‘It is a small boon indeed,’ said the king, ‘ that Aristeas asks of us!’ Then Sosibius and some others who were present said, ‘ Yes, but it will be a fit tribute to your magnanimity for you to offer the enfranchisement of these men as an act of devotion to the supreme God. You have been greatly honoured by Almighty God and exalted above all your forefathers in glory and it is only fitting that you should render to Him the greatest thankoffering in your power.’ Extremely pleased with these arguments he gave orders that an addition should be
20.  made to the wages of the soldiers by the amount of the redemption money, that twenty drachmae should be paid t the owners for every slave, that a public order should be issued and that registers of the captives should be attached to it. He showed the greatest enthusiasm in the business, for it was God who had brought our purpose to fulfilment in its entirety and constrained him to redeem not only those who had come into Egypt with the army of his father but any who had come before that time or had been subsequently brought into the kingdom. It was pointed out to him that the ransom money would exceed four hundred talents.
21.  I think it will be useful to insert a copy of the decree, for in this way the magnanimity of the king, who was empowered by God to save such vast multitudes, will be made clearer and more
22.  manifest. The decree of the king ran as follows: ‘All who served in the army of our father in} the campaign against Syria and Phoenicia and in the attack upon the country of the Jews and became possessed of Jewish captives and brought them back to the city of Alexandria and the land of L£gypt or sold them to others—and in the same way any captives who were in our land before that time or were brought hither afterwards—all who possess such captives are required to set them at liberty at once, receiving twenty drachmae per head as ransom money. The soldiers will receive
23.  this money as a gift added to their wages, the others from the king’s treasury. We think that it was against our father’s will and against all propriety that they should have been made captives and that the devastation of their land and the transportation of the Jews to Egypt was an act of military wantonness. The spoil which fell to the soldiers on the field of battle was all the booty which they should have claimed. To reduce the people to slavery in addition was an act of
24.  absolute injustice. Wherefore since it is acknowledged that we are accustomed to render justice to all men and especially to those who are unfairly in a condition of servitude, and since we strive to deal fairly with all men according to the demands of justice and piety, we have decreed, in reference to the persons of the Jews who are in any condition of bondage in any part of our dominion, that ( those who possess them shall receive the stipulated sum of money and set them at liberty and that no man shall show any tardiness in discharging his obligations. Within three days after the publication of this decree, they must make lists of s/aves for the officers appointed to carry out our will,
25.  and immediately produce the persons of the captives. For we consider that it will be advantageous to us and to our affairs that the matter should be brought to a conclusion. Any one who likes may give information about any who disobey the decree, on condition that if the man is proved guilty ; he will become his slave ; his property, however, will be handed over to the royal treasury.’ _ 26 When the decree was brought to be read over to the king for his approval, it contained all the » other provisions except the phrase ‘any captives who were in the land before that time or were brought ᾿ hither afterwards,’ and in his magnanimity and the largeness of his heart the king inserted this clause and gave orders that the grant of money required for the redemption should be deposited in full with the paymasters of the forces and the royal bankers, and so the matter was decided and the
27.  decree ratified within seven days. The grant for the redemption amounted to more than six hundred and sixty talents; for many infants at the breast were emancipated together with their mothers. When the question was raised whether the sum of twenty talents was to be paid for these, the king ordered that it should be done, and thus he carried out his decision in the most comprehensive way. _ 28 When this had been done, he ordered Demetrius to draw up a memorial with regard to the transcription of the Jewish books. For all affairs of state used to be carried out by means of decrees and with the most painstaking accuracy by these Zgyptéan kings, and nothing was done in a slipshod or haphazard fashion. And so I have inserted copies of the memorial and the letters, the number of the presents sent and the nature of each, since every one of them excelled in
29.  magnificence and technical skill. The following is a copy of the memorial. Zhe Memorial of Demetrius to the great king. ‘Since you have given me instructions, O king, that the books which are needed to complete your library should be collected together, and that those which are defective should be repaired, I have devoted myself with the utmost care to the fulfilment of your wishes,
30.  and I now have the following proposal to lay before you. The books of the law of the Jews (with some few others) are absent from the library. They are written in the Hebrew characters and language and have been carelessly interpreted, and do not represent the original text as I am
31.  informed by those who know; for they have never had a king’s care to protect them. It is necessary that these should be made accurate for your library since the law which they contain, in as much as it is of divine origin, is full of wisdom and free from all blemish. For this reason literary men and poets and the mass of historical writers have held aloof from referring to these books and the men who have lived tand are livingt in accordance with them, because their
32.  conception of life is so sacred and religious, as Hecataeus of Abdera says. If it please you, O king, a letter shall be written to the High Priest in Jerusalem, asking him to send six elders out of every tribe—men who have lived the noblest life and are most skilled in their law—that we may find out the points in which the majority of them are in agreement, and so having obtained an accurate translation may place it in a conspicuous place in a manner worthy of the work itself and your purpose. May continual prosperity be yours!’
33.  When this memorial had been presented, the king ordered a letter to be written to Eleazar on the matter, giving also an account of the emancipation of the Yewish captives. And he gave fifty talents weight of gold and seventy talents of silver and a large quantity of precious stones to make bowls and vials and a table and libation cups. He also gave orders to those who had the custody of his coffers to allow the artificers to make a selection of any materials they might require for the purpose, and that a hundred talents in money should be sent to provide sacrifices for the temple and
34.  for other needs. I shall give you a full account of the workmanship after I have set before you _ copies of the letters. The letter of the king ran as follows :
35.  King Ptolemy sends greeting and salutation to the High Priest Eleazar. Since there are many ) Jews settled in our realm who were carried off from Jerusalem by the Persians at the time of their
36.  power and many more who came with my father into Egypt as captives—large numbers of these he placed in the army and paid them higher wages than usual, and when he had proved the loyalty of their leaders he built fortresses and placed them in their charge that the native Egyptians might be intimidated by them. And I, when I ascended the throne, adopted a kindly attitude towards all
37.  my subjects, and more particularly to those who were citizens of yours—I have set at liberty more than a hundred thousand captives, paying their owners the appropriate market price for them, and if ever evil has been done to your people through the passions of the mob, I have made them reparation. The motive which prompted my action has been the desire to act piously and render — unto the supreme God a thankoffering for maintaining my kingdom in peace and great glory in all the world. Moreover those of your people who were in the prime of life I have drafted into my army, and those who were fit to be attached to my person and worthy of the confidence of the
38.  court, I have established in official positions. Now since I am anxious to show my gratitude to these men and to the Jews throughout the world and to the generations yet to come, I have determined that your law shall be translated from the Hebrew tongue which is in use amongst you
39.  into the Greek language, that these books may be added to the other royal books in my library. It, will be a kindness on your part and a reward for my zeal if you will select six elders from each of your tribes, men of noble life and skilled in your law and able to interpret it, that 7 guestions of dispute we may be able to discover the verdict in which the majority agree, for the investigation is of the highest possible importance. I hope to win great renown by the accomplishment of this
40.  work. I have sent Andreas, the chief of my bodyguard, and Aristeas—men whom I hold in high esteem—to lay the matter before you and present you with a hundred talents of silver, the firstfruits of my offering for the temple and the sacrifices and other religious rites. Ifyou will write to me concerning your wishes in these matters, you will confer a great favour upon me and afford me a new pledge of friendship, for all your wishes shall be carried out as speedily as possible. Farewell.’
41.  Tothis letter Eleazar replied appropriately as follows: ‘ Eleazar the High priest sends greetings to King Ptolemy his true friend. My highest wishes are for your welfare and the welfare of Queen Arsinoe your sister and your children. I also am well. I have received your letter and am greatly
42.  rejoiced by your purpose and your noble counsel. I summoned together the whole people and read it to them that they might know of your devotion to our God. I showed them too the cups which you sent, twenty of gold and thirty of silver, the five bowls and the table of dedication, and the hundred talents of silver for the offering of the sacrifices and providing the things of which the
43.  temple stands in need. These gifts were brought to me by Andreas, one of your most honoured servants, and by Aristeas, both good men and true, distinguished by their learning, and worthy in every way to be the representatives of your high principles and righteous purposes. These men imparted to me your message and received from me an answer in agreement with your letter. 441 will consent to everything which is advantageous to you even though your request is very unusual, For you have bestowed upon our citizens great and never to be forgotten benefits in many
45.  (ways). Immediately therefore I offered sacrifices on behalf of you, your sister, your children, and your friends, and all the people prayed that your plans might prosper continually, and that Almighty God might preserve your kingdom in peace with honour, and that the translation of the
46.  holy law might prove advantageous to you and be carried out successfully. In the presence of all the people I selected six elders from each tribe, good men and true, and I have sent them to you with a copy of our law. It will be a kindness, O righteous king, if you will give instruction that as soon as the translation of the law is completed, the men shall be restored again to us in safety. Farewell.’ 41 The following are the names of the elders: Of the first tribe, Joseph, Ezekiah, Zachariah, John, Ezekiah, Elisha. Of the second tribe, Judas, Simon, Samuel, Adaeus, Mattathias, Eschlemias. Of
48.  the third tribe, Nehemiah, Joseph, Theodosius, Baseas, Ornias, Dakis. Of the fourth tribe, Jonathan, Abraeus, Elisha, Ananias, Chabrias.... Of the fifth tribe, Isaac, Jacob, Jesus, Sab-
49.  bataeus, Simon, Levi. Of the sixth tribe, Judas, Joseph, Simon, Zacharias, Samuel, Selemias. Of the seventh tribe, Sabbataeus, Zedekiah, Jacob, Isaac, Jesias, Natthaeus. Of the eighth tribe, Theodosius, Jason, Jesus, Theodotus, John, Jonathan. Of,the ninth tribe, Theophilus, Abraham,
50.  Arsamos, Jason, Endemias, Daniel. Of the tenth tribe, Jeremiah, Eleazar, Zachariah, Baneas, Elisha, Dathaeus. Of the eleventh tribe, Samuel, Joseph, Judas, Jonathes, Chabu, Dositheus. Of the twelfth tribe, Isaelus, John, Theodosius, Arsamos, Abietes, Ezekiel. They were seventy-two in all. Such was the answer which Eleazar and his friends gave to the king’s letter.
51.  I will now proceed to redeem my promise and give a description of the works of art. They were wrought with exceptional skill, for the king spared no expense and personally superintended the workmen individually. They could not therefore scamp any part of the work or finish it off negli-
52.  gently. First of all I will give you a description of the table. The king was anxious that this piece of work should be of exceptionally large dimensions, and he caused enquiries to be made of the Jews
53.  in the locality with regard to the size of the table already in the temple at Jerusalem. And when they described the measurements, he proceeded to ask whether he might make a larger structure. And some of the priests and the other Jews replied that there was nothing to prevent him. And he said that he was anxious to make it five times the size, but he hesitated lest it should prove useless
54.  for the temple services. He was desirous that his gift should not merely be stationed in the temple, for it would afford him much greater pleasure if the men whose duty it was to offer the fitting
55.  sacrifices were able to do so appropriately on the table which he had made. He did not suppose that it was owing to lack of gold that the former table had been made of small size, but there seems to have been, he said, some reason why it was made of this dimension. }For had the order been given, there would have been no lack of means}. Wherefore we must not transgress or go beyond the proper - measure. At the same time he ordered them to press into service all the manifold forms of art, for he was a man of the most lofty conceptions and nature had endowed him with a keen imagination which enabled him to picture the appearance which would be presented dy the finished work. He gave orders too, that where there were no instructions laid down in the ¥ewzsh Scriptures, everything should be made as beautiful as possible. When such instructions were laid down, they were to be carried out to the letter. They made the table two cubits long (one cubit broad) one and a half cubits high, fashioning it of ti a σi ~ pure solid gold. What Iam describing was not thin gold laid over another foundation, but the whole
58.  structure was of massive gold welded together. And they made a border of a hand’s breadth round about it. And there was a wreath of wave-work, engraved in relief in the form of ropes marvellously
59.  wrought on its three sides. For it was triangular in shape and the style of the work was exactly the same on each of the sides, so that whichever side they were turned, they presented the same appearance. +Of the two sides under the border, the one which sloped down to the table was a very
60.  beautiful piece of work, but it was the outer side which attracted the gaze of the spectatort. Now the upper edge of the two sides, being elevated, was sharp since, as we have said, ¢he rim was three-sided, + from whatever point of view one approached itt. And there were layers of precious stones on it in the midst of the embossed cord-work, and they were interwoven with one another by an inimitable artistic
61.  device. For the sake of security they were all fixed by golden needles which were inserted in perfora-
62.  tions iz the stones. At the sides they were clamped together by fastenings to hold them firm. On the part of the border round the table which slanted upwards and met the eyes, there was wrought a pattern of eggs in precious stones, telaborately engraved{ by a continuous piece of fluted relief-work, closely
63.  connected together round the whole table. And under the stones which had been arranged to repre- sent eggs the artists made a crown containing all kinds of fruits, having at its top clusters of grapes and ears of corn, dates also and apples, and pomegranates and the like, conspicuously arranged. These fruits were wrought out of precious stones, of the same colour as the fruits themselves and
64.  they fastened them edgeways round all the sides of the table with a band of gold. And after the crown of fruit had been put on, wxderneath there was inserted another pattern of eggs in precious stones, and other fluting and embossed work, that both sides of the table might be used, according to the wishes of the owners and for this reason the wave-work and the border were extended
65.  down to the feet of the table. They made and fastened under the whole width of the table a massive plate four fingers thick, that the feet might be inserted into it, and clamped fast with linch-pins which fitted into sockets under the border, so that which ever side of the table people preferred, might be used. Thus it became manifestly clear that the work was intended to be used massive gold welded together: lit. the plate of beaten metal was attached to it.
66.  either way. On the table itself they engraved a ‘maeander’, having precious stones standing out in the middle of it, rubies and emeralds and an onyx too and many other kinds of stones which excel
67.  in beauty. And next to the ‘ maeander’ there was placed a wonderful piece of network, which made the centre of the table appear like a rhomboid in shape, and on it a crystal and amber, as it is called,
68.  had been wrought, which produced an incomparable impression on the beholders. They made the feet of the table with heads like lilies, so that they seemed to be like lilies bending down beneath the
69.  table, and the parts which were visible represented leaves which stood upright. The basis of the foot on the ground consisted of a ruby and measured a hand’s breadth Azgh all round. It had the appearance of a shoe and was eight fingers broad. Upon it the whole expanse of the foot rested.
70.  And they made the foot appear like ivy growing out of the stone, interwoven with akanthus and surrounded with a vine which encircled it with clusters of grapes, which were worked in stones, up to the top of the foot. All the four feet were made in the same style, and everything was wrought and fitted so skilfully, and such remarkable skill and knowledge were expended upon making it true to nature, that when the air was stirred by a breath of wind, movement was imparted to the leaves, and
71.  everything was fashioned to correspond with the actual reality which tt represented. And they made the top of the table in three parts like a triptychon, and they were so fitted and dovetailed together with spigots along the whole breadth of the work, that the meeting of the joints could not be seen or even discovered. The thickness of the table was not less than half a cubit, so that the whole work
72.  must have cost many talents. For since the king did not wish to add to its size he expended on the details the same sum of money which would have been required if the table could have been of larger dimensions. And everything was completed in accordance with his plan, in a most wonderful and remarkable way, with inimitable art and incomparable beauty. The most exceptional artistic skill was employed, so that the cost of the stones and the workmanship was five times as much as that of the gold.
83.  I have given you this description of the presents because I thought it was necessary. The next point in the narrative is an account of our journey to Eleazar, but I will first of all give you a description of the whole country. When we arrived in the land of the Jews we saw the city situated
84.  in the middle of the whole of Judea on the top of a mountain of considerable altitude. On the summit the temple had been built in all its splendour. It was surrounded by three walls more than seventy cubits high and in length and breadth corresponding to the structure of the edifice. All the buildings
85.  were characterised by a magnificence and costliness quite unprecedented. It was obvious that no expense had been spared on the door and the fastenings, which connected it with the door-posts, and
86.  the stability of the lintel. The style of the curtain too was thoroughly in proportion to that of the entrance. Its fabric owing to the draught of wind was in perpetual motion, and as this motion was communicated from the bottom and the curtain bulged out to its highest extent, it afforded a pleasant
87.  spectacle from which a man could scarcely tear himself away. The construction of the altar was in keeping with the place itself and with the burnt offerings which were consumed by fire upon it, and the approach to it wason a similar scale. There was a gradual slope up to it, conveniently arranged for the purpose of decency, and the ministering priests were robed in linen garments, down to their
88.  ankles. The Temple faces the east and its back is toward the west. The whole of the floor is paved with stones and slopes down to the appointed places, that water may be conveyed to wash away the
89.  blood from the sacrifices, for many thousand beasts are sacrificed there on the feast days. And there is an inexhaustible supply of water, because an abundant natural spring gushes up from within the temple area. There are moreover wonderful and indescribable cisterns underground, as they pointed out to me, at a distance of five furlongs all round the site of the temple, and each of them has countless pipes
90.  so that the different streams converge together. And all these were fastened with lead at the bottom and at the sidewalls, and over them a great quantity of plaster had been spread, and every part of the work had been most carefully carried out. There are many openings for water at the base of the altar which are invisible to all except to those who are engaged in the ministration, so that all the blood of the sacrifices which is collected in great quantities is washed away in the twinkling of an gteye. Such is my opinion with regard to the character of the reservoirs and I will now show you how it was confirmed. They led me more than four furlongs outside the city and bade me peer down towards a certain spct and listen to the noise that was made by the meeting of the waters, so that the great size of the reservoirs became manifest to me, as has already been pointed out.
92.  The ministration of the priests is in every way unsurpassed both for its physical endurance and for its orderly and silent service. For they all work spontaneously, though it entails much painful exertion, and each one has a special task allotted tohim. The service is carried on without interrup- tion—some provide the wood, others the oil, others the fine wheat flour, others the spices; others
93.  again bring the pieces of flesh for the burnt offering, exhibiting a wonderful degree of strength. For they take up with both hands the limbs of a calf, each of them weighing more than two talents, and throw them with each hand in a wonderful way on to the high place of ¢he altar and never miss placing them on the proper spot. In the same way the pieces of the sheep and also of the goats are wonderful both for their weight and their fatness. For those, whose business it is, always select the beasts which are without blemish and specially fat, and thus the sacrifice which I have described,
95.  the sacrifices. The most complete silence reigns so that one might imagine that there was not a single 1oo 10 "“ is carried out. There is a special place set apart for them to rest in, where those who are relieved from duty sit. When this takes place, those who have already rested and are ready 20 resume their duties rise up spontancously since there is no one to give orders with regard to the arrangement of person present, though there are actually seven hundred men engaged in the work, besides the vast number of those who are occupied in bringing up the sacrifices. Everything is carried out with reverence and in a way worthy of the great God. We were greatly astonished, when we saw Eleazar engaged in the ministration, at the mode of his dress, and the majesty of his appearance, which was revealed in the robe which he wore and the precious stones upon his person. There were golden bells wpon the garment which reached down to his feet, giving forth a peculiar kind of melody, and on both sides of them there were pomegranates with variegated flowers of a wonderful hue. He was girded with a girdle of conspicuous beauty, woven in the most beautiful colours. On his breast he wore the oracle of God, as it is called, on which twelve stones, of different kinds, were inset, fastened together with gold, containing the names of the leaders of the tribes, according to their original order, each one flashing forth in an indescribable way its own particular colour. On his head he wore a tiara, as it is called, and upon this in the middle of his forehead an inimitable turban, the royal diadem full of glory with the name of God inscribed in sacred letters on a plate of gold . . . having been judged worthy to wear these emblems in the ministrations. Their appearance created such awe and confusion of mind as to make one feel that one had come into the presence of a man who belonged to a different world. I am convinced that any one who takes part in the spectacle which I have described will be filled with astonishment and indescribable wonder and be profoundly affected in his mind at the thought of the sanctity which ~ is attached to each detail of the service. But in order that we might gain complete information, we ascended to the summit of the neighbour- ing citadel and looked around us. It is situated in a very lofty spot, and is fortified with many towers, which have been built up to the very top of immense stones, with the object, as we were informed, of guarding the temple precincts, so that if there were an attack, or an insurrection or an onslaught of the enemy, no one would be able to force an entrance within the walls that surround the temple. On the towers of the citadel engines of war were placed and different kinds of machines, and the position was much higher than the circle of walls which I have mentioned. The towers were guarded too by most trusty men who had given the utmost proof of their loyalty to their country. These men were never allowed to leave the citadel, except on feast days and then only in detachments, nor did they permit any 03 stranger to enterit. They were also very careful when any command came from the chief officer to admit any visitors to inspect the place, as our own experience taught us. They were very reluctant
104.  to admit us,—though we were but two unarmed men—to view the offering of the sacrifices. And they asserted that they were bound by an oath when the trust was committed to them, for they had all sworn and were bound to carry out the oath sacredly to the letter, that though they were five hundred in number they would not permit more than five men to enter at one time. The citadel was the special protection of the temple and its founder had fortified it so strongly that it might efficiently protect it.
105.  + The size of the city is of moderate dimensions. It is about forty furlongs in circumference, as far as one could conjecture. It has its towers arranged in the shape of a theatre, with thoroughfares leading between them} now the cross roads of the lower towers are visible but those of the upper
106.  towers are more frequented+. For the ground ascends, since the city is built upon a mountain. A There are steps too which lead up to the cross roads, and tsome people are always going up, and ‘others down and they keep as far apart from each other as possible on the road} because of those who ΤΟΥ are bound by the rules of purity, lest they should touch anything which is unlawful. It was not with- out reason that: the original founders of the city built it in due proportions, for they possessed clear insight with regard to what was required. For the country is extensive and beautiful. Some parts : of it are level, especially the districts which belong to Samaria, as it is called, and which border on the land of the Idumeans, other parts are mountainous, especially (those which are contiguous to ᾿ the land of Judea). The people therefore are bound to devote themselves to agriculture and the ἢ cultivation of the soil that by this means they may have a plentiful supply of crops. In this way
108.  cultivation of every kind is carried on and an abundant harvest reaped in the whole of the aforesaid _ land. The cities which are large and enjoy a corresponding prosperity are well-populated, but they neglect the country districts, since all men are inclined to a life of enjoyment, for every one has _ 109 a natural tendency towards the pursuit of pleasure. The same thing happened in Alexandria, which excels all cities in size and prosperity. Country people by migrating from the rural districts and settling
110.  in the city brought agriculture into disrepute: and so to prevent them from settling zx the city, the king issued orders that they should not stay in it for more than twenty days. And in the same way he gave the judges written instructions, that if it was necessary to issue a summons against any one 311 who lived in the country, the case must be settled within five days. And since he considered the ' matter one of great importance, he appointed also legal officers for every district with their assistants, _ that the farmers and their advocates might not in the interests of business empty the granaries of the
112.  city, I mean, of the produce of husbandry. I have permitted this digression because it was Eleazar a who pointed out with great clearness the points which have been mentioned. For great is the energy which they expend on the tillage of the soil. For the land is thickly planted with multitudes of olive trees, with crops of corn and pulse, with vines too, and there is abundance of honey. Other kinds. of fruit trees and dates do not count compared with these. There are cattle of all kinds in
113.  great quantities and a rich pasturage for them. Wherefore they rightly recognise that the country districts need a large population, and the relations between the city and the villages are properly
114.  regulated. A great quantity of spices and precious stones and gold is brought into the country by the Arabs. For the country is well adapted not only for agriculture but also for commerce, and the
115.  city is rich in the arts and lacks none of the merchandise which is brought across the sea. It possesses too suitable and commodious harbours at Askalon, Joppa, and Gaza, as well as at Ptolemais which was founded by the King and holds a central position compared with the other places named, being not far distant from any ofthem. The country produces everything in abundance,
116.  since it is well watered in all directions and well protected from storms. The river Jordan, as it is called, which never runs dry, flows through theJand. Originally (the country) contained not less than 60 million acres—though afterwards the neighbouring peoples made incursions against it—and 600,000 men were settled upon it in farms of a hundred acres each. The river like the Nile rises in harvest- time and irrigates a large portion of the land. Near the district belonging to the people of
117.  Ptolemais it issues into another river and this flows out into the sea. Other mountain torrents, as they are called, flow down into the plain and encompass the parts about Gaza and the district of
118.  Ashdod. The country is encircled by a natural fence and is very difficult to attack and cannot be assailed by large forces, owing to the narrow passes, with their overhanging precipices and deep
119.  ravines, and the rugged character of the mountainous regions which surround all the land. We were told that from the neighbouring mountains of Arabia copper and iron were formerly obtained. This was stopped, however, at the time of the Persian rule, since the authorities of the time spread
120.  abroad a false report that the working of the mines was useless and expensive, in order to prevent their country from being destroyed by the mining in these districts and possibly taken away from them owing to the Perstan rule, tsince by the assistance of this false report they found an excuse for entering the districtf. I have now, my dear brother Philocrates, given you all the essential information upon this subject
121.  in brief form. I shall describe the work of translation in the sequel. The High priest selected men of the finest character and the highest culture, such as one would expect from their noble parentage. They were men who had not only acquired proficiency in Jewish literature. but had studied most
122.  carefully that of the Greeks as well. They were specially qualified therefore for serving on embassies and they undertook this duty whenever it was necessary. They possessed a great facility for conferences and the discussion of problems cunnected with the law. They espoused the middle course—and this is always the best course to pursue. They abjured the rough and uncouth manner, but they were altogether above pride and never assumed an air of superiority over others, and in conversation they were ready to listen and give an appropriate answer to every question. And all of them carefully observed this rule and were anxious above everything else to excel each other in
123.  its observance and they were all of them worthy of their leader and of his virtue. And one could observe how they loved Eleazar by their unwillingness to be torn away from him and how he loved them. For besides the letter which he wrote to the king concerning their safe return, he also earnestly
124.  besought Andreas to work for the same end and urged me, too, to assist to the best of my ability. And THE LETTER ΘE ARISTEAS 124-139 although we promised to give our best attention to the matter, he said that he was still greatly distressed, for he knew that the king out of the goodness of his nature considered it his highest privilege, whenever he heard of a man who was superior to his fellows in culture and wisdom, to
125.  summon him to his court. For I have heard of a fine saying of his to the effect that by securing just and prudent men about his person he would secure the greatest protection for his kingdom, since such friends would unreservedly give him the most beneficial advice. And the men who were
126.  now being sent to him by Eleazar undoubtedly possessed these qualities. And he frequently asserted upon oath that he would never let the men go if it were merely some private interest of his own that constituted the impelling motive—but it was for the common advantage of
127.  all the citizens that he was sending them. For, he explained, the good life consists in the keeping of _ the enactments of the law, and this end is achieved much more by hearing than by reading. From this and other similar statements it was clear what his feelings towards them were.
128.  It is worth while to mention briefly the information which he gave in reply to our questions. For I suppose that most people feel a curiosity with regard to some of the enactments in the law, _ 129 especially those about meats and drinks and animals recognised as unclean. When we asked why, since there is but one form of creation, some animals are regarded as unclean for eating, and others unclean even to the touch (for though the law is scrupulous on most points, it is specially scrupulous on such
130.  matters as these) he began his reply as follows : ‘ You observe,’ he said, ‘ what an effect our modes of life and our associations produce upon us ; by associating with the bad, men catch their depravities and become miserable throughout their life ; but if they live with the wise and prudent, they find
131.  the means of escaping from ignorance and amending their lives. Our Lawgiver first of all laid down the principles of piety and righteousness and inculcated them point by point, not merely by prohibitions but by the use of examples as well, demonstrating the injurious effects of siz and the _ 132 punishments inflicted by God upon the guilty. For he proved first of all that there is only one God and that his power is manifested throughout the universe, since every place is filled with his sovereignty and none of the things which are wrought in secret by men upon the earth escapes His knowledge. For all that a man does and all that is to come to pass in the future are manifest to
133.  Him. Working out these truths carefully and having made them plain, he showed that even if : a man should think of doing evil—to say nothing of actually effecting it,—he would not escape _ 134 detection, for he made it clear that the power of God pervaded the whole of the law. Beginning from this starting point he went on to show that all mankind except ourselves believe in the existence of many gods, though they themselves are much more powerful than the beings whom
135.  they vainly worship. For when they have made statues of stone and wood, they say that they are the images of those who have invented something useful for life and they worship them, though
136.  they have clear proof that they possess no feeling. For it would be utterly foolish to suppose that any one became a god in virtue of his inventions. For the inventors simply took certain objects already created and by combining them together, showed that they possessed a fresh utility: they
137.  did not themselves create the substance of the thing, and so it is a vain and foolish thing for people to make gods of men like themselves. For in our times there are many who are much more inventive and much more learned than the men of former days who have been deified, and yet they would never come to worship them. The makers and authors of these myths think that they are
138.  the wisest of the Greeks. Why need we speak of other infatuated people, Egyptians and the like, who place their reliance upon wild beasts and most kinds of creeping things and cattle, and worship them, and offer sacrifices to them both while living and when dead ?’
139.  Now our Lawgiver being a wise man and specially endowed by God to understand all things, took Ὁ an ey me, yea end fm ® a comprehensive view of each particular detail, and fenced us round with impregnable ramparts and walls of iron, that we might not mingle at all with any of the other nations, but remain pure in body and soul, free from all vain imaginations, worshipping the one Almighty God above the whole
140.  creation. Hence the leading Egyptian priests having looked carefully into many matters, and being cognizant with (our) affairs, call us “men of God”. This is a title which does not belong to the rest of mankind but only to those who worship the true God. The rest are men xot of God but of meats and drinks and clothing. For their whole disposition leads them to find solace in these things.
141.  Among our people such things are reckoned of no account, but throughout their whole life their
142.  main consideration is the sovereignty of God. Therefore lest we should be corrupted by any abomination, or our lives be perverted by evil communications, he hedged us round on all sides by
143.  rules of purity, affecting alike what we eat, or drink, or touch, or hear, or see. For though, speaking generally, all things are alike in their natural constitution, since they are all governed by one and the same power, yet there is a deep reason in each individual case why we abstain from the use of certain things and enjoy the common use of others. For the sake of illustration I will run over one or two
144.  points and explain them to you. For you must not fall into the degrading idea that it was out of regard to mice and weasels and other such things that Moses drew up his laws with such exceeding care. All these ordinances were made for the sake of righteousness to aid the quest for virtue and
145.  the perfecting of character. For all the birds that we use are tame and distinguished by their cleanliness, feeding on various kinds of grain and pulse, such as for instance pigeons, turtle-doves,
146.  locusts, partridges, geese also, and all other birds of this class. But the birds which are forbidden you will find to be wild and carnivorous, tyrannising over the others by the strength which they possess, and cruelly obtaining food by preying on the tame birds enumerated above. And not only so, but
147.  they seize lambs and kids, and injure human beings too, whether dead or alive, and so by naming them unclean, he gave a sign by means of them that those, for whom the legislation was ordained, must practise righteousness in their hearts and not tyrannise over any one in reliance upon their own strength nor rob them of anything, but steer their course of life in accordance with justice, just as the tame birds, already mentioned, consume the different kinds of pulse that grow upon the earth
148.  and do not tyrannise to the destruction of their own kindred. Our legislator taught us therefore that it is by such methods as these that indications are given to the wise, that they must be just and effect nothing by violence, and refrain from tyrannising over others in reliance upon their own
149.  strength. For since it is considered unseemly even to touch such wzclean animals, as have been mentioned, on account of their particular habits, ought we not to take every precaution lest our own
150.  characters should be destroyed to the same extent? Wherefore all the rules which he has laid down with regard to what is permitted in the case of these dzvds and other animals, he has enacted with the object of teaching us a moral lesson. For the division of the hoof and the separation of the claws are intended to teach us that we must discriminate between our individual actions with a view to the practice of virtue. For the strength of our whole body and its activity depend upon our shoulders and limbs. Therefore he compels us to recognise that we must perform all our actions 15 with discrimination according to the standard of righteousness—more especially because we have
152.  been distinctly separated from the rest of mankind. For most other men defile themselves by promiscuous intercourse, thereby working great iniquity, and whole countries and cities pride them- selves upon such vices. For they not only have intercourse with men but they defile their own
153.  mothers and even their daughters. But we have been kept separate from such sins. And the people who have been separated in the aforementioned way are also characterised dy the Lawgiver as possessing the gift of memory. For all animals “which are cloven-footed and chew the cud”
154.  represent to the initiated the symdo/ of memory. For the act of chewing the cud is nothing else than the reminiscence of life and existence. For life is wont to be sustained by means of food,
155.  wherefore he exhorts us in the Scripture also in these words: ‘‘ Thou shalt surely remember the Lord that wrought in thee those great and wonderful things”. For when they are properly conceived, they are manifestly great and glorious ; first the construction of the body and the disposition of the
156.  food and the separation of each individual limb and, far more, the organisation of the senses, the operation and invisible movement of the mind, the rapidity of its particular actions and its discovery of the
157.  arts, display an infinite resourcefulness. Wherefore he exhorts us to remember that the aforesaid parts are kept together by the divine power with consummate skill. For he has marked out every
158.  time and place that we may continually remember the God who rules and preserves (us). For in the matter of meats and drinks he bids us first of all offer part as a sacrifice and then forthwith enjoy our meal. Moreover, upon our garments he has given us a symbol of remembrance, and in like manner he has ordered us to put the divine oracles upon our gates and doors as a remembrance of
159.  God. And upon our hands, too, he expressly orders the symbol to be fastened, clearly showing that we ought to perform every act in righteousness, remembering (our own creation), and above all the
160.  fear of God. He bids men also, when lying down to sleep and rising up again, to meditate upon the works of God, not only in word, but by observing distinctly the change and impression produced upon them, when they are going to sleep, and also their waking, how divine and. incomprehensible tόt the change from one of these states to the other is. The excellency of the analogy in regard to a discrimination and memory has now been pointed out to you, according to our interpretation of “ the cloven hoof and the chewing of the cud”. For our laws have not been drawn up at random or in accordance with the first casza/ thought that occurred to the mind, but with a view to truth and the tό indication of right reason. For by means of the directions which he gives with regard to meats and or drinks and particular cases of touching, he bids us neither to do nor listen to anything thoughtlessly
163.  nor to resort to injustice by the abuse of the power of reason. In the case of the wild animals, too, the same principle may be discovered. For the character of the weasel and of mice and such
164.  animals as these, which are expressly mentioned, is destructive. Mice defile and damage everything, not only for their own food but even to the extent of rendering absolutely useless to man whatever _ 165 it falls in their way to damage. The weasel class, too, is peculiar: for besides what has been said, it (2)... tῷ σημειοῦσθαι. Thackeray conjectures ὃ σημειοῦται, and translates ‘ He constrains us to do everything ... as he signifies by these symbols’. Gifford in Eusebius rendering (2) translates ‘ by the signification herein given’. has a characteristic which is defiling : It conceives through the ears and brings forth through the
166.  mouth. And it is for this reason that a like practice is declared unclean in men. For by embodying in speech all that they receive through the ears, they involve others in evils and work no ordinary impurity, being themselves altogether defiled by the pollution of impiety. And your king, as we are informed, does quite right in destroying such men.’ 16] Then I said ‘I suppose you mean the informers, for he constantly exposes them to tortures and to
168.  painful forms of death’. ‘Yes, he replied, ‘these are the men I mean; for to watch for men’s destruction is an unholy thing. And our law forbids us to injure any one either by word or deed. My brief account of these matters ought to have convinced you, that all our regulations have been drawn up with a view to righteousness, and that nothing has been enacted in the Scripture thoughtlessly or without due reason, but its purpose is to enable us throughout our whole life and in all our actions
169.  to practise righteousness before all men, being mindful of Almighty God. And so concerning meats and things unclean, creeping things, and wild, beasts, the whole system aims at righteousness and righteous relationships between man and man.’
170.  He seemed to me to have made a good defence on all the points; for in reference also to the calves and rams and goats which are offered, he said that it was necessary to take them from the herds and flocks, and sacrifice tame animals and offer nothing wild, that the offerers of the sacrifices might understand the symbolic meaning of the lawgiver and not be under the influence of an arrogant self-consciousness. For he, who offers a sacrifice, makes an offering also of his own soul in all
171.  its moods. I think that these particulars with regard to our discussion are worth narrating, and on account of the sanctity and natural meaning of the law, I have been induced to explain them to you clearly, Philocrates, because of your own devotion to learning. 2 And Eleazar, after offering the sacrifice, and selecting the envoys, and preparing many gifts for the .4 king, despatched us on our journey in great security. And when we reached Alexandria, the king was at once informed of our arrival. On our admission to the palace, Andreas and I warmly greeted
174.  the king and handed over to him the letter written by Eleazar. The king was very anxious to meet the envoys, and gave orders that all the other officials should be dismissed and the envoys
175.  summoned to his presence az once. Now this excited general surprise, for it is customary for those who come to seek an audience with the king on matters of importance to be admitted to his presence on the fifth day, while envoys from kings or very important cities with difficulty secure admission to the Court in thirty days—but these men he counted worthy of greater honour, since he held their master in such high esteem, and so he immediately dismissed those whose presence he regarded as superfluous and continued walking about until they came in and he was able to welcome them.
176.  When they entered with the gifts which had been sent with them and the valuable parchments, on which the law was inscribed in gold in Jewish characters, for the parchment was wonderfully prepared and the connexion Jetween the pages had been so effected as to be invisible, the king as soon
177.  as he saw them began to ask them about the books. And when they had taken the rolls out of their coverings and unfolded the pages, the king stood still for a long time and then making obeisance ~ about seven times, he said: ‘I thank you, my friends, and I thank him that sent you still more, and
178.  most of all God, whose oracles these are.’ And when all, the envoys and the others who were present as well, shouted out at one time and with one voice: ‘God save the King!’ he burst into tears of joy. For his exaltation of soul and the sewse of the overwhelming honour which had been
179.  paid him compelled him to weep over his good fortune. He commanded them to put the rolls back in their places and then after saluting the men, said: ‘It was right, men of God, that I should first of all pay my reverence to the books for the sake of which I summoned you here and then, when I had done that, to extend the right-hand of friendship to you. It was for this reason that I did this first. I have enacted that this day, on which you arrived, shall be kept as a great day and it will be celebrated annually throughout my life time. It happens also that it is the anniversary of 81 my naval victory over Antigonus. Therefore I shall be glad to feast with you to-day.’ ‘ Everything that you may have occasion to use’, he said, ‘shall be prepared (for you) in a befitting manner and for me also with you.’ After they had expressed their delight, he gave orders that the best quarters near the citadel should be assigned to them, and that preparations should be made for the banquet. 82 And Nicanor summoned the lord high steward, Dorotheus, who was the special officer appointed to look after the ews, and commanded him to make the necessary preparation for each one. For this arrangement had been made by the king and it is an arrangement which you see maintained to-day. For as many cities (as) have (special) customs in the matter of drinking, eating, and reclining, have special officers appointed 720 look after their requirements. And whenever they come to visit the kings, preparations are made in accordance with their own customs, in order that there may be no discomfort to disturb the enjoyment of their visit. The same precaution was taken in the case of the Jewish envoys. Now Dorotheus who was the patron appointed to look after Fewish guests was
183.  3. very conscientious man. All the stores which were under his control and set apart for the reception of such guests, he brought out for the feast. He arranged the seats in two rows in accordance with the king’s instructions. For he had ordered him to make half the men sit at his right hand and the rest behind him, in order that he might not withhold from them the highest possible honour. When they had taken their seats he instructed Dorotheus to carry out everything in
184.  accordance with the customs which were in use amongst his Jewish guests. Therefore he dispensed with the services of the sacred heralds and the sacrificing priests and the others who were ᾿ς accustomed to offer the prayers, and called upon one of our number, Eleazar, the oldest of the Jewish priests, to offer prayer instead. And he rose up and made a remarkable prayer. ‘May Almighty
185.  God enrich you, O king, with all the good things which He has made and may He grant you and your wife and your children and your comrades the continual possession of them as long as you live!’ At these words a loud and joyous applause broke out which lasted for a considerable time, and then
186.  they turned to the enjoyment of the banquet which had been prepared. All the arrangements for service at table were carried out in accordance with the injunction of Dorotheus. Among the attendants were the royal pages and others who held places of honour at the king’s court.
187.  Taking an opportunity afforded by a pause in the banquet the king asked the envoy who sat in 5. » ¥ { if i the seat of honour (for they were arranged according to seniority), How he could keep his kingdom
188.  unimpaired to the end? After pondering for a moment he replied, ‘You could best establish its security if you were to imitate the unceasing benignity of God. For if you exhibit clemency and inflict mild punishments upon those who deserve them in accordance with their deserts, you will
189.  turn them from evil and lead them to repentance.’ The king praised the answer and then asked the next man, How he could do everything for the best in all his actions? And he replied, ‘If a man maintains a just bearing towards all, he will always act rightly on every occasion, remembering that every thought is known to God. If you take the fear of God as your starting-point, you will never miss the goal.’
190.  The king complimented this man, too, upon his answer and asked another, How he could have friends like-minded with himself? He replied, ‘If they see you studying the interests of the multitudes over whom you rule; you will do well to observe how God bestows his benefits on the
191.  human race, providing for them health and food and all other things in due season.’ After expressing his agreement with the reply, the king asked the next guest, How in giving audiences and passi judgments he could gain the praise even of those who failed to win their suit? And he said, ‘If you are fair in speech to all alike and never act insolently nor tyrannically in your treatment of
192.  offenders. And you will do this if you watch the method by which God acts. The petitions of the worthy are always fulfilled, while those who fail to obtain an answer to their prayers are informed by means of dreams or events of what was harmful i their requests and that God does not smite them according to their sins or the greatness of His strength, but acts with forbearance towards them.’
193.  The king praised the man warmly for his answer and asked the next in order, How he could be invincible in military affairs? And he replied, ‘If he did not trust entirely to his multitudes or his warlike forces, but called upon God continually to bring his enterprises to a successful issue, while
194.  he himself discharged all his duties in the spirit of justice.’ Welcoming this answer, he asked another how he might become an object of dread to his enemies. And he replied, ‘If while maintaining a vast supply of arms and forces he remembered that these things were powerless to achieve a permanent and conclusive result. For even God instils fear into the minds of men by granting reprieves and making merely a display of the greatness of his power.’
195.  This man the king praised and then said to the next, What is the highest good in life? And he answered ‘To know that God is Lord of the Universe, and that in our finest achievements it is not we who attain success but God who by his power brings all things to fulfilment and leads us to the goal.
196.  The king exclaimed that the man had answered well and then asked the next How he could keep all his possessions intact and finally hand them down to his successors in the same condition? And he answered ‘ By praying constantly to God that you may be inspired with high motives in all your undertakings and by warning your descendants not to be dazzled by fame or wealth, for it is God who bestows all these gifts and men never by themselves win the supremacy ’.
200.  When all had signified by their applause their agreement with the answer, the king said to the philosophers (for not a few of them were present), ‘It is my opinion that these men excel in virtue and possess extraordinary knowledge, since on the spur of the moment they have given fitting answers to these questions which I have put to them, and have all made God the starting-point of their words.’
201.  And Menedemus, the philosopher of Eretria, said, ‘True, O King—for since the universe is managed by providence and since we rightly perceive that man is the creation of God, it follows
202.  that all power and beauty of speech proceed from God.’ When the king had nodded his assent to this sentiment, the speaking ceased and they proceeded to enjoy themselves. When evening came on, the banquet ended.
203.  On the following day they sat down to table again and continued the banquet according to the same arrangements. When the king thought that a fitting opportunity had arrived to put inquiries to his guests, he proceeded to ask further questions of the men who sat next in order to those who
204.  had given answers on the previous day. He began to open the conversation with the eleventh man, for there were ten who had been asked questions on the former occasion. When silence was _ 205 established, he asked How he could continue to be rich? After a brief reflection, the man who had been asked the question replied—‘If he did nothing unworthy of his position, never acted licentiously, never lavished expense on empty and vain pursuits, but by acts of benevolence made all his subjects well disposed towards himself. For it is God who is the author of all good things and
206.  Him man must needs obey.’ The king bestowed praise upon him and then asked another How he could maintain the truth? In reply to the question he said, ‘ By recognizing that a lie brings great disgrace upon all men, and more especially upon kings. For since they have the power to do whatever they wish, why should they resort to lies? In addition to this you must always remember, O King, that God is a lover of the truth.’ a The king received the answer with great delight and looking az another said, ‘What is the ἰ fel eae me *.-— == teaching of wisdom?’ And the other replied, ‘As you wish that no evil should befall you, but to be a partaker of all good things, so you should act on the same principle towards your subjects and offenders, and you should mildly admonish the noble and good. For God draws all men Zo Himself j by his benignity.’ 5208 The king praised him and asked the next in order How he could be the friend of men? And he replied, ‘ By observing that the human race increases and is born with much trouble and great suffering: wherefore you must not lightly punish or inflict torments upon them, since you know that the life of men is made up of pains and penalties. For if you understood everything you would be filled with pity, for God also is pitiful.’
209.  «©The king received the answer with approbation and inquired of the next ‘What is the most ᾿ς essential qualification for ruling?’ ‘To keep oneself’, he answered, ‘ free from bribery and to practise sobriety during the greater part of one’s life, to honour righteousness above all things, and to make friends of men of this type. For God, too, is a lover of justice.’
210.  Having signified his approval, the king said to another ‘ What is the true mark of piety?’ And _ he replied, “To perceive that God constantly works in the Universe and knows all things, and no man who acts unjustly and works wickedness can escape His notice. As God is the benefactor of the whole world, so you, too, must imitate Him and be void of offence.’ air The king signified his agreement and said to another ‘What is the essence of kingship?’ And he replied, ‘To rule oneself well and not to be led astray by wealth or fame to immoderate or unseemly desires, this is the true way of ruling if you reason the matter well out. For all that you really need is yours, and God is free from need and benignant withal. Let your thoughts be such as become a man, and desire not many things but only such as are necessary for ruling.’ ~ 201. Menedemus, a Greek philosopher who lived at Eretria in Euboea, where he founded a school of thought. Born about 350 and died between 278 and 275 B.c. He was the disciple of Stilpo and the friend of Antigonus Gonatas. Our knowledge of his philosophy is limited and indefinite; it is derived from statements in Athenaeus, Diogenes Laertius, and Plutarch. We have no knowledge that he ever visited Alexandria, and his death had in all ability occurred before he is introduced into the narrative here. See Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, ii. 205 ff. ; . Mallett, Histoire de ['école de Mégare et des écoles d’ Elis et d’ Evétrie (1845). THE LETTER OE ARISTEAS 212-225
212.  The king praised him and asked another man How his deliberations might be for the best? and he replied, ‘If he constantly set justice before him in everything and thought that injustice was equivalent to deprivation of life. For God always promises the highest blessings to the just.’
213.  Having praised him, the king asked the next How he could be free from disturbing thoughts in his sleep? And he replied, ‘ You have asked me a question which is very difficult to answer, for we cannot bring our true selves into play during the hours of sleep, but are held fast in these
214.  by imaginations that cannot be controlled by reason. For our souls possess the feeling that they actually see the things that enter into our consciousness during sleep. But we make a mistake if we suppose that we are actually sailing on the sea in boats or flying through the air or travelling to other regions or anything else of the kind. And yet we actually do imagine such
215.  things to be taking place. So far as it is possible for me to decide, I have reached the following conclusion. You must in every possible way, O King, govern your words and actions by the rule of piety that you may have the consciousness that you are maintaining virtue and that you never choose to gratify yourself at the expense of reason and never by abusing your power do
216.  despite to righteousness. For the mind mostly busies itself in sleep with the same things with which it occupies itself when awake. And he who has all his thoughts and actions set towards the noblest ends establishes himself 2 righteousness both when he is awake and when he is asleep. Wherefore you must be stedfast in the constant discipline of self.’ 21] The king bestowed praise on the man and said to another—‘Since you are the tenth to answer, when you have spoken, we will devote ourselves to the banquet. And then he put the question,
218.  How can I avoid doing anything unworthy of myself? And he replied, ‘Look always to your own fame and your own supreme. position, that you may speak and think only such things as are
219.  consistent therewith, knowing that all your subjects think and talk about you. For you must not appear to be worse than the actors, who study carefully the réle, which it is necessary for them to play, and shape all their actions in accordance with it. You are not acting a part, but are really a king, since God has bestowed upon you a royal authority in keeping with your character.’
220.  When the king had applauded loud and long in the most gracious way, the guests were urged to seek repose. So when the conversation ceased, they devoted themselves to the next course of the feast.
221.  On the following day, the same arrangement was observed, and when the king found an opportunity of putting questions to the men, he questioned the first of those who had been left over
222.  for the next interrogation, What is the highest form of government? And he replied, ‘To rule oneself and not to be carried away by impulses. For all men possess a certain natural bent of mind.
223.  It is probable that most men have an inclination towards food and drink and pleasure, and kings a bent towards the acquisition of territory and great renown. But it is good that there should be moderation in all things. What God gives, that you must take and keep, but never yearn for things that are beyond your reach.’
224.  Pleased with these words, the king asked the next How he could be free from envy? And he after a brief pause replied, ‘If you consider first of all that it is God who bestows on all kings glory and great wealth and no one is king by his own power. All men wish to share this glory but cannot, since it is the gift of God.’
225.  The king praised the man in a long speech and then asked another How he could despise his enemies? And he replied, ‘If you show kindness to all men and win their friendship, you need fear no one. To be popular with all men is the best of good gifts to receive from God.’ reading of the MSS. we must translate, ‘Everything is at your command, and it is as nothing.’ Mendelssohn conjectures ὡς οὐδενί ‘ you, as no one else, possess everything you need.’ THE LETTER OE ARISTEAS 226-239
226.  Having praised this answer the king ordered the next man to reply to the question, How he could maintain his great renown? and he replied that ‘If you are generous and large-hearted in bestowing kindness and acts of grace upon others, you will never lose your renown, but if you wish the aforesaid graces to continue yours, you must call upon God continually.’ 7 The king expressed his approval and asked the next, To whom ought a man to show liberality ? And he replied, ‘All men acknowledge that we ought to show liberality to those who are well disposed towards us, but I think that we ought to show the same keen spirit of generosity to those who are opposed to us that by this means we may win them over to the right and to what is advantageous to ourselves. But we must PEAY, to God that this may be accomplished, for he rules the minds of all men.” 8 Having expressed his agreement with the answer, the king asked the sixth to reply to the question, To whom ought we to exhibit gratitude? And he replied, ‘To our parents continually, for God has given us a most important commandment with regard to the honour due to parents. In the next place He reckons the attitude of friend towards friend for He speaks of “‘a friend which is as thine own soul”. You do well in trying to bring all men into friendship with yourself.’ 9 The king spoke kindly to him and then asked the next, What is it that resembles beauty in value? And he said, ‘Piety, for it is the pre-eminent form of beauty, and its power lies in love, which is the gift of God. This you have already acquired and with it all the blessings of life.’ The king in the most gracious way applauded the answer and asked another How, if he were to fail, he could regain his reputation again in the same degree? And he said, ‘It is not possible for you to fail, for you have sown in all men the seeds of gratitude which produce a harvest of goodwill, 31 and this is mightier than the strongest weapons and guarantees the greatest security. But if any man does fail, he must never again do those things which caused his failure, but he must form friendships and act justly. For it is the gift of God to be able to do good actions and not the contrary.’ 2 Delighted with these words, the king asked another How he could be free from grief? And he _ replied, ‘If he never injured any one, but did good to everybody and followed the pathway of 133 righteousness, for its fruits bring freedom from grief. But we must pray to God that unexpected evils such as death or disease or pain or anything of this kind may not come upon us and injure us, But since you are devoted to piety, no such misfortune will ever come upon you.’ 34 + +The king bestowed great praise upon him and asked the tenth, What is the highest form of glory? And he said, ‘To honour God, and this is done not with gifts and sacrifices but with purity of soul and holy conviction, since all things are fashioned and governed by God in accordance with His will. Of this purpose you are in constant possession as all men can see from your achievements in the past and in the present.’ 5 With loud voice the king greeted them all and spoke kindly to them, and all those who were resent expressed their approval, especially the philosophers. For they were far superior to them i.e, the philosophers] both in conduct and in argument, since they always made God their starting- point. After this the king to show his good feeling proceeded to drink the health of his guests.
236.  On the following day the same arrangements were made for the banquet, and the king, as soon as an opportunity occurred, began to put questions to the men who sat next to those who had already responded, and he said to the first ‘Is wisdom capable of being taught?’ And he said, ‘ The soul is so constituted that it is able by the divine power to receive all the good and reject the contrary.’
237.  + The king expressed approval and asked the next man, What is it that is most beneficial to health? And he said, ‘Temperance, and it is not possible to acquire this unless God create a disposition towards it.’ The king spoke kindly to the man and said to another, ‘How can a man worthily pay the debt of gratitude to his parents?’ And he said, ‘ By never causing them pain, and this is not possible _ unless God dispose the mind to the pursuit of the noblest ends.’ 2 The king expressed agreement and asked the next How he could become an eager listener? And he said, ‘By remembering that all knowledge is useful, because it enables you by the help of God in ἦ a Thackeray suggests κaὶ κaλῶn δώpωn (as above). Wendland conjectures κaὶ κaλὴn δόξan εἰληφέναι δῶρον --- To win a fair reputation is the highest gift of God.’ a time of emergency to select some of the things which you have learned and apply them to the crisis which confronts you. And so the efforts of men are fulfilled by the assistance of God.’ .“240 The king praised him and asked the next How he could avoid doing anything contrary to law ? And he said, ‘If you recognize that it is God who has put the thoughts into the hearts of the lawgivers that the lives of men might be preserved, you will follow them.’
241.  The king acknowledged the man’s answer and said to another, ‘What is the advantage of kinship?’ And he replied, ‘ If we consider that we ourselves are afflicted by the misfortunes which fall upon our relatives and if their sufferings become our own—then the strength of kinship is
242.  apparent at once, for it is only when such feeling is shown that we shall win honour and esteem in their eyes. For help, when it is linked with kindliness, is of itself a bond which is altogether indissoluble. And in the day of their prosperity we must not crave their possessions, but must pray God to bestow all manner of good upon them.’
243.  And having accorded to him the same praise as to the rest, the king asked another How he could attain freedom from fear? And he said, ‘When the mind is conscious that it has wrought no evil, and when God directs it to all noble counsels.’
244.  The king expressed his approval and asked another How he could always maintain a right judgement? And he replied, ‘ If he constantly set before his eyes the misfortunes which befall men and recognized that it is God who takes away prosperity from some and brings others to great honour and glory.’
245.  Theking gavea kindly reception to the man and asked the next to answer the question How he could avoid a life of ease and pleasure? And he replied, ‘If he continually remembered that he was the ruler of a great empire and the lord of vast multitudes, and that his mind ought not to be occupied with other things, but he ought always to be considering how he could best promote their welfare. He must pray, too, to God that no duty might be neglected.’
246.  Having bestowed praise upon him, the king asked the tenth How he could recognize those who were dealing treacherously with him? And he replied to the question, ‘If he observed whether the bearing of those about him was natural and whether they maintained the proper rule of precedence at receptions and councils, and in their general intercourse, never going beyond the bounds of
247.  propriety in congratulations or in other matters of deportment. But God will incline your mind, O King, to all that is noble.’ When the king had expressed his loud approval and praised them all individually (amid the plaudits of all who were present), they turned to the enjoyment of the feast.
248.  And on the next day, when the opportunity offered, the king asked the next man, What is the grossest form of neglect? And he replied, ‘If a man does not care for his children and devote every effort to their education. For we always pray to God not so much for ourselves as for our children that every blessing may be theirs. Our desire that our children may possess self-control is only realized by the power of God.’
249.  The king said that he had spoken well and then asked another How he could be patriotic? ‘ By keeping before your mind,’ he replied, ‘the thought that it is good to live and die in one’s own country. Residence abroad brings contempt upon the poor and shame upon the rich as though they had been banished for acrime. If you bestow benefits upon all, as you continually do, God will give you favour with all and you will be accounted patriotic.’
250.  After listening to this man, the king asked the next in order How he could live amicably with his wife? And he answered, ‘By recognizing that womankind are by nature headstrong and energetic in the pursuit of their own desires, and subject to sudden changes of opinion through fallacious reasoning, and their nature is essentially weak. It is necessary to deal wisely with them and not to provoke strife. For the successful conduct of life the steersman must know the goal toward which he ought to direct his course. It is only by calling upon the help of God that men can steer a true course of life at all times.’
252.  The king expressed his agreement and asked the next How he could be free from error? And + 25 he replied, ‘If you always act with deliberation and never give credence to slanders, but prove for yourself the things that are said to you and decide by your own judgement the requests which are made to you and carry out everything in the light of your judgement, you will be free from error, O King. But the knowledge and practice of these things is the work of the Divine power.’ 63 Delighted with these words, the king asked another How he could be free from wrath? And he said in reply to the question, ‘If he recognized that he had power over all even to inflict death upon them, if he gave way to wrath, and that it would be useless and pitiful if he, just because he was lord, 4 deprived many of life. What need was there for wrath, when all men were in subjection and no one was hostile to him? It is necessary to recognize that God rules the whole world in the spirit of kindness and without wrath at all, and you, said he, ‘O King, must of necessity copy His example.’ The king said that he had answered well and then inquired of the next man, What is good counsel ? “To act well at all times and with due reflection,’ he explained, ‘comparing what ἐς advantageous to our own policy with the injurious effects that would result from the adoption of the opposite view, - in order that by weighing every point we may be well advised and our purpose may be accomplished. And most important of all, by the power of God every plan of yours will find fulfilment because you _ ‘practise piety.’ :
256.  The king said that this man had answered well, and asked another What is philosophy? And ᾿ς he explained, ‘To deliberate well in reference to any question that emerges and never to be carried ᾿ς away by impulses, but to ponder over the injuries that result from the passions, and to act rightly as ἢ the circumstances demand, practising moderation. But we must pray to God to instil into our mind ᾿ς aregard for these things.’
257.  +‘qThe king signified his consent and asked another How he could meet with recognition when travelling abroad? ‘ By being fair to all men,’ he replied, ‘and by appearing to be inferior rather than superior to those amongst whom he was travelling. For it is a recognized principle that God by His very nature accepts the humble. And the human race loves those who are willing to be in t΄ subjection to them.’
258.  Having expressed his approval at this reply, the king asked another How he could build in such away that his structures would endure after him? And he replied to the question, ‘If his creations were on a great and noble scale, so that the beholders would spare them for their beauty, and if he never dismissed any of those who wrought such works and never compelled others to minister to his 9 needs without wages. For observing how God provides for the human race, granting them health and mental capacity and all other gifts, he himself should follow His example by rendering to men a recompense for their arduous toil. For it is the deeds that are wrought in righteousness that abide continually.’
260.  The king said that this man, too, had answered well and asked the tenth, What is the fruit of _ wisdom? And he replied, ‘That a man should be conscious in himself that he has wrought no evil
261.  and that he should live his life in the truth. Since it is from these,O mighty King, that the greatest joy and stedfastness of soul and strong faith in God accrue to you if you rule your realm in piety.’ And when they heard the answer they all shouted with loud acclaim, and afterwards the king in the fullness of his joy began to drink their healths.
262.  Andon the next day the banquet followed the same course as on previous occasions, and when _ the opportunity presented itself the king proceeded to put questions to the remaining guests, and
263.  he said to the first, ‘ How can a man keep himself from pride?’ And he replied, ‘If he maintains equality and remembers on all occasions that he is a man ruling over men. And God brings the proud to nought, and exalts the meek and humble.’
264.  The king spoke kindly to him and asked the next, Whom ought a man to select as his counsellors? and he replied, ‘ Those who have been tested in many affairs and maintain unmingled goodwill towards him and partake of his own disposition. And God manifests Himself to those who are worthy that these ends may be attained.’
265.  The king praised him and asked another, What is the most necessary possession for a king? ‘The friendship and love of his subjects,’ he replied, ‘ for it is through this that the bond of goodwill is rendered indissoluble. And it is God who ensures that this may come to pass in accordance with your wish.
266.  The king praised him and inquired of another, What is goal of speech? And he replied, ‘ To ew 255. 38 alge what is advantageous. The meaning is not clear. I follow Wendland in supplying the clause in italics. ackeray translates, ‘And while forming our decisions not neglecting to weigh [lit. comparing] the injurious effects of following the opposite view.’ convince your opponent by showing him his mistakes in a well-ordered array of arguments. For in this way you will win your hearer, not by opposing him, but by bestowing praise upon him with a view to persuading him. And it is by the power of God that persuasion is accomplished.’ 26] The king said that he had given a good answer, and asked another How he could live amicably with the many different races who formed the population of his kingdom? ‘ By acting the proper part towards each,’ he replied, ‘and taking righteousness as your guide, as you are now doing with the help of the insight which God bestows upon you.’
268.  The king was delighted by this reply, and asked another ‘ Under what circumstances ought a man to suffer grief?’ ‘In the misfortunes that befall our friends,’ he replied,‘ when we see that they are protracted and irremediable. Reason does not allow us to grieve for those who are dead and set free from evil, but all men do grieve over them because they think only of themselves and their own advantage. It is by the power of God alone that we can escape all evil.’
269.  The king said that he had given a fitting answer, and asked another, How is reputation lost? And he replied, ‘When pride and unbounded self-confidence hold sway, dishonour and loss of reputation are engendered. For God is the Lord of all reputation and bestows it where He will.’
270.  +The king gave his confirmation to the answer, and asked the next man, To whom ought men to entrust themselves? ‘To those,’ he replied, ‘who serve you from goodwill and not from fear or self- interest, thinking only of their own gain. For the one is the sign of love, the other the mark of ill-will and time-serving. For the man who is always watching for his own gain is a traitor at heart. But you possess the affection of all your subjects by the help of the good counsel which God bestows upon you.’ by such conduct in obedience to the Divine command have laid up in store for yourself a perpetual memorial.’ The king said that this man, too, had spoken well, and asked the next, Whom ought we to appoint as governors? And he replied, ‘All who hate wickedness, and imitating your own conduct act righteously that they may maintain a good reputation constantly. For this is what you do, O mighty King,’ he said, ‘and it is God who has bestowed upon you the crown of righteousness.’ The king loudly acclaimed the answer and then looking at the next man said, ‘ Whom ought we to appoint as officers over the forces?’ And he explained, ‘Those who excel in courage and righteousness and those who are more anxious about the safety of their men than to gain a victory by risking their lives through rashness. For as God acts well towards all men, so too you in imitation of Him are the benefactor of all your subjects.’ 82 The king said that he had given a good answer and asked another, What man is worthy of admiration? And he replied, ‘The man who is furnished with reputation and wealth and power and possesses a soul equal to it all. You yourself show by your actions that you are most worthy of admiration through the help of God who makes you care for these things.’ 3 The king expressed his approval and said to another ‘To what affairs ought kings to devote most time?’ And he replied, ‘To reading and the stwdy of the records of official journeys, which are written in reference to the various kingdoms, with a view to the reformation and preservation of the subjects. And it is by such activity that you have attained to a glory which has never been tς approached by others, through the help of God who fulfils all your desires.’ 84 The king spoke enthusiastically to the man and asked another How ought a man to occupy himself during his hours of relaxation and recreation? And he replied, ‘To watch those plays which can be acted with propriety and to set before one’s eyes scenes taken from life and enacted
285.  with dignity and decency is profitable and appropriate. For there is some edification to be found even in these amusements, for often some desirable lesson is taught by the most insignificant affairs of life. But by practising the utmost propriety in all your actions, you have shown that you are a philosopher and you are honoured by God on account of your virtue.’ The king, pleased with the words which had just been spoken, said to the ninth man, How ought a man to conduct himself at banquets? And he replied, ‘You should summon to your side men of learning and those who are able to give you useful hints with regard to the affairs of your kingdom and the lives of your subjects (for you could not find any theme more suitable or more
287.  educative than this) since such men are dear to God because they have trained their minds to it the noblest themes—as you indeed are doing yourself, since all your actions are POT directed by God.’ Delighted with the reply, the king inquired of the next man, What is best for the people? That a private citizen should be made king over them or a member of the royal family? And he 9 teplied, ‘He who is best by nature. For kings who come of royal lineage are often harsh and severe towards their subjects. And still more is this the case with some of those who have risen 3 from the ranks of private citizens, who after having experienced evil and borne their share of
290.  poverty, when they rule over multitudes turn out to be more cruel than the godless tyrants. But, _ 451 have said, a good nature which has been properly trained is capable of ruling, and you are a great king, not so much because you excel in the glory of your rule and your wealth but rather because you have surpassed all men in clemency and philanthropy, thanks to God who has endowed you with these qualities.’
291.  The king spent some time in praising this man and then asked the last of all, What is the ἢ greatest achievement in ruling an empire? And he replied, ‘ That the subjects should continually dwell in a state of peace, and that justice should be speedily administered in cases of dispute:
292.  These results are achieved through the influence of the ruler, when he is a man who hates evil and loves the good and devotes his energies to saving the lives of men, just as you consider injustice the worst form of evil and by your just administration have fashioned for yourself an undying reputation, since God bestows upon you a mind which is pure and untainted by any evil.’
293.  And when he ceased, loud and joyful applause broke out for some considerable time. When it stopped the king took a cup and gave a toast in honour of all his guests and the words which they had uttered. Then in conclusion he said, ‘I have derived the greatest benefit from your presence.
294.  I have profited much by the wise teaching which you have given me in reference to the art of ruling” Then he ordered that three talents of silver should be presented to each of them, and appointed one of his slaves to deliver over the money. All at once shouted their approval, and the banquet became a scene of joy, while the king gave himself up to a continuous round of festivity.
295.  I have written at length and must crave your pardon, Philocrates. J was astonished beyond measure at the men and the way in which on the spur of the moment they gave answers which 296,really needed a long time to devise. For though the questioner had given great thought toeach particular question, those who replied one after the other had their answers to the questions ready at once and so they seemed to me and to all who were present and especially to the philosophers to be worthy of admiration. And I suppose that the thing will seem incredible to those who will
297.  read my narrative in the future. But it is unseemly to misrepresent facts which are recorded in the public archives. And it would not be right for me to transgress in such a matter as this. I tell the story just as it happened, conscientiously avoiding any error. I was so impressed by the force of their utterances, that I made an effort to consult those whose business it was to make ᾿
298.  ἃ record of all that happened at the royal audiences and banquets. For it is the custom, ἃ5 you know, from the moment the king begins to transact business until the time when he retires to rest, for a record to be taken of all his sayings and doings—a most excellent and useful arrangement.
299.  For on the following day the minutes of the doings and sayings of the previous day are read over before business commences, and if there has been any irregularity, the matter is at once set right. 4
300.  I obtained therefore, as has been said, accurate information from the public records, and I have set forth the facts in proper order since I know how eager you are to obtain useful information. Ϊ
301.  Three days later Demetrius took the men and passing along the sea-wall, seven stadia long, to the island, crossed the bridge and made for the northern districts of Pharos. There he assembled them in a house, which had been built upon the sea-shore, of great beauty and in a secluded situation, and invited them to carry out the work of translation, since everything that they needed for the purpose
302.  was placed at their disposal. So they set to work comparing their several results and making them agree,and whatever they agreed upon was suitably copied out under the direction of Demetrius.
303.  And the session lasted until the ninth hour ; after this they were set free to minister to their physical
304.  needs. Everything they wanted was furnished for them on a lavish scale. In addition to this Dorotheus made the same preparations for them daily as were made for the king himself—for thus he had been commanded by the king. In the early morning they appeared daily at the Court, and
305.  after saluting the king went back to their own place. And as is the custom of all the Jews, they washed their hands in the sea and prayed to God and then devoted themselves to reading and
306.  translating the particular passage upon which they were engaged, and I put the question to them, Why it was that they washed their hands before they prayed? And they explained that it. was a token that they had done no evil (for every form of activity is wrought by means of the hands) since in their noble and holy way they regard everything as a symbol of righteousness and truth. ee 295. [have written at length, eἶπa πλείονα. Mendelssohn suggests eἰ πεπλεόνακα (‘if I have been too prolix’) and this emendation is accepted by Wendland and Thackeray. ; As I have already said, they met together daily in the place which was delightful for its quiet and its brightness and applied themselves to their task. And it so chanced that the work of translation was completed in seventy-two days, just as if this had been arranged of set purpose. When the work was completed, Demetrius collected together the Jewish population in the place where the translation had been made, and read it over to all, in the presence of the translators, who met with a great reception also from the people, because of the great benefits which they had conferred upon them. They bestowed warm praise upon Demetrius, too, and urged him to have the whole law transcribed and present a copy to their leaders. After the books had been read, the priests and the elders of the translators and the Jewish community and the leaders of the people stood up and said, that since so excellent and sacred and accurate a translation had been made, it was only right that it should remain as it was and no 11 alteration should be made in it. And when the whole company expressed their approval, they bade them pronounce a curse in accordance with their custom upon any one who should make any alteration either by adding anything or changing in any way whatever any of the words which had been written or making any omission. This was a very wise precaution to ensure that the book might be preserved for all the future time unchanged. 2 When the matter was reported to the king, he rejoiced greatly, for he felt that the design which he had formed had been safely carried out. The whole book was read over to him and he was greatly astonished at the spirit of the lawgiver. And he said to Demetrius, ‘ How is it that none of the historians or the poets have ever thought it worth their while to allude to such a wonderful 3 achievement?’ And he replied, ‘ Because the law is sacred and of divine origin. And some of those who formed the intention of dealing with it have been smitten by God and therefore desisted from 14 their purpose.’ He said that he had heard from Theopompus that he had been driven out of his mind for more than thirty days because he intended to insert in his history some of the incidents from the earlier and somewhat unreliable translations of the law. When he had recovered
315.  a little, he besought God to make it clear to him why the misfortune had befallen him. And it was ᾿ς revealed to him in a dream, that from idle curiosity he was wishing to communicate sacred truths to common men, and that if he desisted he would recover his health. I have heard, too, from the lips 816 oἵ Theodektes, one of the tragic poets, that when he was about to adapt some of the incidents ᾿ς recorded in the book for one of his plays, he was affected with cataract in both his eyes. And when ὥσte ai χεῖρες ἐπὶ δυνάμεως νοοῦνται θeoῦ. κaὶ yap ἔσti νοῆσαι tὴn πᾶσan ἰσxὺn tῶn ἀνθρώπων κaὶ tὰς ἐνεργείας ἐn taῖς χερσὶν εἶναι. Cp. also the reference to the Zephd//a, ὃ 159. he perceived the reason why the misfortune had befallen him, he prayed to God for many days and was afterwards restored.
317.  And after the king, as I have already said, had received the explanation of Demetrius on this point, he did homage and ordered that great care should be taken of the books, and that they should
318.  be sacredly guarded. And he urged the translators to visit him frequently after their return to Judea, for it was only right, he said, that he should now send them home. But when they came back, he
319.  would treat them as friends, as was right, and they would receive rich presents from:him. He ordered preparations to be made for them to return home, and treated them most munificently. He presented each one of them with three robes of the finest sort, two talents of gold, a sideboard weighing one talent, all the furniture for three couches.
320.  And with the escort he sent Eleazar ten couches with silver legs and all the necessary equipment, a sideboard worth thirty talents, ten robes, purple, and a magnificent crown, and a hundred pieces of the finest woven linen, also bowls and dishes, and two golden beakers to be dedicated to God.
321.  He urged him also in a letter that if any of the men preferred to come back to him, not to hinder them. For he counted it a great privilege to enjoy the society of such learned men, and he would rather lavish his wealth upon them than upon vanities.
322.  And now Philocrates, you have the complete story in accordance with my promise. I think that you find greater pleasure in these matters than in the writings of the mythologists. For you are devoted to the study of those things which can benefit the soul, and spend much time upon it, I shall attempt to narrate whatever other events are worth recording, that by perusing them you may secure the highest reward for your zeal. We have elsewhere βίβλος or βιβλίον δiaθήκης (Ecclus. xxiv. 23; 1 Macc. i. 57), tὰ βιβλία toῦ νόμου (1 Macc. i. 56) tὰ βιβλία tὰ ἅγia (I Macc. xii. 9). It is possible, however, that the reference to the tὴn ἱερὰν βίβλον in 2 Macc. viii. 23 may be earlier. Cp. also the allusion to the line as Scripture, δiὰ tῆς γpaφῆς in § 168.


# The Books of Adam and Eve

2.  not hearken to our prayers: and will turn away His countenance from us, because we have not
3.  fulfilled what we promised. My lord, how much penitence hast thou thought (to do) for I have brought trouble and anguish upon thee ?’ v. I And Adam said to Eve: ‘Thou canst not do so much as I, but do only so much as thou hast strength for. For I will spend forty days fasting, but do thou arise and go to the river Tigris and lift up a stone and stand on it in the water up to thy neck in the deep of the river. And let no Eiς speech proceed out of thy mouth, since we are unworthy to address the Lord, for our lips are unclean from the unlawful and forbidden tree. _ 2And do thou stand in the water of the river thirty-seven days. But I will spend forty days in the water of Jordan, perchance the Lord God will take pity upon us.’ wii.t And Eve walked to the river Tigris and did 2as Adam had told her. Likewise, Adam walked to the river Jordan and stood on a stone up to ; his neck in water. vii. t And Adam said: ‘I tell thee, water of Jordan, grieve with me, and assemble to me all swimming I (creatures), which are in thee, and let them sur- 2round me and mourn in company with me. Not for themselves let them lament, but for me; for it is not they that have sinned, but I.’ ἘΣ; ἿP THE BOOKS OF ViTA ADAE ET EVAE. 1 And eighteen days passed by; then Satan was wroth and transformed himself into the brightness of angels, and went away to the river 2 Tigris to Eve, and found her weeping, and the devil himself pretended to grieve with her, and he began to weep and said to her: ‘Come out of the river and lament no more. Cease now from sorrow and moans. Why art thou anxious 3 and thy husband Adam? The Lord God hath heard your groaning and hath accepted your penitence, and all we angels have entreated on your behalf, and made supplication to the Lord ; 4and he hath sent me to bring you out of the water and give you the nourishment which you had in paradise, and for which you are crying
5.  out. Now come out of the water and I will conduct you to the place where your victual hath been made ready.’ 1 But Eve heard and believed and went out of the water of the river, and her flesh was (trembling) 2 like grass, from the chill of the water. And when she had gone out, she fell on the earth and the devil raised her up and led her to Adam. 3 But when Adam had seen her and the devil with her, he wept and cried aloud and said: ‘O Eve, Eve, where is the labour of thy penitence? 4 How hast thou been again ensnared by our adversary, by whose means we have been estranged from our abode in paradise and spiritual joy ?’ t And when she heard this, Eve understood that (it was) the devil (who) had persuaded her to go out of the river; and she fell on her face on the earth and her sorrow and groaning and wailing 2 was redoubled. And she cried out and said: ‘Woe unto thee, thou devil. Why dost thou attack us for no cause? What hast thou to do with us? What have we done to thee? for thou pursuest us with craft? Or why doth thy malice 3 assail us? Have we taken away thy glory and caused thee to be without honour? Why dost thou harry us, thou enemy (and persecute us) to the death in wickedness and envy?’ ix. 1. was wroth. III >. VITA ADAE ET EVAE., The Fall of the Devil, xii—xvii. 1 And with a heavy sigh, the devil spake: “Ὁ Adam! all my hostility, envy, and sorrow is for thee, since it is for thee that I have been expelled from my glory, which I possessed in the heavens 2 in the midst of the angels and for thee was I cast out in the earth.’ Adam answered, ‘ What dost 3 thou tell me? What have I done to thee or what is my fault against thee? Seeing that thou hast received no harm or injury from us, why dost thou pursue us?’ 1 The devil replied, ‘Adam, what dost thou tell me? It is for thy sake that I have been hurled 2 from that place. When thou wast formed, I was hurled out of the presence of God and banished from the company of the angels. When God blew into thee the breath of life and thy face and likeness was made in the image of God, Michael also brought thee and made (us) worship thee in the sight of God ; and God the Lord spake: Here is Adam. I have made thee in our image and likeness.’ . 1 And Michael went out and called all the angels saying : ; ‘Worship the image of God as the Lord God hath commanded.’ 2 And Michael himself worshipped first; then he called me and said: ‘ Worship the image of God } 3the Lord.’ And I answered, ‘I have no (need) to worship Adam.’ And since Michael kept urging me to worship, I said to him, ‘ Why dost thou urge me? 1 will not worship an inferior and - younger being (than I). I am his senior in the Creation, before he was made was I already made. ὃ It ishis duty to worship me.’ - 1,2 When the angels, who were under me, heard this, they refused to worship him. And Michael saith, ‘ Worship the image of God, but if thou wilt not worship him, the Lord God will be wrath _ $with thee.’ And I said, ‘If He be wrath with me, I will set my seat above the stars of heaven and will be like the Highest.’ t And God the Lord was wrath with me and banished me and my angels from our glory; and on 2thy account were we expelled from our abodes into this world and hurled on the earth. And 3 straightway we were overcome with grief, since we had been spoiled of so great glory. And we 4 were grieved when we saw thee in such joy and luxury. And with guile I cheated thy wife and caused thee to be expelled through her (doing) from thy joy and luxury, as I have been driven ᾿ς oἱ of my glory.’ Vii, eὰ When Adam heard the devil say this, he cried out and wept and spake: ‘O Lord my God, my _ life is in thy hands. - Banish this Adversary far from me, who seeketh to destroy my soul, and give 2, 3 me his glory which he himself hath lost.’ And at that moment, the devil vanished before him. But Adam endured in his penance, standing for forty days (on end) in the water of Jordan. Birth of Cain and Abel; Death of Abel; Book of Seth, xviii-xxiv. viii, 1 _ And Eve said to Adam: ‘ Live thou, my Lord, to thee life is granted, since thou hast committed neither the first nor the second error. But I have erred and been led astray for I have not kept the commandment of God; and now banish me from the light of thy life and I will go to the sunsetting, 2 and there will I be, until I die’ And she began to walk towards the western parts and to mourn 3 and to weep bitterly and groan aloud. And she made there a booth, while she had in her womb offspring of three months old. xii. 1. expelled I. Il]+e¢ alienatus sum. Story closely parallel to Al Koran Suras vii-xi, Codex Nazaraeus 67: * The highest kings of light declared: ‘‘ Let the kings of fire serve Adam.” But one, the author of ill, did not follow the commands of the Lord and was hurled in chains.’ Cf. Rabbi Moses-Hadarschan: ‘When God made Adam, he said to the higher angels, ‘‘ Bow yourselves down !”’ xix. 1 And when the time of her bearing approached, she began to be distressed with pains, and she 2 cried aloud to the Lord and said: ‘ Pity me, O Lord, assist me.’ And she was not heard and the 3 mercy of God did not encircle her. And she said to herself: ‘Who shall tell my lord Adam? I implore you, ye luminaries of heaven, what time ye return to the east, bear a message to my lord Adam,’ But in that hour, Adam said: ‘The complaint of Eve hath come to me. hath the serpent fought with her.’ 2 And he went and found her in great distress. And Eve said: ‘From the moment I saw thee, my lord, my grief-laden soul was refreshed. And now entreat the Lord God on my behalf to 3 hearken unto thee and look upon me and free me from my awful pains.’ And Adam entreated the Lord for Eve. xxi. 1 And behold, there came twelve angels and two ‘ virtues’, standing on the right and on the left 2 of Eve; and Michael was standing on the right; and he stroked her on the face as far as to the breast and said to Eve: ‘Blessed art thou, Eve, for Adam’s sake. Since his prayers and intercessions are great, I have been sent that thou mayst receive our help. Rise up now, and 3 prepare thee to bear. And she bore a son and he was shining; and at once the babe rose up and ran and bore a blade of grass in his hands, and gave it to his mother, and his name was 5 ἢ Perchance, once more called Cain. VITA ADAE ET EVAE. xxii, 1 And Adam carried Eve and the boy and led 2 them to the East. Andthe Lord God sent divers seeds by Michael the archangel and gave to Adam and showed him how to work and till the ground, that they might have fruit by which they and all their generations might live. 3 For thereafter Eve conceived and bare a son, whose name was Abel ; and Cain and Abel used to stay together. 4 And Eve said to Adam: ‘My lord, while I slept, I saw a vision, as it were the blood of our son Abel in the hand of Cain, who was gulping it down in his mouth. Therefore I have sorrow.’ 5 And Adam said,‘ Alas if Cainslew Abel. Yet let us separate them from each other mutually, xix. 2. did not encircle her. ViTA ADAE ET ΕΥ̓ΔΕ. and let us make for each of them separate dwellings.’ x And they made Cain an husbandman, (but) Abel they made a shepherd; in order that in this wise they might be mutually separated. 2 And thereafter, Cain slew Abel, but Adam was then one hundred and thirty years old, but Abel was slain when he was one hundred and twenty- two years. Ϊ = 3 And thereafter Adam knew his wife ᾿ς and he begat a son and called his name Seth. xiv t And Adam said to Eve, ‘Behold, I have be- gotten a son, in place of Abel, whom Cain slew.’ _ 2And after Adam had begotten Seth, he lived Ἷ eight hundred years and begat thirty sons and thirty daughters; in all sixty-three children. And they ‘were increased over the face of the APOCALYPSIS MOsIS. mouth. And Adam said, ‘Let us arise and go 4 and see what has happened to them. (I fear) lest the adversary may be assailing them some- where.’ And they both went and found Abel murdered jj, a by the hand of Cain his brother. And God 2 saith to Michael the archangel: ‘Say to Adam : “Reveal not the secret that thou knowest to Cain thy son, for he is a son of wrath. But grieve not, for I will give thee another son in his stead ; he shall show (to thee) all that thou shalt do. Do thou tell him nothing.” ’ Thus spake the arch- 3 angel to Adam. But he kept the word in his heart, and with him also Eve, though they grieved concerning Abel their son. And after this, Adam knew Eve his wife, and iv. 1 she conceived and bare Seth. And Adam said to Eve: ‘See! we have be- 2 gotten a son in place of Abel, whom Cain slew, — let us give glory and sacrifice to God.’ And Adam begat thirty sons and thirty v. 1 daughters and Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years; and he fell sick and cried with a loud 2 voice and said, ‘ Let all my sons come to me that I may see them before I die.’ VITA ADAE ET EVAE. Vision of Adam, xxv—-xxix. xxv. 1 And Adam said to Seth, ‘Hear, my son Seth, that I may relate to thee what I heard and 2 saw after your mother and I had been driven out of paradise. When we were at prayer, there 3 came to me Michael the archangel, a messenger of God. And I saw a chariot like the wind and its wheels were fiery and I was caught up into the Paradise of righteousness, and I saw the xxiii. 2, one hundred and twenty-two. Cf. Jub. iv. 3 (Charles’s note); Abel there is twenty-two. xxiv. 2. sixty-three. Cf. Jub. iv. 10 (Charles’ note): Jub. says ‘nine’; ‘ Conflict of A. and E.’ says ‘five’; Arm. omits ‘thirty daughters’. xxv. I. Seth. Some MSS. have preface explaining choice of Seth, D.A. 8. says it was told to a// his sons. XXVi. XXVii, XXViii, Lord sitting and his face was flaming fire that could not be endured. And many thousands of angels were on the right and the left of that chariot. i 1 When I saw this, I was confounded, and terror seized me and I bowed myself down before 2 God with my face to the earth. And God said to me, ‘ Behold thou diest, since thou hast trans- gressed the commandment of God, for thou didst hearken rather to the voice of thy wife, whom I gave into thy power, that thou mightst hold her to thy will. Yet thou didst listen to her and didst pass by My words.’ 1 And when I heard these words of God, I fell prone on the earth and worshipped the Lord and said, ‘My Lord, All powerful and merciful God, Holy and Righteous One, let not the name that is mindful of Thy majesty be blotted out, but convert my soul, for I die and my 2 breath will go out of my mouth. Cast me not out from Thy presence, (me) whom Thou didst form of the clay of the earth. Do not banish from Thy favour him whom Thou didst nourish.’ And lo! a word concerning thee came upon me and the Lord said to me, ‘Since thy days twere fashioned}, thou hast been created with a love of knowledge; therefore there shall not be taken from thy seed for ever the (right) to serve Me.’ 1 And when I heard these words, I threw myself on the earth and adored the Lord God and said, ‘Thou art the eternal and supreme God ; and all creatures give thee honour and praise. 2 ‘Thou art the true Light gleaming above all light(s), the Living Life, infinite mighty Power. To Thee, the spiritual powers give honour and praise. Thou workest on the race of men the abundance of Thy mercy.’ 3 After I had worshipped the Lord, straightway Michael, God’s archangel, seized my hand and 4 cast me out of the paradise Toῦ ‘vision’} and of God’s command. And Michael held a rod in his hand, and he touched the waters, which were round about paradise, and they froze hard. 1 And I went across, and Michael the archangel went across with me, and he led me back to 2 the place whence he had caught me up. Hearken, my son Seth, even to the rest of the secrets {and sacraments] that shall be, which were revealed to me, when I had eaten of the tree of the 3 knowledge, and knew and perceived what will come to pass in this age ; [what God intends to do 4 to his creation of the race of men. The Lord will appear in a flame of fire (and) from the mouth of His majesty He will give commandments and statutes [from His mouth will proceed a two-edged sword] and they will sanctify Him in the house of the habitation of His majesty. 5 And He will show them the marvellous place of His majesty. And then they will build a house to the Lord their God in the land which He shall prepare for them and there they will trans- gress His statutes and their sanctuary will be burnt up and their land will be deserted and they
6.  themselves will be dispersed ; because they have kindled the wrath of God. And once more He will cause them to come back from their dispersion ; and again they will build the house of God;
7.  and in the last time the house of God will be exalted greater than of old. And once more iniquity will exceed righteousness. And thereafter God will dwell with men on earth [in visible form]; and then, righteousness will begin to shine. And the house of God will be honoured in the age and their enemies will no more be able to hurt the men, who are believing in God; and God will stir up for Himself a faithful people, whom He shall save for eternity, and the impious shall be punished flaming fire. Cf. 1 En. (xiii-xvii) for description of God’s dwelling, &c, xxvi. 2, rather II 2” primis; 1 prius. 11 (Meyer) plus. to thy wife. Cf. Apoc. Mos. xxiv. xxvii, I. name. Hebrew expression = personality. Cf. Kautzsch, Hastings’ 2. D., art. ‘ Religion of Israel ’. by God their king, the men who refused to love His law. Heaven and earth, nights and days, and all creatures shall obey Him, and not overstep His commandment. Men shall not change their
9.  works, but they shall be changed from forsaking the law of the Lord. Therefore the Lord shall ᾿ repel from Himself the wicked, and the just shall shine like the sun, in the sight of God. And
10.  in that time, shall men be purified by water from their sins. But those who are unwilling to be purified by water shall be condemned. And happy shall the man be, who hath ruled his soul, when the Judgement shall come to pass and the greatness of God be seen among men and their deeds be inquired into by God the just judge. ViTA ADAE ET EVAE. 1 After Adam was nine hundred and thirty years old, since he knew that his days were coming to an end, he said: ‘Let all my sons assemble themselves to me, that I may bless them before I die, and speak with them.’ 2 And they were assembled in three parts, before his sight, in the house of prayer, where they used _ 3toworship the Lord God. And they asked him _ (saying): ‘ What concerns thee, Father, that thou shouldst assemble us, and why dost thou lie on 4thy bed?’ Then Adam answered and said: ‘My sons, I am sick and in pain.’ And all his sons said to him: ‘What does it mean, father, this illness and pain?’ xxi. 1. Then said Seth his son: ‘O (my) lord, per- _ chance thou hast longed after the fruit of paradise, which thou wast wont to eat, and therefore thou liest in sadness? Tell me and I will go to the nearest gates of paradise and put dust on my _ head and throw myself down on the earth before the gates of paradise and lament and make entreaty to God with loud lamentation; per- chance he will hearken to me and send his angel to bring me the fruit, for which thou hast longed.’ 2 Adam answered and said: ‘No, my son, I do not long (for this), but I feel weakness and great 3 pain in my body.’ Seth answered, ‘ What is pain, my lord father? I am ignorant ; but hide it not from us, but tell us (about it).’ And Adam answered and said: ‘ Hear me, my sons. When God made us, me and your mother, and placed us in paradise and gave us every tree “- XX. I 9-1o. purified by water, i.e. baptism. APOCALYPSIS MOSIS. And all assembled, for the earth was divided v. 3 into three parts. And Seth his son said to him: 4 ‘Father Adam, what is thy complaint ?’ And he saith, ‘My children, I am crushed by 5 the burden of trouble. And they say to him, ‘What is trouble?’ And Seth answered and said to him: ‘Hast vi. 1 thou called to mind, father, the fruit of paradise of which thou usedst to eat, and hast been grieved in yearning for it?’ ‘If this be so, tell me, (and) I will go and 2 bring thee fruit from paradise. For I will set dung upon my head and will weep and pray that the Lord will hearken to me and send his angel (and bring me a plant from paradise), and I will ire: it thee that thy trouble may cease from thee.’ Adam saith to him: ‘ Nay, my son Seth, but 3 I have (much) sickness and trouble!’ Seth saith to him: ‘ And how hath this come upon thee?’ And Adam said to him: ‘ When God made us, vii. 1 me and your mother, through whom also I die, He gave us power to eat of every tree which is in xxx. I. bless them. Cf. Gen. xxvii. 14, xviii. 3, 2 En. Ixiv. 4. XXxiii. XXXIV. XXXV, XXXVi. 3 unlawful and forbidden tree. THE BOOKS OF ADAM AND EVE VITA ADAE ET EVAE. bearing fruit to eat, he laid a prohibition on us concerning the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which is in the midst of paradise; (saying) 2*Do not eat of it.’ But God gave a part of paradise to me and (a part) to your mother: the trees of the eastern part and the north, which is over against Aquilo he gave to me, and to your mother he gave the part of the south and the western part. 1 (Moreover) God the Lord gave us two angels to guard us. The hour came when the angels had ascended to worship in the sight of God; forthwith the adversary [the devil] found an opportunity while the angels were absent and the devil led your mother astray to eat of the And she did eat in and gave to me. 1 And immediately, the Lord God was wrath with us, and the Lord said to me: ‘In that thou hast left behind my commandment and hast not kept my word, which I confirmed to thee; be- hold, I will bring upon thy body, seventy blows ; with divers griefs, shalt thou be tormented, beginning at thy head and thine eyes and thine ears down to thy nails on thy toes, and in every separate limb. These hath God fappointed for chastisement}. All these things hath the Lord sent to me and to all our race.’ 1 Thus spake Adam to his sons, and he was seized with violent pains, and he cried out with a loud voice, ‘What shall I do? I am in dis- tress. So cruel are the pains with which I am beset.’ And when Eve had seen him weeping, she also began to weep herself, and said: ‘O Lord my God, hand over to me his pain, for it is I who sinned.’ 3 And Eve said to Adam: ‘My lord, give me a part of thy pains, for this hath come to thee from fault of mine.’ 1 And Adam said to Eve: ‘ Rise up and go with [Ὁ] [Ὁ] ΧΧΧΙΪ. 2. your mother. confirmed. 2. ‘tappointed for chastisementt. MSS. obscure. all our race. Read omne genus nostrum with II III: Meyer ‘all our generations’ (omnes nostras generationes). that one only DBEC. THE BOOKS OF ΨΙΤΑ ADAE ET EVAE. _. my son Seth to the neighbourhood of paradise, and put dust on your heads and throw your- selves on the ground and lament in the sight of _ 2God. Perchance He will have pity (upon you) and send His angel across to the tree of His mercy, whence floweth the oil of life, and will give _ you a drop of it, to anoint me with it, that I may 4 have rest from these pains, by which I am being consumed.’ Then Seth and his mother went off to- wards the gates of paradise. And while they were walking, lo! suddenly there came a beast _ 2 {a serpent] and attacked and bit Seth. And as soon as Eve saw it, she wept and said: ‘ Alas, wretched woman that I am. I am accursed since I have not kept the commandment of God.’ 3 And Eve said to the serpent in a loud voice: * Accursed beast! how (is it that) thou hast not feared to let thyself loose against the image of God, but hast dared to fight with it?’ The beast answered in the language of men: *Is it not against you, Eve, that our malice (is directed)? Are not ye the objects of our rage? 2 Tell me, Eve, how was thy mouth opened to eat of the fruit? But now if I shall begin to reprove thee thou canst not bear it.’ ἃ. Then said Seth to the beast: ‘God the Lord revile thee. Be silent, be dumb, shut thy mouth, accursed enemy of Truth, confounder and de- stroyer. Avaunt from the image of God till the day when the Lord God shall order thee to be 2 brought to the ordeal.’ And the beast said to ix. 1 xxxvi. 2. oil of life. Cf. Apoc. Mos. ix. 3 (note). xxxvii. 1, [a serpent]. A gloss to connect with tale of Fall. revolt. bit Seth proves work is not Sethzte. Vira ADAE ET EVAE. Seth: ‘See, I leave the presence of the image of God, as thou hast said.’ Forthwith he left Seth, wounded by his teeth. But Seth and his mother walked to the regions of paradise for the oil of mercy to anoint the sick Adam: and they arrived at the gates of paradise, (and) they took dust from the earth and placed it on their heads, and bowed themselves with their faces to the earth and began to lament and 2 make loud moaning, imploring the Lord God to pity Adam in his pains and to send His angel to give them the oil from the ‘tree of His mercy’, But when they had been praying and imploring for many hours, behold, the angel Michael ap- 2 peared to them and said: ‘I have been sent to you from the Lord—I am set by God over the 3 bodies of men—I tell thee, Seth, (thou) man of God, weep not nor pray and entreat on account of the oil of the tree of mercy to anoint thy father Adam for the pains of his body. ‘For I tell thee that in no wise wilt thou be able to receive thereof save in the last days.’ 2 [When five thousand five hundred years have been fulfilled, then will come upon earth the most beloved king Christ, the son of God, to revive the body of Adam and with him to revive 3 the bodies of the dead. He Himself, the Son of God, when He comes will be baptized in the river of Jordan, and when He hath come out of the water of Jordan, then He will anoint from the 4 oil of mercy all that believe in Him. And the oil of mercy shall be for generation to generation for those who are ready to be born again of 5 water and the Holy Spirit to lifeeternal. Then the most beloved Son of God, Christ, descending on earth shall lead thy father Adam to Paradise to the tree of mercy. ‘But do thou, Seth, go to thy father Adam, since the time of his life is fulfilled. Six days hence, his soul shall go off his body and when xii. Σ ἘΠ XH xlili, 1 THE BOOKS OF Vita ADAE ET EVAE. it shall have gone out, thou shalt see great marvels in the heaven and in the earth and the 2 luminaries of heaven. With these words, straight- way Michael departed from Seth. xvii, 1 And instantly he hung himself from the wall of paradise, and when the angels ascended to 2 worship God, then Satan appeared in the form of an angel and sang hymns like the angels. And I bent over the wall and saw him, like anangel. But he saith tome: “ Art thou Eve?” And I said 3 to him, “I am.” ‘ What art thou doing in paradise?” And I said to him, “ God set us to guard and 4 to eat of it.” The devil answered through the mouth of the serpent: “ Ye do well but ye do not eat 5 of every plant.” And I said: ‘‘ Yea, we eat of all, save one only, which is in the midst of paradise, concerning which, God charged us not to eat of it: for, He said to us, on the day on which ye eat of it, ye shall die the death.” xviii. 1 Then the serpent saith to me, “ May God live! but I am grieved on your account, for I would not have you ignorant. But arise, (come) hither, hearken to me and eat and mind the value of that tree.” 2, 3 But I said to him, “I fear lest God be wroth with me as he told us.” And he saith to me: “ Fear not, for as soon as thou eatest of it, ye too shall be as God, in that ye shall know good and evil. 4 But God perceived this that ye would be like Him, so he envied you and said, Ye shall not eat of 5,6 it. Nay, do thou give heed to the plant and thou wilt see its great glory.” Yet I feared to take of the fruit. And he saith to me: “ Come hither, and I will give it thee. Follow me.” xix. 1 And I opened to him and he walked a little way, then turned and said to me: “1 have changed my 2 mind and I will not give thee to eat until thou swear to me to give also to thy husband.” (And) I said, “ What sort of oath shall I swear to thee? Yet what I know, I say to thee: By the throne of the 3 Master, and by the Cherubim and the Tree of Life, I will give also to my husband to eat.” And when he had received the oath from me, he went and poured upon the fruit the poison of his wicked- ness, which is lust, the root and beginning of every sin, and he bent the branch on the earth and I took of the fruit and I ate. xx. 1 And in that very hour my eyes were opened, and forthwith I knew that I was bare of the right- 2 eousness with which I had been clothed (upon), and I wept and said to him: “Why hast thou 3 done this to me in that thou hast deprived me of the glory with which I was clothed?” But I wept also about the oath, which I had sworn. But he descended from the tree and vanished. 4 And I began to seek, in my nakedness, in my part for leaves to hide my shame, but I found none, for, as soon as I had eaten, the leaves showered down from all the trees in my part, except the fig- 5 tree only. But I took leaves from it and made for myself a girdle and it was from the very same _ plant of which I had eaten. xxl. I And I cried out in that very hour, “ Adam, Adam, where art thou? Rise up, come to me and 2 I will show thee a great secret.” But when your father came, I spake to him words of transgression 3 [which have brought us down from our great glory]. For, when he came, I opened my mouth and xvii. I. he hung. E reads ‘the devil inside the serpent hung’, as Moslem fable in Weil, B. Z. der 277. when. A B prefix ‘about the (‘ninth’ B) hour.’ form of an angel. Cf. 2 Cor. xi. 14. Points to old idea of a literal seduction; cf. Gen. vi. I-6; 1 En. vi-xii, Ixxxviii-xc ; Sota ix. 9: Ber. rabba xxiv ; Jalk. Schim. Ber. xlii. the devil was speaking, and I began to exhort him and said, “ Come hither, my lord Adam, hearken to me and eat of the fruit of the tree of which God told us not to eat of it, and thou shalt be as 4a God.” And your father answered and said, “I fear lest God be wroth with me.” And I said to 5 him, “Fear not, for as soon as thou hast eaten thou shalt know good and evil.” And speedily I persuaded him, and he ate and straightway his eyes were opened and he too knew his nakedness. 6 And to me he saith, “ O wicked woman! what have I done to thee that thou hast deprived me of the glory of God?” 1 And in that same hour, we heard the archangel Michael blowing with his trumpet and calling to _2 the angels and saying: “ Thus saith the Lord, Come with me to paradise and hear the judgement with which I shall judge Adam.” : 3 And when God appeared in paradise, mounted on the chariot of his cherubim with the angels pro- ceeding before him and singing hymns of praises, all the plants of paradise, both of your father’s lot 4and mine, broke out into flowers. And the throne of God was fixed where the Tree of Life was. 1 And God called Adam saying, “ Adam, where art thou? Can the house be hidden from the presence 2 of its builder?” Then your father answered ; “ It is not because we think not to be found by thee, Lord, that we hide, but I was afraid, because I am naked, and I was ashamed before thy might, 3 (my) Master.” God saith to him, “ Who showed thee that thou art naked, unless thou hast forsaken my 4 commandment, which I delivered thee to keep (it).’ Then Adam called to mind the word which I spake to him, (saying) “ I will make thee secure before God”; and he turned and said to me: “ Why 5 hast thou done this?”’ And I said, “ The serpent deceived me.” 1 God saith to Adam: “ Since thou hast disregarded my commandment and hast hearkened to thy wife, cursed is the earth in thy labours. 2 Thou shalt work it and it shall not give its strength: thorns and thistles shall spring up for thee, ᾿ς and in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread. [Thou shalt be in manifold toils; thou shalt be crushed by bitterness, but of sweetness shalt thou not taste.] 3 Weary shalt thou be and shalt not rest; by heat shalt thou be tired, by cold shalt thou be straitened : abundantly shalt thou busy thyself, but thou shalt not be rich; and thou shalt grow fat, but come to no end. 4 The beasts, over whom thou didst rule, shall rise up in rebellion against thee, for thou hast not kept my commandment.” - 1 And the Lord turned to me and said: “Since thou hast hearkened to the serpent, and turned 2a deaf ear to my commandment, thou shalt be in throes of travail and intolerable agonies; thou shalt bear children in much trembling and in one hour thou shalt come to the birth, and lose thy 3 life, from thy sore trouble and anguish. But thou shalt confessand say: ‘Lord, Lord, save me, and 4 I will turn no more to the sin of the flesh.’ And on this account, from thine own words I will judge thee, by reason of the enmity which the enemy has planted in thee.” 1 But he turned to the serpent [in great wrath] and said: “ Since thou hast done this, and become a thankless vessel until thou hast deceived the innocent hearts, accursed art thou among all beasts. XXvii. 1, XXVill, KXIX- 1, XXX, 2 Thou shalt be deprived of the victual of which thou didst eat and shalt feed on dust all the days of 3 thy life ; on thy breast and thy belly shalt thou walk and be robbed of hands and feet. There shall not be left thee ear nor wing, nor one Jimb of all that with which thou didst ensnare them in — 4 thy malice and causedst them to be cast out of paradise ; and I will put enmity between thee and © his seed ; he shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel until the day of Judgement.” 2 Thus he spake and bade the angels have us cast out of paradise: and as we were being driven out amid our loud lamentations, your father Adam besought the angels and said: “Leave me a little (space) that I may entreat the Lord that he have compassion on me and pity me, for I only 3 have sinned.” And they left off driving him and Adam cried aloud and wept saying: “ Pardon me, 4 Ὁ Lord, my deed.” Then the Lord saith to the angels, “ Why have ye ceased from driving Adam from paradise ἢ Why do ye not cast him out? Is it I who have done wrong? Or is my judgement — 5 badly judged?” Then the angels fell down on the ground and worshipped the Lord saying, “ Thou art just, O Lord, and thou judgest righteous judgement.” 1 But the Lord turned to Adam and said: “I will not suffer thee henceforward to be in paradise.” 2 And Adam answered and said, “ Grant me, O Lord, of the Tree of Life that I may eat of it, before 3 I be cast out.” Then the Lord spake to Adam, “ Thou shalt not take of it now, for I have com- manded the cherubim with the flaming sword that turneth (every way) to guard it from thee that 4thou taste not of it; but thou hast the war which the adversary hath put into thee; yet when thou art gone out of paradise, if thou shouldst keep thyself from all evil, as one about to die, when again the Resurrection hath come to pass, I will raise thee up and then there shall be given to thee the Tree of Life.” 2 Thusspake the Lord and ordered us to be cast out of paradise. But your father Adam wept before the angels opposite paradise and the angels say to him: “ What wouldst thou have us to do, 3 Adam?” And your father saith to them, “ Behold, ye cast me out. I pray you, allow me to take away fragrant herbs from paradise, so that I may offer an offering to God after I have gone out 4 of paradise that he hear me.” And the angels approached God and said: “JAEL, Eternal King, command, my Lord, that there be given to Adam incense of sweet odour from paradise and seeds 5 for his food.” And God bade Adam go in and take sweet spices and fragrant herbs from paradise 6 and seeds for his food. And the angels let him go and he took four kinds: crocus and nard and — calamus and cinnamon and the other seeds for his food: and, after taking these, he went out of 7 paradise. And we were on the earth. t Now then, my children, I have shown you the way in which we were deceived; and do ye guard yourselves from transgressing against the good.’ 1 And when Eve had said this in the midst of her sons, while Adam was lying ill and bound to die 2 after a single day from the sickness which had fastened upon him, she saith to him: ‘ How is it that 3 thou diest and I live or how long have I to live after thou art dead? Tell me.’ And Adam saith to her: ‘ Reck not of this, for thou tarriest not after me, but even both of us are to die together. And fshe shall lie} in my place. But when I die, anoint me: and let no man touch me till the 4 angel of the Lord shall speak somewhat concerning me. For God will not forget me, but will seek His own creature ; and now arise rather and pray to God till I give up my spirit into His hands who gave it me. For we know not how we are to meet our Maker, whether He be wroth with us, or be merciful and intend to pity and receive us.’ ,»2 And Eve rose up and went outside and fell on the ground and began to say: ‘I have sinned, O God, I have sinned, O God of All, I have sinned against Thee. I have sinned against the elect _ angels. I have sinned against the Cherubim. I have sinned against Thy fearful and unshakable Throne. I have sinned before Thee and all sin hath begun through my doing in the creation.’ 3 Even thus prayed Eve on her knees ; (and) behold, the angel of humanity came to her, and raised 4 her up and said ; ‘ Rise up, Eve, (from thy penitence), for behold, Adam thy husband hath gone out of his body. Rise up and behold his spirit borne aloft to his Maker.’ 1 And Eve rose up and wiped off her tears with her hand, and the angel saith to her, ‘ Lift up thy- 2 self from the earth.’ And she gazed steadfastly into heaven, and beheld a chariot of light, borne by _ four bright eagles, (and) it were impossible for any man born of woman to tell the glory of them or 3 behold their face—and angels going before the chariot—and when they came to the place where 4 your father Adam was, the chariot halted and the Seraphim. And I beheld golden censers, between your father and the chariot, and all the angels with censers and frankincense came in haste to the 5 incense-offering and blew upon it and the smoke of the incense veiled the firmaments. And the angels fell down and worshipped God, crying aloud and saying, ‘JAEL, Holy One, have pardon, for he is Thy image, and the work of Thy holy hands.’ 1 And I Eve beheld two great and fearful wonders standing in the presence of God and I wept for 2 fear, and I cried aloud to my son Seth and said, ‘ Rise up, Seth, from the body of thy father Adam, and come to me, and thou shalt see a spectacle which no man’s eye hath yet beheld.’ VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPSIS MOsIS. -1 And just as Michael the archangel had fore- 2 told, after six days came Adam’s death. When Adam perceived that the hour of his death was at hand, he said to all his sons: ‘Behold, I am nine hundred and thirty years old, and if I die, 3 bury me towards the sunrising fin the field of yonder dwelling}.’ And it came to pass that when he had finished all his discourse, he gave up the ghost. Then Seth arose and came to his mother and xxxv. 1 to her he saith: ‘What is thy trouble? Why weepest thou?’ (And) she saith to him: ‘Look 2 up and see with thine eyes the seven heavens opened, and see how the soul of thy father lies on its face and all the holy angels are praying on his behalf and saying: “ Pardon him, Father of All, for he is Thine image.”’ Pray, my child 3 Seth, what shall this mean? And will he one day be delivered into the hands of the Invisible Father, even our God? But who are the two 4 THE BOOKS OF VITA ADAE ET EVAE. (Then) was the sun darkened and the moon xlvi. t and the stars for seven days, and Seth in his mourning embraced from above the body of his father, and Eve was looking on the ground with hands folded over her head, and all her children wept most bitterly. And behold, there appeared 2 Michael the angel and stood at the head of Adam and said to Seth: ‘ Rise up from the body of thy 3 father and come to me and see what is the doom of the Lord God concerning him. His creature is he, and God hath pitied him.’ And all angels blew their trumpets, and cried : xlvii, 1 ‘ Blessed art thou, O Lord, for thou hast had pity on Thy creature.’ Then Seth saw the hand of God stretched out holding Adam and he handed him over to 2 Michael, saying: ‘Let him be in thy charge till the day of Judgement in punishment, till the last years when I will convert his sorrow into joy. 3 Then shall he sit on the throne of him who hath been his supplanter.’ xlviii. 1 ADAM AND EVE APOCALYPSIS MOsIs. negroes who stand by at the prayers for thy father Adam?’ And Seth telleth his mother, that they are x the sun and moon and themselves fall down and pray on behalf of my father Adam. Eve saith 2 to him: ‘And where is their light and why have they taken on such a black appearance?’ And 3 Seth answereth her, ‘The light hath not left them, but they cannot shine before the Light of the Universe, the Father of Light ; and on this account their light hath been hidden from them.’ Now while Seth was saying this to his mother, lo, an angel blew the trumpet, and there stood up all the angels (and they were) lying on their faces, and they cried aloud in an awful voice and said: ‘Blessed (be) the glory of the Lord from 2 the works of His making, for He hath pitied Adam the creature of His hands.’ But when the 3 angels had said these words, lo, there came one of the seraphim with six wings and snatched up Adam and carried him off to the Acherusian lake, and washed him thrice, in the presence of God. And God saith to him: ‘Adam, what hast thou done? If thou hadst kept my command- ment, there would now be no rejoicing among those who are bringing thee down to this place. Yet, I tell thee that I will turn their joy to grief 2 and thy grief will I turn to joy, and I will trans- form thee to thy former glory, and set thee on the throne of thy deceiver. But he shall be cast 3 into this place to see thee sitting above him, then he shall be condemned and they that heard him, and he shall be grieved sore when he seeth thee sitting on his honourable throne.’ xlvi. 1. sun darkened, ἄς. Abbreviated from Apoc. Mos. xxxvi—ordinary setting to Jewish ‘ Apocalypse’. Cf. Matt, xxiv. 29; 2 En. xiv. 2-4; Test. Adam, &c. hands folded over her head. Fuchs compares 2 Sam. xiii. 19 for this attitude in mourning. her head. II 9 Meyer + ‘and leaning her head on her knees.’ most bitterly. Lit. ‘ wept with most bitter weeping’ ΨΙΤΑ ADAE ET EVAE. i. 4 And the Lord said again to the angels Michael and Uriel: ‘Bring me three linen clothes of byssus and spread them out over Adam and other linen clothes over Abel! his son and bury Adam and Abel his son.’ 5 And all the ‘powers’ of angels marched before Adam, and the sleep of the dead was 6consecrated. And the angels Michael and Uriel buried Adam and Abel in the parts of Paradise, before the eyes of Seth and his mother ἡ [and no one else], and Michael and Uriel said: xlviii. 4. and ...hisson. II III only. Adae (III and Slav.), at Hebron. Cf. Fabric. i. to. powers = viriutes. See xxi, 1. 6. [and no one else] 1 >. A gloss. from ‘ third Heaven’, Paul xviii. 2; Test. Levi iii; Chagiga 12 Ὁ. told him. VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPsIsS MOsIs. ‘Just as ye have seen, in like manner, bury for wicked Cain took great pains to conceal (him) your dead’ but could not, for the earth would not receive him for the body sprang up from the earth and a voice went out of the earth saying: ‘I will not 5 receive a companion body, till the earth which was taken and fashioned in me cometh to me.’ At that time, the angels took it and placed it on a rock, till Adam his father was buried. And 6 both were buried, according to the commandment of’God, in the spot where God found the dust, and He caused the place to be dug for two. And God sent seven angels to paradise and they 7 brought many fragrant spices and placed them ~ in the earth, and they took the two bodies and placed them in the spot which they had digged and builded. And God called and said,‘ Adam, Adam.’ And sli, the body answered from the earth and said : ‘ Here am I, Lord.’ And God saith to him: ‘I told 2 thee (that) earth thou art and to earth shalt thou return. Again I promise to thee the Resurrec- 3 tion ; I will raise thee up in the Resurrection with every man, who is of thy seed.’ Vita ADAE ET EVAE, Eve's directions as to the Memorials of her life. xlix. 1 Six days after, Adam died; and Eve perceived that she would die, (so) she assembled all her sons 2 and daughters, Seth with thirty brothers and thirty sisters, and Eve said to all: ‘Hear -me, my children, and I will tell you what the archangel Michael said to us when I and your father transgressed the command of God. 3 On account of your transgression, Our Lord will bring upon your race the anger of his judgement, first by water, the second time by fire; by these two, will the Lord judge the whole human race.
11.  But hearken unto me, my children, Make ye then tables of stone and others of clay, and write 2 on them, all my life and your father’s (all) that ye have heard and seen from us. If by water the Lord judge our race, the tables of clay will be dissolved and the tables of stone will remain; but if by fire, the tables of stone will be broken up and the tables of clay will be baked (hard).’ VITA ADAE ET EVAE. When Eve had said all this to her children, she spread out her hands to heaven in prayer, and bent her knees to the earth, and while she worshipped the Lord and gave him thanks, she gave up the ghost. Thereafter, all her children ried her with loud lamentation. t When they had been mourning four days, (then) Michael the archangel appeared and said to Seth: ‘Man of God, mourn not for thy dead more than six days, for on the seventh day is the sign of the resurrection and the rest of the age to come; on the seventh day the Lord rested from all His works.’ 3 Thereupon Seth made the tables. li. 2. Man of God. Cf. xli. ii. 17-21. except Seth C: D says ‘all slept’. VITA ADAE ET EVAE. APOCALYPsIS ΜΟΒΙ5. . There follows in the following MSS.: II 3, 5, on that very day, God rejoiceth (yea) and we — 19, 17, Jean; and Ar. 210, a long story of Solo- angels (too) with the righteous soul, who hath — mon finding ‘ tabulas achiliacas.’ passed away from the earth.’ Even thus PN the angel, and ascended into heaven, glorifying — (God) and saying: ‘ Allelujah.’ Me [Holy, holy, holy is the Lord, in the glory of 5 God the Father, for to Him it is meet to give glory, — honour and worship, with the eternal life-giving spirit now and always and for ever. Amen.] [Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. To whom be glory and power for ever and for ever. Amen.] [Then the archangel Joel glorified God; saying, ‘Holy, Holy, Holy Lord, heaven and earth are — full of thy glory.’


# The Martyrdom of Isaiah

13.  resolved in his heart to slay Manasseh his son, And Isaiah said to Hezekiah: [ἡ The Beloved hath made of none effect thy design, and] the purpose of thy heart shall not be accomplished, for with this calling have I been called [and I shall inherit the heritage of the Beloved].’ 1 And it came to pass after that Hezekiah died and Manasseh became king, that he did not — remember the commands of Hezekiah his father but forgat them, and Sammael abode in Manasseh — 2 and clung fast to him. And Manasseh forsook the service of the God of his father, and he served 3 Satan and his angels and his powers. And he turned aside the house of his father which had been 4 before the face of Hezekiah (from) the words of wisdom and from the service of God. And Manasseh turned aside his heart to serve Beliar; for the angel of lawlessness, who is the ruler of this world, is Beliar, whose name is Matanbichis. And he delighted in Jerusalem because of Manasseh, and he made him strong in apostatizing (Israel) and in the lawlessness which was spread abroad in Jerusalem. 5 And witchcraft and magic increased and divination and auguration, and fornication, [and adultery], and the persecution of the righteous by Manasseh and [ Belachira, and] Tobia the Canaanite, and John 6 of Anathoth, and by (Zadok) the chief of the works. And the rest of the acts, behold they are written 7 in the book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. And when Isaiah the son of Amoz saw the lawless- ness which was being perpetrated in Jerusalem and the worship of Satan and his wantonness, he 8 withdrew from Jerusalem and settled in Bethlehem of Judah. And there also there was much 9 lawlessness, and withdrawing from Bethlehem he settled on a mountain in a desert place. [And Micaiah the prophet, and the aged Ananias, and Joel and Habakkuk, and his son Jésab, and many of the faithful who believed in the ascension into heaven, withdrew and settled on the mountain. 10 They were all clothed with garments of hair, and they were all prophets. And they had nothing with them but were naked, and they all lamented with a great lamentation because of the going tt astray of Israel. And these eat nothing save wild herbs which they gathered on the mountains, and having cooked them, they lived thereon together with Isaiah the prophet. And they spent two years of days on the mountains and hills. [And after this, whilst they were in the desert, there was a certain man in Samaria named Belchira, of the family of Zedekiah, the son of Chenaan, a false prophet whose dwelling was in Bethlehem. Now +Hezekiaht the son of Chandni, who was the brother of his father, and in the days of Ahab king of Israel had been the teacher of the 400 prophets of Baal, 1 nN 13. [‘ The Beloved hath . . . Beloved’]. Editorial additions like 2-64. 11. 1. Manasseh ...forgat. Cf. for the play on the words Gen. xli.51; alsothe Opus Jmperf., and Gk. Leg. iii. 2. commands of Hezekiah. See i. 6. Sammael. See i. 8 (note). i 13 had himself smitten and reproved Micaiah the son of Amada the prophet. And he, Micaiah, had _ been reproved by Ahab and cast into prison. «(And he was) with Zedekiah the prophet : they were _ 14 with Ahaziah the son of Ahab, king in Samaria. And Elijah the prophet of Tébén of Gilead was reproving Ahaziah and Samaria, and prophesied regarding Ahaziah that he should die on his bed of sickness, and that Samaria should be delivered -into the hand of Leba Nasr because he had slain
15.  the prophets of God. And when the false prophets, who were with Ahaziah the son of Ahab and
16.  their teacher Gemarias of Mount ;Joel} had heard—now he was brother of Zedekiah—when _ they had heard, they persuaded Ahaziah the king of fAguaron} and s/ew Micaiah. ‘x And Belchira recognized and saw the place of Isaiah and the prophets who were with him ; for he dwelt in the region of Bethlehem, and was an adherent of Manasseh. - And he prophesied falsely in Jerusalem, and many belonging to Jerusalem were confederate with him, and he was a Samaritan. 2 And it came to pass when Alagar Zagar, king of Assyria, had come and captured Samaria and taken the nine (and a half) tribes captive,and led them away to the mountains of the Medes and the 3 rivers of Tazén; this (Belchird) while still a youth, had escaped and come to Jerusalem in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, but he walked not in the ways of his father of Samaria; for he feared 4 Hezekiah. And he was found in the days of Hezekiah speaking words of lawlessness in Jerusalem. _ 5 And the servants of Hezekiah accused him, and he made his escape to the region of Bethlehem. _ 6And they persuaded... And Belchira accused Isaiah and the prophets who were with him, ᾿ς saying: ‘ Isaiah and those who are with him prophesy against Jerusalem and against the cities of Judah that they shall be laid waste and (against the children of Judah and) Benjamin also that they shall go into captivity, and also against thee, O lord the king, that thou shalt go (ound) with hooks 8 and iron chains’: But they prophesy falsely against Israel and Judah. And Isaiah himself hath |. gsaid: ‘I see more than Moses the prophet.’ But Moses said: ‘No man can see God and live’: 10and Isaiah hath said: ‘I have seen God and behold I live.’ Know, therefore, O king, that he is ἴω ᾿ lying. And Jerusalem also he hath called Sodom, and the princes of Judah and Jerusalem he hath A smitten, &c. 1 Kings xxii. 24. i = Amada = Imlah. i a 13. And he was. &’ supplies. 5 Ahab, king in Samaria. Alamerem balala’aw E; ᾿Aλὰ(μ) ἐn Σeμμωμa Ge. For ‘Alam’=‘ Ahab’ see (aὖ iii. 15. balala’aw = probably basala’aw, i.e. βασιλέως. The ‘-erem’ is explicable from ἐn Σeμμωμa Uk? as ‘in Samaria’. 1 3 14. Elijah is introduced here unexpectedly. iP of Téb6n of Gilead. Cf. 1 Kings xvii. 1 (LXX) ὁ Θεσβείτης ἐκ Θεσβῶν tῆς Ταλαάδ, and Josephus, A7zé. viii. 13. 2 ἐκ πόλeως Θεσεβώνης tῆς Γαλαδίτιδος χώρας. This Thisbe is mentioned in Tobit i. 2. For the omission of 6 Θεσβείτης cf. MS. A of the LXX. The Massoretic punctuation in 1 Kings xvii. 1 of ‘WN = ‘ of the sojourners of’. gree regarding Ahaziah. 2 Kings i. 1-6. ba NAsr. Corrupt for Salmanassar. Cf. 2 Bar. lxii. 6 and 4 Ezra xiii. 40. declared to be the people of Gomorrah. And he brought many accusations against Isaiah and the 11 prophets before Manasseh. But Beliar dwelt in the heart of Manasseh and in the heart of the 12 princes of Judah and Benjamin and of the eunuchs and of the councillors of the king. And the words of Belchira pleased him [exceedingly], and he sent and seized Isaiah. 5 1b,2 And he sawed him asunder with a wood-saw. And when Isaiah was being sawn in sunder Balchira stood up, accusing him, and all the false prophets stood up, laughing and rejoicing because 3 oἵ Isaiah. And Balchiré, with the aid of Mechémbéchis, stood up before Isaiah, [laughing] 4 deriding; And Belchira said to Isaiah: ‘ Say: “I have lied in all that I have spoken, and likewise 5 the ways of Manasseh are good and right. And the ways also of Balchira and of his associates are 6, 7 good.”’ And this he said to him when he began to be sawn in sunder. But Isaiah was (absorbed) 8 in a vision of the Lord, and though his eyes were open, he saw them (not). And Balchira spake thus to Isaiah: ‘Say what I say unto thee and I will turn their heart, and I will compel Manasseh g and the princes of Judah and the people and all Jerusalem to reverence thee.’ And Isaiah answered and said: ‘So far as I have utterance (I say): Damned and accursed be thou and all thy powers and to, 11 all thy house. For thou canst not take (from me) aught save the skin of my body.’ And they 12 seized and sawed in sunder Isaiah, the son of Amoz, with a wood-saw. And Manasseh and 13 Balchira and the false prophets and the princes and the people [and] all stood looking on. And to the prophets who were with him he said before he had been sawn in sunder: ‘Go ye to the region 14 oἵ Tyre and Sidon; for for me only hath God mingled the cup.” And when Isaiah was being sawn in sunder, he neither cried aloud nor wept, but his lips spake with the Holy Spirit until he — was sawn in twain.


# The Testaments of the XII Patriarchs

2.  died in the hundred and twenty-fifth year of his life. Two years after the death of Joseph ‘his
3.  brother', when Reuben fell ill, his sons and his sons’ sons were gathered together to visit him. And 4he said to them: My children, behold I am dying, and go the way of my fathers. And seeing ‘there! Judah, and Gad, and Asher, his brethren, he said to them: Raise me up, that I may tell to my brethren and to my children what things I have hidden in my heart, for behold now at length
5.  I am passing away. And he arose and kissed them, and said unto them: Hear, my brethren, and
6.  do ye, my children, give ear to Reuben your father. in the commands which I give unto you. And behold I call to witness against you this day the God of heaven, that ye walk not in the sins of
7.  youth and fornication, wherein I was poured out, and defiled the bed of my father Jacob. And I tell you that he smote me with a sore plague in my loins for seven months; and had not my father
8.  Jacob prayed for me to the Lord, the Lord would have destroyed me. For I was thirty years old
9.  when I wrought the evil thing before the Lord, and for seven months I was sick unto death. And 1o after this I repented with set purpose of my soul for seven years before the Lord. And wine and strong drink I drank not, and flesh entered not into my mouth, and I eat no pleasant food; but I mourned over my sin, for it was great, such as had not been in Israel. 2 1 And now hear me, my children, what things I saw concerning the seven spirits of deceit, when TITLE. So hi. cis corrupt: bef add ‘regarding thoughts’; A.5.9 8 ‘the Book of the Chronicles, the words of Reuben, First (> 4.8) Testament’; A ‘Testament and words of Reuben from the Book of the Chronicles’. THE TESTAMENT OF REUBEN 1. :--ϑ8. 6 2] repented. Seven spirits therefore are appointed against man, and they are the leaders in the works 8 oἵ youth. [And seven other spirits are given to him at his creation, that through them should be 4done every work of man. The first is the spirit of life, with which the constitution (of man) is 5 created. The second is the sense of sight, with which ariseth desire. The third is the sense of hearing, with which cometh teaching. The fourth is the sense of smell, with which tastes are given 6,7 to draw air and breath. The fifth is the power of speech, with which cometh knowledge. The sixth is the sense of taste, with which cometh the eating of meats and drinks ; and by it strength is produced, for in food is the foundation of strength. The seventh is the power of procreation and 9 sexual intercourse, with which through love of pleasure sins enter in. Wherefore it is the last in order of creation, and the first in that of youth, because it is filled with ignorance, and leadeth the _ youth as a blind man to a pit, and as a beast to a precipice, 1 Besides all these there is an eighth spirit of sleep, with which is brought about the trance of nature and the image of death. With these spirits are mingled the spirits of error.] First, the spirit of fornication is seated in the nature and in the senses; the second, the spirit of insatiableness, 4in the belly; the third, the spirit of fighting, in the liver and gall. The fourth is the spirit of 5 Obsequiousness and chicanery, that through officious attention one may be fair in seeming. The fifth is the spirit of pride, that one may be boastful and arrogant. The sixth is the spirit of lying, fin perdition and jealousy} to practise deceits, and concealments from kindred and friends. The called spirits of deceit, T. R. ii. 1,2; T.S. iii. 1; and assim: also wicked spirits, T. 5. iv. 9; spirits of Beliar, _T. Iss. vii. 7, &c.; unclean spirits, T. B. v. 2; angels of Satan, T. A. vi. 4. Their function is threefold as in tand 2 Enoch and the N. T., (1) to tempt men, (2) to accuse them when they fall, (3) to torment them. (2) is not a feature in this book, (3) is mentioned twice, T. L. iii. 2, spirits of retribution, and T. A. vi. 5, the evil spirit which a serves waits for his soul as it leaves the body at death to torment it. (1) is their most prominent function in the Testaments. Of the tempting spirits, there are the seven spirits of deceit which attack youth, T. R. ii. 1-2, namely, those of fornication (cf., too, T. Jud. xiii. 3), insatiableness, fighting, obsequiousness, pride, lying, and injustice, T. R. iii. 3-6. T. Jud. xvi. 1 adds the spirits of lust, hot desire, profligacy, and filthy lucre. There are also the spirits of jealousy, T. Jud. xiii. 3; and of envy, T. S. iii. 1, iv. 7, which are wicked and poisonous spirits, T. S. iv. 9; the spirits of anger, T. Ὁ. ii. 4. There are angels, moreover, which stir men to murder, T. D. i. 7; and idolatry, T. N. iii. 3; and lust, T. Jos. vii. 4. The faithless and wicked fall an easy prey to them, but the spirits first require permission to tempt men, T. B. iii. 3 (cf. Job i. 12, ii. 6). If men yield, the devil makes them into his own instruments, T. N. viii. 6; but if they are single-hearted and do right, then neither the spirits of deceit nor Beliar have power over them, T. Iss. iv. 4; T. B. iii. 3; indeed, the devil and the spirits of Beliar and unclean spirits flee from them, T. N. viii. 4; T. Iss. vii. 7; T. B. n. 2. Nay, more, the righteous rule over them, T. S. vi. 6, and tread them under foot, T. L. xviii. 12, T. Z. ix. 8 (bdg). These spirits are punished on the judgement day, T. L. iii. 3. seventh is the spirit of injustice, with which are thefts and acts of rapacity, that a man may fulfil the desire of his heart; for injustice worketh together with the other spirits by the taking of gifts. 7, 8 [And with all these the spirit of sleep is joined which is (that) of error and fantasy.] And so perisheth every young man, darkening his mind from the truth, and not understanding the law of 9 God, nor obeying the admonitions of his fathers, as befell me also in my youth. And now, my children, love the truth, and it will preserve you: hear ye ‘the words of ' Reuben your father.
10.  Pay no heed to the face of a woman, Nor associate with another man’s wife, Nor meddle with affairs of womankind.
11.  For had I not seen Bilhah bathing in a covered place, I had not fallen into this great iniquity.
12.  For my mind taking in the thought of the woman’s nakedness, suffered me not ‘to sleep! until I had
13.  wrought the abominable thing. For while Jacob our father had gone to Isaac his father, when we were in Eder, near to Ephrath in Bethlehem, Bilhah became drunk and was asleep uncovered in her
14.  chamber. Having therefore gone in and beheld her nakedness, I wrought the impiety ‘without her
15.  perceiving it', and leaving her sleeping I departed. And forthwith an angel of God revealed to my father concerning my impiety, and he came and mourned over me, and touched her no more. 4, Pay no heed, therefore, ‘my children’, to the beauty of women, nor set your mind on their affairs ; but walk in singleness of heart in the fear of the Lord, and expend labour on good works, and on study and on your flocks, until the Lord give you a wife, whom He will, that ye suffer not as I did. 2 For until my father’s death I had not boldness to look in his face, or to speak to any of my brethren, 3 because of the reproach. Even until now my conscience causeth me anguish on account of my 4impiety. And yet my father comforted me much, and prayed for me unto the Lord, that the anger of the Lord might pass from me, even as the Lord showed. And thenceforth until now I have 5 been on my guard and sinned not. Therefore, my children, ΓI say unto you', observe ‘all! things 6 whatsoever I command you, and ye shall not sin. For a pit unto the soul is the sin of fornication, separating it from God, and bringing it near to idols, because it deceiveth the mind and under- THE TESTAMENT OF REUBEN 8. 6—6. 5 ἡ standing, and leadeth down young men into Hades before their time. For many hath fornication destroyed ; because, though a man be old or noble, ‘or rich or poor', he bringeth reproach upon 8 himself with the sons of men and derision with Beliar. For ye heard regarding Joseph how he _ guarded himself from a woman, and purged his thoughts from all fornication, and found favour in _g the sight of God and men. For the Egyptian woman did many things unto him, and summoned tὸ magicians, and offered him love potions, but the purpose of his soul admitted no evil desire. There- gx fore the God of your fathers delivered him from every evil (and) hidden death. For if fornication _ overcomes not your mind, neither can Beliar overcome you. ‘For! evil are women, my children ; and since they have no power or strength over man, they use 2 wiles by outward attractions, that they may draw him to themselves. And whom they cannot bewitch by outward attractions, him they overcome by craft. ‘For! moreover, concerning them, the angel of the Lord told me, and taught me, that women are overcome by the spirit of fornication more than men, and in their heart they plot against men; and by means of their adornment they _ deceive first their minds, and by the glance of the eye instil the poison, and then through the accom- plished act they take them captive. For a woman cannot force a man openly, but by a harlot’s bearing she beguiles him. Flee, therefore, fornication, my children, and command your wives and your daughters, that they adorn not their heads and faces to deceive the mind: because every woman who useth these wiles hath been reserved for eternal punishment. For thus they allured the _ Watchers who were before the flood ; for as these continually beheld them, they lusted after them, _ and they conceived the act in their mind ; for they changed themselves into the shape of men, and on pa to them when they were with their husbands. And the women lusting in their minds after ir forms, gave birth to giants, for the Watchers appeared to them as reaching even unto heaven. 91 Beware, therefore, of fornication ; and if you wish to be pure in mind, guard your senses from every 4 woman. And command the women likewise not to associate with men, that they also may be pure 8 ἴῃ mind. For constant meetings, even though the ungodly deed be not wrought, are to them an _ 4irremediable disease, and to us a destruction of Beliar and an eternal reproach. For in fornication δ there is neither understanding nor} godliness, and all jealousy dwelleth in the lust thereof. There- leadeth down .. . to Hades. Cf. Prov. vii. 27, where LXX has κατάγουσαι as here. : before their time, oὐκ ἐn καιρῷ αὐτῶν = OMY NOI. Cf. T. Jud. xvi. 3. 7. many hath fornication destroyed. Cf. Prov. vii. 26; also Sir. ix. 8, where read ἀπεκτάνθησαν for ἐπλανήθησαν. So Sanh. too”, Yebam. 63". or rich or poor. a only. Age ay. derision, γέλωta, de AS. πρόσκομμα, ‘an offence’ or ‘stumbling-block’, a, i.e. WP for PIN. fore, ‘then I say unto you’, ye will be jealous ‘against the sons of Levi', and will seek to be exalted 6 over them; but ye shall not be able. For God will avenge them, ‘and ye shall die by an evil death’, 7 For to Levi God gave the sovereignty [and to Judah with him and to me also, and to Dan and 8 Joseph, that we should be for rulers]. ‘Therefore I command you to hearken to Levi, because he shall know the law of the Lord, and shall give ordinances for judgement and shall sacrifice for all Israel until the consummation of the times, as the anointed High Priest, of whom the Lord spake. 9 I adjure you by the God of heaven to do truth each one unto his neighbour and to entertain love 10 each one for his brother. And draw ye near to Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive 11 a blessing from his mouth. For he shall bless Israel and Judah, because him hath the Lord chosen to 12 be king over all the nation. And bow down before his seed, for on our behalf it will die in wars visible and invisible, and will be among you an eternal king. 71,2 And Reuben died, having given these commands to his sons. And they placed him in a coffin until they carried him up from Egypt, and buried him ‘in Hebron’ in the cave where his father was. THE TESTAMENT OF SIMEON, THE SECOND SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 1: The copy of the words of Simeon, the things which he spake to his sons before he died, in the 2 hundred and twentieth year of his life, at which time Joseph, ‘his brother!, died. For when Simeon xviii. 1,2; T. 1). n. 4; T.N. viii. 2; T. G. viii. 1; T. Jos. xix.11. The salvation of Israel is to come from both Levi and Judah jointly, T. 5. vii. 1, &c. Only in T. G. viii. 1 (probably corrupt) is Judah placed before Levi. Levi is priest and king, T. R. vi. 7-12; T. L. viii. 14, xviii. 1, 2; as high-priest, T. 5. vii. 2, Judah is king Tὶ 8. vii. 2; T. Jud. i. 6, xvii. 5; ΤΟΝ, viii. 2 (corrupt?). T. KE. vi. 7% and T. Jud. xxiv. 4-6 are additions. THE TESTAMENT OF SIMEON 1. 1—4. 4 was sick, his sons came to visit him, and he strengthened himself and sat up and kissed them, and said :— 1 Hearken, my children, to Simeon your father, And I will declare unto you what things I have in my heart. 2 I was born of Jacob as my father’s second son; And my mother Leah called me Simeon, Because the Lord had heard her prayer. y 3 Moreover, I became strong exceedingly ; 4 I shrank from no achievement, Nor was I afraid of ought. : 4 For my heart was hard, And my liver was immovable, And my bowels without compassion. 5,6 Because valour also has been given from the Most High to men in soul and body. For in the time of my youth I was jealous 'in many things' of Joseph, because my father loved him ‘beyond Wall’. And I set my mind against him to destroy him, because the prince of deceit sent forth the i spirit of jealousy and blinded my mind, so that I regarded him not as a brother, nor did I spare even 8 Jacob my father. But his God and the God of his fathers sent forth His angel, and delivered him 9 out of my hands. - For when I went to Shechem to bring ointment for the flocks, and Reuben to Dothan, where were our necessaries and all our stores, Judah my brother sold him to the Ishmaelites. to And when Reuben heard these things he was grieved, for he wished to restore him to his father. 11 But on hearing this I was "exceedingly! wroth against Judah in that he let him go away alive, and 12 for five months I continued wrathful against him. But the Lord restrained me, and withheld ‘from 13 me’ the power of my hands; for my right hand was half withered for seven days. And I knew, my children, that because of Joseph this had befallen me, and I repented and wept; and I besought the Lord God that my hand might be restored, and that I might hold aloof from all pollution and envy 14'and from all folly’. For I knew that I had devised an evil thing before the Lord and Jacob my father, on account of Joseph my brother, in that I envied him. 1,2 And now, my children, ‘hearken unto me and! beware of the spirit of deceit and envy. For envy ruleth over the whole mind of a man, and suffereth him ‘neither to eat nor to drink!, nor to do any 3 good thing. But it ever suggesteth (to him) to destroy him that he envieth ; and so long as he that 4 is envied flourisheth, he that envieth fadeth away. Two years therefore! I afflicted my soul with fasting in the fear of the Lord, and I learnt that deliverance from envy cometh by the fear of God. 5 For if a man flee to the Lord, the evil spirit runneth away from him, and his mind is lightened. ) 6 And henceforward he sympathiseth with him whom he envied and forgiveth those who are hostile to him, and so ceaseth from his envy. ἢ 4: And my father asked ‘concerning me’, because he saw that I was sad ; and I said unto him, I am P 2 pained in my liver. For I mourned more than they all, because I was guilty of the selling of Joseph. 3 And when we went down into Egypt, and he bound me as a spy, I knew that I was suffering justly, 4and I grieved not. Now Joseph was a good man, and had the Spirit of God within him: being II. 2, Simeon . .. heard her prayer. Cf. Gen. xxix. 33 for this play on the name, compassionate and pitiful, he bore no malice against me; but loved me even as the rest of his 5 brethren. Beware, therefore, my children, of all jealousy and envy, and walk in singleness of BAS! heart, soul and with good heart, keeping in mind Joseph your father’s brother, that God may give ‘you also’ grace and glory, and blessing upon*your heads, even as ye saw in 6 Joseph’s case. All his days he reproached us not concerning this thing, but loved us as his own 7 soul, and beyond his own sons glorified us, and gave us riches, and cattle and fruits. Do ye also, my children, love each one his brother with a good heart, and the spirit of envy will withdraw from 8 you. For this maketh savage the soul and destroyeth the body; it causeth anger and war in the mind, and stirreth up unto deeds of blood, a B ABS} and leadeth the mind into frenzy, and leadeth the mind into frenzy, ‘and suffereth not prudence to act in men!; moreover, it taketh away sleep, [and causeth tumult to the soul and trembling to the body]. 9 For even in sleep some malicious jealousy, deluding him, gnaweth, and with wicked spirits dis- turbeth his soul, and causeth the body to be troubled, and waketh the mind from sleep in confusion ; and as a wicked and poisonous spirit, so appeareth it to men. 51 Therefore was Joseph comely in appearance, and goodly to look upon, because no wickedness 2 dwelt in him; for some of the trouble of the spirit the face manifesteth. And now, my children, Make your hearts good before the Lord, And your ways straight before men, And ye shall find grace before the Lord and men. 3 Beware, therefore, of fornication, For fornication is mother of all evils, Separating from God, and bringing near to Beliar. THE TESTAMENT OF SIMEON 4. 4—9. 2 3 Then shall perish the seed of Canaan, And a remnant shall not be unto Amalek, ‘And all the Cappadocians shall perish’, And all the Hittites shall be utterly destroyed. 4 Then shall fail the land of Ham, And all the people shall perish. Then shall all the earth rest from trouble, And all the world under heaven from war. Restored Text Ashn 5 Then the Mighty One of Israel shall glorify Then shall Shem (MSS. ‘ Seth’) be glorified, Shem, For the Lord our God shall appear on earth For the Lord God shall appear on earth, [as man] And Himself save men. And Himself saves again. 6 Then shall all the spirits of deceit be given to be trodden under foot, - And men shall rule over wicked spirits. _ 7 Then shall I arise in joy, And will bless the Most High because of his marvellous works, [Because God hath taken a body and eaten with men and saved men]. 7: And now, my children, obey Levi and Judah, and be not lifted up against these two tribes, for 2 from them shall arise unto you the salvation of God'. For the Lord shall raise up from Levi as it were a High-priest,and from Judah as it were a King [God and man], He shall save all [the Gentiles 3 and] the race of Israel. Therefore I give you these commands that ye also may command your children, that they may observe them throughout their generations. 1 And when Simeon had made an end of commanding his sons, he slept with his fathers, being an 2 hundred and twenty years old. And they laid him in a wooden coffin, to take up his bones to 3 Hebron. And they took them up secretly during a war of the Egyptians. For the bones of Joseph 4 the Egyptians guarded in the tombs of the kings. For the sorcerers told them, that on the departure of the bones of Joseph there should be throughout all the land darkness and gloom, and an exceeding great plague to the Egyptians, so that even with a lamp a man should not recognize his brother. 21,2 And the sons of Simeon bewailed their father. And they were in Egypt until the day of their 7 departure by the hand of Moses. Mf 3. The destruction of Israel's foes. And all... perish >A. The Cappadocians seem to mean here the Caphtorim or Philistines. Cf. Deut. ii. 23, and note on Jub. xxiv. 29. Hittites, either ‘NN ‘ Hittites’ or Ὁ TI (i. e. Greeks, or Macedonians). THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI, THE THIRD SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 1: The copy of the words of Levi, the things which he ordained unto his sons, according to all that 2 they should do, and what things should befall them until the day of judgement. He was sound in health when he called them to him; for it had been revealed to him that he should die. And when they were gathered together he said to them: 21,2 TI, Levi, was born in Haran, and I came with my father to Shechem. And I was young, about 3 twenty years of age, when, with Simeon, I wrought vengeance on Hamor for our sister Dinah. And when I was feeding the flocks in Abel-Maul, the spirit of understanding of the Lord came upon me, and I saw all men corrupting their way, and that unrighteousness had built for itself walls, and law- 4 lessness sat upon towers. And I was grieving for the race of the sons of men, and I prayed to the 5 Lord that I might be saved. Then there fell upon me a sleep, and I beheld a high mountain, and 6 I was upon it. And behold the heavens were opened, and an angel of God said to me, Levi, enter. a Ae B As St 7 And I entered from the first 7. And when I had entered And I entered from the first 7 heaven, and I saw there a great into the first heaven, tand he heaven into the second, and I sea hanging. escorted raised met to the saw there a sea hanging between second. And I saw there a the one and the other. great sea hanging. 8 And further I saw a second And further I saw a third 8 heaven far brighter and more heaven far brighter and more brilliant, for there was a bound- brilliant than these two; for less light also therein. there was also a_ boundless theight therein. 9 And I said to the angel, Why g. And I said unto him: And I said unto the angel: 9 is this so? And the angel said What is this, Lord? And he Wherefore is it so? And the to me, Marvel not at this, for said unto me: : angel said unto me: Marvel not thou shalt see another heaven at these ; for thou shalt see four more brilliant and incomparable. other heavens more brilliant and incomparable, TiTLE. Soa: ‘Testament of Levi concerning the priesthood’ 8B-ade AS: + ‘and arrogance’ bdefA* edefg, I. 1. until the day of judgement. This event is therefore conceived as near to the time of the writer. revealed to him. Levi has several revelations. II. 2. about twenty years; eighteen according to T. L. xii. 5. Jub. xxviii. 13, 14 makes Simeon two years older. I Ca a } Il 3: THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 1. 1—3. 3 a to And when thou hast ascended thither, Thou shalt stand near the Lord, And shalt be His minister, And shalt declare His mys- teries to men, And shalt proclaim {concerning Him that shall redeem} Israel. "Saving every race of men.' Δa to. When thou hast ascended thither, Thou shalt stand before the Lord, And shalt be His minister, And his coming mysteries thou shalt declare unto men. And by thee and Judah shall the Lord appear among men, And from the Lord’s portion shall be thy life, And He shall be thy field and vineyard, And fruits, gold, and silver. a Hear, therefore, regarding the heavens which have been shown to thee. The lowest is for this cause gloomy unto thee, in that it beholds all the unrighteous deeds of men. 2 And it has fire, snow, and ice made ready for the day of judgement, in the righteous judgement of God ; for in it are all the spirits of the retributions for vengeance on men. 3 And in the second are the hosts of the armies which are ordained for the day of judge- ment, to work vengeance on the spirits of deceit and of Beliar. And above them are the holy ones. 10-12. Levi has not yet ascended into the third heaven ; in fact he does not do so till v. 1. anticipate in 10-12, and resumes his account in iii. 1. a And in the highest of all dwelleth the Great Glory, far above all holiness. 5 In [the heaven next to] it are the archangels, who minister and make propitiation to the Lord for all the sins of igno- rance of the righteous ; 6 Offering to the Lord a sweet- smelling savour, ἃ reasonable and a bloodless offering. 7 And [in the heaven below this] are the angels who bear fanswers to the angels of the presence of the Lord. 8 An fin the heaven next to this} are thrones and dominions, in which always they offer praise to God. ab AB 5:1 9 When, therefore, the Lord looketh upon us, all of us are shaken; yea, the heavens, and the earth, and the abysses are shaken at the presence of His majesty. At THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 8. 4—5. 7 And the fire cowering, And all creation troubled, And the invisible spirits melting away, And Hades taketh spoils through the visitations of the Most High, Men will be unbelieving and persist in their iniquity. On this account with punishment shall they be judged. 2 ‘Therefore! the Most High hath heard thy prayer, To separate thee from iniquity, and that thou shouldst become to Him a son, And a servant, and a minister of His presence. 3 The light of knowledge shalt thou light up in Jacob, And as the sun shalt thou be to all the seed of Israel. 4 And there shall be given to thee a blessing, and to all thy seed, Until the Lord shall visit all the Gentiles in His tender mercies for ever. 5 ‘And!’ therefore there have been given to thee counsel and understanding, That thou mightst instruct thy sons concerning this ; Because they that bless + Him shall be blessed, 6 : 5 And they that curset Him shall perish. I And thereupon the angel opened to me the gates of heaven, and I saw the holy temple, and upon 2 a throne of glory the Most High. And He said to me: Levi, I have given thee the blessings of the 3 priesthood until I come and sojourn in the midst of Israel. Then the angel brought me down to the _ earth, and gave me a shield and a sword, and said to me: Execute vengeance on Shechem because 4 of Dinah, thy sister, and I will be with thee because the Lord hath sent me. And I destroyed at 5 that time the sons of Hamor, as it is written in the heavenly tables. And I said to him: I pray 6 thee, O Lord, tell me Thy name, that I may call upon Thee in a day of tribulation. And he said: I am the angel who intercedeth for the nation of Israel that they may not be smitten utterly, 7 for every evil spirit attacketh it. And after these things I awaked, and blessed the Most High, and the angel who intercedeth for the nation of Israel and for all the righteous. And Hades taketh spoils. Cf. Isa. v.14. Or a Christian addition-—‘and Hades is despoiled’, σκυλευομένου being taken in a passive not middle sense. visitations. A difficult but possible rendering of πάθei. If an interpolation, = ‘ passion’. unbelieving and persist. Cf. Rev. xvi. 9, 11, 21; 1 En. Ixvii. 12, 13. For ἀπιστοῦντες B-d APS we have ἀπειθοῦντες, ‘ disobedient’ a d. THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 6. :--. 6 4,5 ever. And the first anointed me with holy oil, and gave to me the staff of judgement. The second washed me with pure water, and fed me with bread and wine (even) the most holy things, and clad 6, 7 me with a holy and glorious robe. The third clothed me with a linen vestment like an ephod. The 8, 9 fourth put round me a girdle like unto purple. The fifth gave me a branch of rich olive. The sixth to placed a crown on my head. The seventh placed on my head a diadem of priesthood, and filled my 11 hands with incense, that I might serve as priest to the Lord God. And they said to me: Levi, thy 12 seed shall be divided into three offices, for a sign of the glory of the Lord who is to come. And the ᾿ς 18 first portion shall be great; yea, greater than it shall none be. ‘The second shall be in the priest- _ t4hood. And the third shall be called by a new name, because a king shall arise in Judah, and shall 15 establish a new priesthood, after the +fashion of the Gentiles [to all the Gentiles]. And His presence is beloved, as a prophet of the Most High, of the seed of Abraham our father.
16.  Therefore, every desirable thing in Israel shall be for thee and for thy seed, And ye shall eat everything fair to look upon, And the table of the Lord shall thy seed apportion.
17.  And some of them shall be high priests, and judges, and scribes ; For by their mouth shall the holy place be guarded. tg And when I awoke, understood that this (dream) was like the first dream. And I hid this also in my heart, and told it not to any man upon the earth. 1,2 And after two days I and Judah went up with our father Jacob to Isaac our father’s father. And my father’s father blessed me according to all the words of the visions which I had seen. And 3 he would not come with us to Bethel. ‘And when we came to Bethel', my father saw a vision 4 concerning me, that I should be their priest unto God. And he rose up early in the morning, 5 and paid tithes of all ‘to the Lord' through me. And ‘so! we came to Hebron to dwell there. 6 And Isaac called me continually to put me in remembrance of the law of the Lord, even as the 7 angel of the Lord showed unto me. And _ he taught me the law of the priesthood, of sacrifices, 8 whole burnt-offerings, first-fruits, freewill-offerings, peace-offerings. And each day he was instructing g me, and was busied on my behalf before the Lord, and said to me: Beware of the spirit of to fornication ; for this shall continue and shall by thy seed pollute the holy place. Take, therefore, to thyself a wife without blemish or pollution, while yet thou art young, and not of the race of 11 Strange nations. And before entering into the holy place, bathe; and when thou offerest the 12 sacrifice, wash ; and again, when thou finishest the sacrifice, wash. Of twelve trees having leaves 13 offer to the Lord, as Abraham taught me also. And of every clean beast ‘and bird? offer a 14 sacrifice to the Lord. And of all thy first-fruits and of wine offer the first, as a sacrifice to the Lord God ; and every sacrifice thou shalt salt with salt. 10: Now, therefore, observe whatsoever I command you, children; for whatsoever things I have 2 heard from my fathers ‘I have declared unto you. And behold' I am clear from your ungodliness and transgression, which ye shall commit in the end of the ages [against the Saviour of the world, Christ, acting Sarees deceiving Israel, and stirring up against it great evils from the 3 Lord. And ye shall deal lawlessly together with Israel, so He shall not bear with Jerusalem because of your wickedness; but the veil of the temple shall be rent, so as not to cover your 4shame. And ye shall be scattered as captives among the Gentiles, and shall be for a reproach 5 and for a curse there. For the house which the Lord shall choose shall be called Jerusalem, as is contained in the book of Enoch the righteous. 11 1, 2 Therefore when I took a wife I was twenty-eight years old, and her name was Melcha. And she conceived and bare a son, and I called his name Gersam, for we were sojourners in our land. 3, 4 And I saw concerning him, that he would not be in the first rank. And Kohath was born in the 5 thirty-fifth year ‘of my life!, towards sunrise. And I saw in a vision that he was standing on high 6 in the midst of all the congregation. Therefore I called his name Kohath [which is, beginning of 7 majesty and instruction]. And she bare me a third son, in the fortieth year of my life; and since his mother bare him with difficulty, I called him Merari, that is, ‘my bitterness,’ because he also was THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 9. )η---18. 9 g like to die. And Jochebed was born in Egypt, in my sixty-fourth year, for I was renowned then in the midst of my brethren. 1,2 And Gersam took a wife, and she bare to him Lomni and Semei. And the sons of Kohath, 3, 4 Ambram, Issachar, Hebron, and Ozeel. And the sons of Merari, Mooli, and Mouses. And ‘in the ninety-fourth year' Ambram took Jochebed my daughter to him to wife, for they were born in one 5 day, he and my daughter. Eight years old was I when I went intothe land of Canaan, and eighteen years when I slew Shechem, and at nineteen years I became priest, and at twenty-eight years I took 6a wife, and at forty-eight I went into Egypt. And behold, my children, ye are a third generation. uw 7 In my hundred and eighteenth year Joseph died. 48,1 And now, my children, 1 command you: Ἔ Fear the Lord your God ‘with your whole heart", And walk in simplicity according to all His law. 2 And do ye also teach your children letters, That they may have understanding all their life, Reading unceasingly the law of God. 3 For every one that knoweth the law of the Lord shall be honoured, _ And shall not be a stranger whithersoever he goeth. 4 Yea, many friends shall he gain more than his parents, And many men shall desire to serve him, And to hear the law from his mouth. 5 Work righteousness, ‘therefore’, my children, upon the earth, That ye may have (it) as a treasure in heaven. 6 And sow good things in your souls, That ye may find them in your life. But if ye sow evil things, Ye shall reap every trouble and affliction. 7 Get wisdom in the fear of God with diligence ; For though there be a leading into captivity, J And cities and lands be destroyed, And gold and silver and every possession perish, The wisdom of the wise nought can take away, Save the blindness of ungodliness, and the callousness (that comes) of sin. 8 'For if one keep oneself from these evil things’, Then even among his enemies shall wisdom be a glory to him, And in a strange country a fatherland, And in the midst of foes shall prove a friend. 9g Whosoever teaches noble things and does them, Shall be enthroned with kings, As was also Joseph my brother. 14, 6 eating (them) contemptuously with harlots. THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS a, Aa Therefore, my children, I have learnt that at the end of the ages ye will transgress against the Lord, stretching out hands to wickedness [against Him]; and to all the Gentiles shall ye become a scorn. B, AB S} And now, my children, I have learnt from the 1 writing of Enoch that in the end ye will trans- gress against the Lord, stretching out hands to all wickedness ; and your brethren shall be put to shame because of you, and to all the Gentiles shall ye become a scorn. For our father Israel is pure from the transgressions of the chief priests [who shall lay their hands upon the Saviour of the world]. a, Δa For as the heaven is purer in the Lord’s sight than the earth, so also be ye, the lights of Israel, (purer) than all the Gentiles. But if ye be darkened through transgressions, what, therefore, will all the Gentiles do living in blindness? Yea, ye shall bring a curse upon our race, because the light of the law which was given for to lighten every man this ye desire to destroy by teaching command- ments contrary to the ordinances of God. BS! THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 14. 1—17. 2 ments of the Lord, wedded women shall ye pollute, ‘and the virgins of Jerusalem shall ye defile'; and with harlots and adulteresses shall ye be joined, and the daughters of the Gentiles shall ye take to wife, purifying them with an unlawful purification ; and your union shall be like unto Sodom and 7 Gomorrah. And ye shall be puffed up because of your priesthood, lifting yourselves up against 8 men, and not only so, but also against the commands of God. For ye shall contemn the holy things with jests and laughter. 15: Therefore the temple, which the Lord shall choose, shall be laid waste through your uncleanness, 2 and ye shall be captives throughout all nations. And ye shall be an abomination unto them, and ye 3 shall receive reproach and everlasting shame from the righteous judgement of God. And all who hate 4 you.shall rejoice at your destruction. And if you were not to receive mercy through Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, our fathers, not one of our seed should be left upon the earth. perfect with the Lord, [and in the day of his gladness shall he arise for the salvation of the world]. 3 In the second jubilee, he that is anointed shall be conceived in the sorrow of beloved ones; and his 4 priesthood shall be honoured and shall be glorified by all. And the third priest shall be taken hold 5 of by sorrow. And the fourth shall be in pain, because unrighteousness shall gather itself against 6 him exceedingly, and all Israel shall hate each one his neighbour. The fifth shall be taken hold of 7 by darkness. Likewise also the sixth and the seventh. And in the seventh shall be such pollution 8 as I cannot express before men, for they shall know it who do these things. Therefore shall they g be taken captive and become a prey, and their land and their substance shall be destroyed. 10 ~=And in the fifth week they shall return to their desolate country, and shall renew the house of the 11 Lord. And in the seventh week shall become priests, (who are) idolaters, adulterers, lovers of money, proud, lawless, lascivious, abusers of children and beasts.
18.  1° And after their punishment shall have come from the Lord, the priesthood shall fail. THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI 17. 2—19. 5 And there shall none succeed him for all generations for ever. 9 And in his priesthood the Gentiles shall be multiplied in knowledge upon the earth, And enlightened through the grace of the Lord: In his priesthood shall sin come to an end, And the lawless shall cease to do evil. [And the just shall rest in him.] 10 And he shall open the gates of paradise, And shall remove the threatening sword against Adam. 11 And he shall give to the saints to eat from the tree of life, ᾿ And the spirit of holiness shall be on them. f 12 And Beliar shall be bound by him, i And he shall give power to His children to tread upon the evil spirits. 4 13. And the Lord shall rejoice in His children, And be well pleased in His beloved ones for ever. 14 Then shall Abraham and Isaac and Jacob exult, And I will be glad, And all the saints shall clothe themselves with joy. 19: And now, my children, ye have heard all; choose, therefore, for yourselves either the light or the 2 darkness, either the law of the Lord or the works of Beliar. And his sons answered him, saying, 3 Before the Lord we will walk according to His law. And their father said unto them, The Lord is witness, and His angels are witnesses, and ye are witnesses, and I am witness, concerning the word 4 of your mouth. And his sons said unto him: We are witnesses. And thus Levi ceased commanding his sons ; and he stretched out his feet "on the bed', and was gathered to his fathers, after he had 5 lived a hundred and thirty-seven years. And they laid him in a coffin, and afterwards they buried him in Hebron, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. -t κa THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH, THE FOURTH SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. "».---- 11,2. The copy of the words of Judah, what things he spake to his sons before he died. They gathered 3 themselves together, therefore, and came to him, and he said to them: ‘Hearken, my children, to Judah your father’. I was the fourth son born to my father Jacob; and Leah my mother named 4 me Judah, saying, I give thanks to the Lord, because He hath given me a fourth son ‘also', I was 5 swift in my youth, and obedient to my father in everything. And I honoured my mother and my 6 mother’s sister. And it came to pass, when I became a man, that my father blessed me, saying, Thou shalt be a king, prospering in all things. none succeed him, i.e. the office is secured to him and his descendants. Cf. Ps. cx; 1 Macc. xiv. 41 ‘a priest for ever’, of Simon. 21,2 And the Lord showed me favour in all my works both in the field and in the house. I know that 3 I raced a hind, and caught it, and prepared the meat for my father, and he did eat. And the roes I used to master in the chase, and overtake all that was in the plains. A wild mare I overtook, and 4 caught it and tamed it. I slew a lion and plucked a kid out of its mouth. I took a bear by its paw THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 2. 1—7. 3 2,3 four kings. And I went up upon the wall, and I slew four mighty men. And so we captured Hazor, and took all the spoil. 5: On the next day we departed to Aretan, a city strong and walled and inaccessible, threatening us 2 with death. But I and Gad approached on the east side of the city, and Reuben and Levi on the 3 west. And they that were upon the wall, thinking that we were alone, twere drawn down} against 4 walls we cast down. And we drew near to Thamna, where was all the substance of the hostile kings. 5 Then being insulted by them, I was therefore wroth, and rushed against them to the summit; and 6 they kept slinging against me stones and darts. And had not Dan my brother aided me, they would 7 have slain me. We came upon them, therefore, with wrath, and they all fled; and passing by 8 another way, they besought my father, and he made peace with them. And we did to them no hurt, 9 and they became tributary to us, and we restored to them their spoil. And I built Thamna,and my 10 father built Pabael. I was twenty years old when this war befell. And the Canaanites feared me and my brethren. 81,2 And I had much cattle, and I had for chief herdsman Iram the Adullamite. And when I went to him I saw Parsaba, king of Adullam; ‘and he spake unto us', and he made us a feast; 3 and when I was heated he gave me his daughter Bathshua to wife. She bare me Er, and Onan and Shelah ; and two of them the Lord smote: for Shelah lived, and his children are ye. 9; And eighteen years my father abode in peace with his brother Esau, and his sons with us, after 2 that we came from Mesopotamia, from Laban. And when eighteen years were fulfilled, in the fortieth year of my life, Esau, the brother of my father, came upon us with a mighty and strong 3 people. And Jacob smote Esau with an arrow, and he was taken up wounded on Mount Seir, and 4 as he went he died at Anoniram. And we pursued after the sons of Esau. Now they had a city with walls of iron and gates of brass; and we could not enter ‘into it', and we encamped around, and 5 besieged it. And when they opened not to us in twenty days, I set up a ladder 'in the sight of all’ and with my shield upon my head I went up, sustaining the assault of stones, upwards of three 7 talents weight; and I slew four of their mighty men. And Reuben and Gad slew six others. Then they asked from us terms of peace; and having taken counsel with our father, we received them as 8 tributaries. And they gave us five hundred cors of wheat, five hundred baths of oil, five hundred measures of wine, ‘until the famine!, when we went down into Egypt. 10: And after these things my son Er took to wife Tamar, from Mesopotamia, a daughter of Aram. 2 Now Er was wicked, and he {was in need concerning Tamar, because she was not of the land 3 of Canaan. And on the third night an angel of the Lord smote him. ‘And he had not known her 4 according to the evil craftiness of his mother, for he did not wish to have children by her. In the 6 THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 7. 4---18. 3 days! of the wedding-feast I gave Onan to her in marriage; and he also in wickedness knew her not, 5 though he spent with her a year. And when I threatened him he went in unto her, but he spilled the seed on the ground, according to the command of his mother, and he also died through wickedness. 6 And I wished to give Shelah also to her, but his mother did not permit it; ‘for she wrought evil against Tamar!, because she was not of the daughters of Canaan, as she also herself was. x And I knew that the race of the Canaanites was wicked, but the impulse of youth blinded my 2 mind.’ And when I saw her pouring out wine, owing to the intoxication of wine I was deceived, and 3 took her although my father had not counselled (it). And while I was away she went and took for 4 Shelah a wife from Canaan. And when I knew what she had done, I cursed her in the anguish of 5 my soul. And she also died through her wickedness together with her sons. 1 And after these things, while Tamar was a widow, she heard after two years that I was going up 2 to shear my sheep, and adorned herself in bridal array, and sat in the city Enaim by the gate. ‘For it was a law of the Amorites, that she who was about to marry should sit in fornication seven days 3 by the gate’. Therefore being drunk with wine, I did not recognize her; and her beauty deceived 4 me, through the fashion of her adorning. And I turned aside to her, and said: Let me go in unto thee. And she said: What wilt thou give me? And I gave her my staff, and my girdle, and the 5 diadem of my kingdom ‘in pledge’. And I went in unto her, and she conceived. And not knowing 6 what I had done, I wished to slay her ; but she privily sent my pledges, and put me to shame. And when I called her, I heard also the secret words which ΓI spoke! when lying with her in my drunken- 7 ness; and I could not slay her, because it was from the Lord. For I said, Lest haply she did it in 8 subtlety, having received the pledge from another woman. But I came not again near her while 9 I lived, because I had done ‘this! abomination in ‘all’ Israel. Moreover, they who were in the city said there was no harlot in the gate, because she came from another place, and sat for a while in the 12 Egypt ‘to Joseph', because of the famine. And I was forty and six years old, and seventy and three i years lived I in Egypt. 1 And now I command you, my children, hearken ‘to Judah your father', and keep my sayings to 2 perform all the ordinances of the Lord, and to obey the commands of God. And walk not after your lusts, nor in the imaginations of your thoughts in haughtiness of heart; and glory not in the deeds 3 and strength of your youth, for this also is evil in the eyes of the Lord. Since I also gloried that in wars no comely woman’s face ever enticed me, and reproved Reuben my brother concerning Bilhah, the wife of my father, the spirits of jealousy and of fornication arrayed themselves against E15 to, 11 gate. And I thought that no one knew that I had gone in to her. And after this we came into 4. BA 5": ‘And I gave her to Aunan my second son, and behold the Lord slew him’ a. 5. »a. 4 me, until I lay with Bathshua the Canaanite, and Tamar, who was espoused to my sons. For I said to my father-in-law : I will take counsel with my father, and so will I take thy daughter. And he was unwilling, but he showed me a boundless store of gold in his daughter's behalf; for he was 5 aking. And he adorned her with gold and pearls, and caused her to pour out wine for us at the 6 feast fwith the beauty of women.t And the wine turned aside my eyes, and pleasure blinded my 7 heart. And I became enamoured of and I lay with her, and transgressed the commandment of the 8 Lord and the commandment of my fathers, and I took her to wife. And the Lord rewarded me according to the imagination of my heart, inasmuch as I had no joy in her children. 1 And now, my children, 'I say unto you’, be not drunk with wine ; for wine turneth the mind away 2 from the truth, and inspires the passion of lust, and leadeth the eyes into error. For the spirit of fornication hath wine as a minister to give pleasure to the mind; for these two also take away the 3 mind of man. For if a man drink wine to drunkenness, it disturbeth the mind with filthy thoughts ‘leading to fornication', and heateth the body to carnal union ; and if the occasion of the lust be 4 present, he worketh the sin, and is not ashamed. Such is the inebriated man, my children ; for he 5 who is drunken reverenceth no man. For, lo, it made me also to err, so that I was not ashamed of the multitude in the city, in that before the eyes of all I turned aside unto Tamar, and I wrought 6 a great sin, and I uncovered the covering of my sons’ shame. After I had drunk wine I reverenced ἡ not the commandment of God, and I took a woman of Canaan to wife. For much discretion needeth the man who drinketh wine, my children ; and herein is discretion in drinking wine, a man 8 may drink so long as he preserveth modesty. But if he go beyond this limit the spirit of deceit attacketh his mind, and it maketh the drunkard to talk filthily, and to transgress and not to be ashamed, but even to glory in his shame, and to account himself honourable. 1 He that committeth fornication is not aware when he suffers loss, and is not ashamed when put 2 to dishonour. For even though a man be a king and commit fornication, he is stripped of his 3 kingship by becoming the slave of fornication, as I myself also suffered. For I gave my staff, that is, the stay of my tribe; and my girdle, that is, my power; and my diadem, that is, the glory of my 4kingdom. And indeed I repented of these things; wine and flesh I eat not until my old age, nor 5 did I behold any joy. And the angel of God showed me that for ever do women bear rule over 6 king and beggar alike. And from the king they take away his glory, and from the valiant man his might, and from the beggar even that little which is the stay of his poverty. 1 Observe, therefore, my children, the (right) limit in wine; for there are in it four evil spirits—of 2 lust, of hot desire, of profligacy, of filthy lucre. If ye drink wine in gladness, be ye modest in the fear of God. For if in (your) gladness the fear of God departeth, then drunkenness ariseth and 3 shamelessness stealeth in. But if ye would live soberly do not touch wine at all, lest ye sin in words of outrage, and in fightings and slanders, and transgressions of the commandments of God, 4 and ye perish before your time. Moreover, wine revealeth the mysteries of God and men, even as I lay with, συνέπεσα eἰς, 8 A S!: συνετέλεσα eἰς, a. 5 woman Bathshua, which God bade me not to reveal. And wine is a cause both of war and confusion. 7x And now, I command you, my children, not to love money, nor to gaze upon the beauty of women; because for the sake of money and beauty I was led astray to Bathshua the Canaanite. .3 [For I know that because of these two things shall my race fall into wickedness. For even wise men among my sons shall they mar, and shall cause the kingdom of Judah to be diminished, which i 4 the Lord gave me because of my obedience to my father. For I never caused grief to Jacob, my j 5 father ; for all things whatsoever he commanded I did. And Isaac, the father of my father, blessed 6 me to be king in Israel, and Jacob further blessed me in like manner. And I know that from me shall the kingdom be established. THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 18. 4—19. 3 I also revealed the commandments of God and the mysteries of Jacob my father to the Canaanitish a BAS} 181 And I know what evils ye will do in the last For I have also read in the books of Enoch days. the righteous what evils ye will do in the last days. 2 Beware, therefore, my children, of fornication, and the love of money, and hearken to Judah your father. 3 For these things withdraw you from the law of God, And blind the inclination of the soul, And teach arrogance, And suffer not a man to have compassion upon his neighbour. 4 They rob his soul of all goodness, And oppress him with toils and troubles, 'And drive away sleep from him’, And devour his flesh. 5 And he hindereth the sacrifices of God ; 5 ‘And he remembereth not the blessing of God,' He hearkeneth not to a prophet when he speaketh, And resenteth the words of godliness. 6 ‘For he is a slave to two contrary passions, And cannot obey God, 4 Because they have blinded his soul, ; And he walketh in the day as in the night'. 19: My children, the love of money leadeth to idolatry; because, when led astray through money, men name as gods those who are not gods, and it causeth him who hath it to fall into madness. 2 For the sake of money I lost my children, and had not my repentance, "and my humiliation’, and 3 the prayers of my father been accepted, I should have died childless. But the God of my fathers nῶn 5. >a XVII. 1. nor to gaze upon. Cf. T. R. iv. 1. 7 XVII. 2—XVIII. 1. Bracketed as a Jater addition. xviii. 2 resumes xvii. I. 4 had mercy on me, because I did it in ignorance. And the prince of deceit blinded me, and I sinned as a man and as flesh, being corrupted through sins; ‘and I Jearnt my own weakness while thinking myself invincible’. 20: ‘Know, therefore, my children, that two spirits wait upon man—the spirit of truth and the spirit 2 of deceit. And in the midst is the spirit of understanding of the mind, to which it belongeth to turn whithersoever it will. 3 And the works of truth and the works of deceit are written upon the hearts of men, and each one of them the Lord knoweth. 4 And there is no time at which the works of men can be hid ; for on the heart itself have they been 5 written down 'before the Lord’. And the spirit of truth testifieth all things, and accuseth all; and the sinner is burnt up ‘by his own heart’, and cannot raise his face ‘to the judge'. 21: = And now, my children, I command you, love Levi, that ye may abide, and ‘exalt not yourselves 2 against him', lest ye be utterly destroyed. ‘For to me the Lord gave the kingdom, and to him the 3 priesthood, and He set the kingdom beneath the priesthood. To me He gave the things upon the 4 earth; to him the things in the heavens. As the heaven is higher than the earth, so is the priesthood of God higher than the earthly kingdom, unless it falls away through sin from the Lord and is 5 dominated by the earthly kingdom'. For ‘the angel of the Lord said unto me!: The Lord chose him rather than thee, to draw near to Him, and to eat of His table ‘and to offer Him the first-fruits! of the choice things of the sons of Israel; but thou shalt be king of Jacob. 6 And thou shalt be amongst them as the sea. For as, on the sea, just and unjust are tossed about, ‘some taken into captivity while some are enriched", so also shall every race of men be in thee: some shall be impoverished, being taken captive, ‘and others grow rich by plundering the possessions of others. 7 For the kings shall be as sea-monsters. They shall swallow men like fishes : The sons and daughters ‘of freemen! shall they enslave ; Houses, lands, flocks, money shall they plunder : 8 And with the flesh of many shall they ‘wrongfully! feed the ravens and the cranes ; "And they shall tadvance in evil, in covetousness uplifted,}! g And there shall be false prophets ‘like! tempests, And they shall persecute all righteous men. 22:1 And the Lord shall bring upon them divisions ‘one against another. And there shall be ‘continual! wars in Israel ; Until the salvation of Israel shall come, That Jacob For the Lord sware to me with an oath that for ever. THE TESTAMENT OF JUDAH 19. 3—24. 1 And among men of another race shall my kingdom be brought to an end, Until the appearing of the God of righteousness’, Vand all the Gentiles] may rest in peace. And He shall guard the might of my kingdom for ever ; He would not. destroy the kingdom from my seed Now I have much grief, my children, because of your lewdness and witchcrafts, and idolatries Ye shall make your daughters singing girls and harlots, and ye shall mingle in 3 the abominations of the Gentiles. For which things’ sake the Lord shall bring upon you famine and pestilence, death and the sword, beleaguering by enemies, and revilings of friends, the slaughter of children, the rape of wives, the plundering of possessions, [the burning of the temple of God,] the 4 laying waste of the land, the enslavement of yourselves among the Gentiles. And they shall make some of you eunuchs for their wives. a 5 Until the Lord visit you, when with perfect heart ye repent and walk in all His command- ments, and He bring you up from captivity among the Gentiles. ab 53 And after these things shall a star arise to you from Jacob in peace, BAS! Until ye turn unto the Lord with perfect heart 5 repenting and walking in all the commandments of God, and the Lord visit you with mercy and bring you up from captivity among the Gentiles. A And after these things shall arise the star of 1 peace, And a man shall arise [from my seed], like the sun of righteousness, Walking with the sons of men in meekness and righteousness ; And no sin shall be found in him. And he shall walk with men in meekness and 285: which ye shall practise ‘against the kingdom, following them that have familiar spirits, diviners, and 2 demons of error.
24.  1 righteousness. . J continual wars. From Alexander's death to Herod’s accession this holds good. aps! A 2 And the heavens shall be opened unto him, And the heavens shall be opened unto him, 2 To pour out the spirit, (even) the blessing of And the blessings of the Holy Father shall be the Holy Father ; poured down upon him. 3 And He shall pour out the spirit of grace upon And He will pour down upon us the spirit of 3 ou; grace. : And ye shall be unto Him sons in truth, And ye shall be His true children by adoption, And ye shall walk in His commandments first And ye shall walk in His commandments first and last. and last. 4 [This Branch of God Most High, [Then a branch shall go forth from me.] 4 nd this Fountain giving life unto all.] 5 Then shall the sceptre of my kingdom shine And the sceptre of my kingdom shall shine 5 forth ; forth ; And from your root shall arise a stem ; And from your root shall arise a stem ; 6 And from it shall grow a rod of righteousness And from it shall grow up the rod of righteous- 6 to the Gentiles, ness unto the Gentiles, To judge and to save all that call upon the To judge and to save all that call upon the Lord. Lord. 25:1 And after these things shall Abraham and Isaac and Jacob arise unto life, and I and my brethren shall be chiefs of the tribes ‘of Israel’: Levi first, I the second, Joseph third, Benjamin fourth, 2 Simeon fifth, Issachar sixth, and so all in order. And the Lord blessed Levi, and the Angel of the Presence, me; the powers of glory, Simeon; the heaven, Reuben; the earth, Issachar; the sea, Zebulun ; the mountains, Joseph ; the tabernacle, Benjamin ; the luminaries, Dan; Eden, Naphtali ; the sun, Gad ; the moon, Asher. THE TESTAMENT OF ISSACHAR 1. 1—2. 5 3 nineteen years old. Let no one bury me ‘in costly apparel', nor tear open my bowels, 'for this 4 shall they who are kings do'; and carry me up to Hebron with you. And Judah, when he had said these things, fell asleep ; and his sons did according to all whatsoever he commanded them, and they buried him in Hebron, with his fathers. THE TESTAMENT OF ISSACHAR, THE FIFTH SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 1: The copy ofthe words of Issachar. For he called his sons and said to them: Hearken, my children, to Issachar your father ; Give ear to the words of him who is beloved of the Lord. 2,3 I was born the ‘fifth son to Jacob’, by way of hire for the mandrakes. For Reuben ‘my brother! 4 brought in mandrakes from the field, and Rachel met him and took them. And Reuben wept, and 5 at his voice Leah my mother came forth. Now these (mandrakes) were ‘sweet-smelling! apples 6 which were produced in the land of Haran below a ravine of water. And Rachel said: I will not give them to thee, but they shall be to me instead of children. ‘For the Lord hath despised me, 7 and I have not borne children to Jacob’. Now there were two apples ; and Leah said ‘to Rachel! : 8 Let it suffice thee that thou hast taken my husband: wilt thou take these also? And Rachel said g ‘to her': Thou shalt have Jacob this night for the mandrakes ‘of thy son’. And Leah said to her: 10 Jacob is mine, for I am the wife of his youth. But Rachel said: Boast not, and vaunt not thyself; for he espoused me before thee, and for my sake he served our father fourteen years. a BAS 11 And had not craft increased on the earth and What shall I do to thee? for the craft and 11 the wickedness of men prospered, thou wouldst the subtlety of men are increased, and craft pros- not now see the face of Jacob. pereth on the earth—if it were not so, thou wouldst not now see the face of Jacob. 12,13 For thou art not his wife, but in craft wert taken to him in my stead. And my father deceived me, ‘and removed me on that night', and did not suffer ‘Jacob to see me; for' had I been 14 there, this had not happened ‘to him', Nevertheless, for the mandrakes I am hiring Jacob to thee 15 for one night. And Jacob knew Leah, and she ‘conceived and’ bare me, and on account of the hire I was called Issachar. 2: Then appeared to Jacob an angel of the Lord, saying: Two children shall Rachel bear, inasmuch 2 as she hath refused company with her husband, and hath chosen continency. And had not Leah my mother paid the two apples for the sake of his company, she would have borne eight sons ; for this reason she bare six, and Rachel bare the two: for on account of the mandrakes the Lord 3 visited her. For He knew that for the sake of children she wished to company with Jacob, and 4 not for lust of pleasure. For on the morrow also she again gave up Jacob. Because of the man- 5 drakes, therefore, the Lord hearkened to Rachel. For though she desired them, she eat them not, but offered them in the house of the Lord, presenting them to the priest of the Most High who was at that time. nineteen § A 5": ‘ eighteen’ a, wrongly. When, therefore, I grew up, my children, I walked in uprightness of heart, and I became a husbandman for my father and my brethren, and I brought in fruits from the field according to 2, 3 their season. ‘And my father blessed me, for he saw that I walked in rectitude before him’. And 4 I was not a busybody in my doings, ‘nor envious and malicious against my neighbour. I never slandered any one, nor did I censure the life of any man, walking as I did in singleness of eye’. 5 Therefore, when I was thirty-'five' years old, I took to myself a wife, for my labour wore away my strength, and I never thought upon pleasure with women ; ‘but owing to my toil, sleep overcame me', 6 And my father ‘always’ rejoiced in my rectitude, "because I offered through the priest to the Lord 7 all first-fruits ; then to my father also. And the Lord increased ten thousandfold His benefits in my 8 hands; and also Jacob, my father, knew that God aided my singleness. For on all the poor and I oppressed I bestowed the good things of the earth in the singleness of my heart’. And now, hearken to me, my children, And walk in singleness ‘of your heart’, For I have seen in it ‘all’ that is well-pleasing to the Lord. ‘The single-(minded) man coveteth not gold, He overreacheth not his neighbour, He longeth not after manifold dainties, He delighteth not in varied apparel. He doth not desire to live a long life, But only waiteth for the will of God’. And the spirits of deceit have no power against him, For he looketh not on the beauty of women, "Lest he should pollute his mind with corruption’. There is no envy in his thoughts, [No malicious person maketh his soul to pine away, Nor worry with insatiable desire in his mind. For he walketh in singleness 'of soul’, And beholdeth all things in uprightness ‘of heart', Shunning eyes (made) evil through the error of the world, Lest he should see the perversion of any of the commandments of the Lord. Keep, therefore, my children, the law of God, And get singleness, III-VI. Issachar is here held up as the single-hearted husbandman (iii. 1, v. 3, 5) who scorns luxuries and wealth (iv. 2), is free from envy, malice, and greed (iii. 3, iv. 5), shuns lust (iv. 4), offers freely to God and his father (iii. 6), and to the poor (iii. 8). Cf. LXX of Gen. xlix. 15 ἐγenήθη ἀnὴp γeωpγός, ‘he bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant under taskwork ’ (Heb.). The Targums interpret this labour as in the law; cf. 1 Chron. xii. 32. III. 1. uprightness, εὐθύτητι, Iw’. As this work was translated into Greek between the completion of the LXX and 4,D. 50 it employs more frequently than the LXX the late Greek word ἁπλόtης = pM +The MSS. waver between the two at times, probably because ἁπλόtης was not yet so popular a term as it later became. See my Commentary, p- 103, and cf. T. G. vii. 7, T. Iss. iv. 6. according to their season >aaf. 2. >A. rectitude, ἁπλύtης = wholeness, integrity. Cf. Eph. vi. 5; Col. iii. 32. THE TESTAMENT OF ISSACHAR 8. 1—7. 5 ‘And walk in guilelessness, Not playing the busybody with the business of your neighbour, And I shared my bread with the poor. I wrought godliness, all my days I kept truth. a BS} 6 I loved the Lord ; 'The Lord I loved with all my strength : Likewise also every man with all my heart. Likewise also every man I loved more than my own children, 7 So do you also these things, my children, And every spirit of Beliar shall flee from you, ’ And no deed of wicked men shall rule over you; And every wild beast shall ye subdue, Since you have with you the God of heaven and carth (And) walk with men in singleness of heart!. 8 And having said these things, he commanded his sons that they should carry him up to Hebron, 9 and bury him there in the cave ‘with his fathers’. And he stretched out his feet and died, at a good old age ; with every limb sound, and with strength unabated, he slept the eternal sleep. THE TESTAMENT OF ZEBULUN, THE SIXTH SON OF JACOB AND LEAH. 1: The copy of the words of Zebulun, which he enjoined on his sons "before he died’ in the 2 hundred and fourteenth year of his life, two years after the death of Joseph. And he said to them: 3 Hearken to me, ye sons of Zebulun, attend to the words of your father. I, Zebulun, was born a good gift to my parents. For when I was born my father was increased very exceedingly, both in flocks 4 and herds, when with the straked rods he had his portion. I am not conscious that I have sinned 5 all my days, ‘save in thought'. Nor yet do I remember that I have done any iniquity, except the sin of ignorance which I committed against Joseph; for I covenanted with my brethren not to tell 6 my father what had been done. But I wept ‘in secret! many days on account of Joseph, for I feared my brethren, ‘because they had all agreed that if any one should declare the secret, he should be slain'. 7 But when they wished to kill him, I adjured them much ‘with tears! not to be guilty of this sin. 21,2 For Simeon and Gad came against Joseph ‘to kill him', and he said unto them with tears: Pity me, my brethren, have mercy upon the bowels of Jacob our father: lay not upon me your hands 3 ‘to shed innocent blood', for I have not sinned against you. And if indeed I have sinned, with chastening chastise me, ‘my brethren’, but lay not upon me your hand, for the sake of Jacob our 4 father. And as he spoke these words, ' wailing as he did 50}, I was unable to bear his lamentations, and ‘began to weep', and my liver was poured out, and all the substance of my bowels was }loosened. shared my bread. Cf. Prov. xxii. 9. with the poor + ‘I never eat alone, I moved no landmark’ b 5}. kept truth a: ‘did truth’ B-beS!: ‘and I walked in holiness’ A + “1 loved godliness’ c. THE TESTAMENT OF ZEBULUN 1. 1—4. 9 5 And I wept with Joseph, and my heart sounded, ‘and the joints of my body trembled’, and I was 6 not able to stand. And when ‘Joseph! saw me weeping with him, and them coming against him to 7 slay him, he fled behind me, beseeching them. But meanwhile Reuben arose and said: 'Come!, my brethren, let us not slay him, but let us cast him into one of these dry pits, which our fathers digged g and found no water. For for this cause the Lord forbade that water should rise up in them, in order that Joseph should be preserved. And they did so, until they sold him to the Ishmaelites. 31,2 For in his price I had no share, my children. But Simeon and Gad and six other of our brethren took the price of Joseph, and bought sandals for themselves, and their wives, ‘and their children’, 3 saying: We will not eat of it, for it is the price of our brother’s blood, but we will assuredly tread it under foot, because he said that he would be king over us, ‘and so let us see what will become of 4his dreams'. Therefore it is written in the writing of the law of Moses, that whosoever will not raise 5 up seed to his brother, his sandal should be unloosed, and they should spit in his face. And the brethren of Joseph wished not that their brother should live, and the Lord loosed from them the 6 sandal which they wore against ‘Joseph their brother!. For when they came into Egypt ‘they were unloosed by the servants of Joseph outside the gate, and so they made obeisance to Joseph after the 7 fashion of King Pharaoh. And! not only did they make obeisance to him, but ‘were spit upon also, 8 falling down before him forthwith, and so' they were put to shame before the Egyptians. For after this the Egyptians heard all the evils that they had done to Joseph. a 10 a kid of the goats, and dip in it the coat of Joseph; and let us send it to Jacob, saying: Know, is 11 this the coat of thy son? And they did so. ‘For they stripped off from Joseph his coat when they were selling him, and put upon him the garment of a slave’. Now Simeon took the coat, and would not give it up, “for he wished to rend it with his sword’, as he was angry that Joseph lived and that 12 he had not slain him. Then we ‘all’ rose up and said unto him: If thou givest not up the coat, we 13 will say ‘to our father! that thou alone didst this evil thing in Israel. And so he gave it unto them, and they did even as Dan had said. 1 And now, my children, I bid you to keep the commands of the Lord, ‘and to show mercy to your neighbours, and to have compassion towards all, not. towards men only, but also towards beasts. 2 For all this thing’s sake the Lord blessed me’, and when all my brethren were sick, I escaped with- 3 out sickness, for the Lord knoweth the purposes of each. Have, therefore, compassion in your hearts, my children, because even as a man doeth to his neighbour, even so also will the Lord do to him, 4 For the sons of my brethren were sickening and were dying on account of Joseph, "because they 5 showed not mercy in their hearts'; but my sons were preserved without sickness, as ye know. And when I was in the land of Canaan, by the sea-coast, I made a catch of fish for Jacob my father; and when many were choked in the sea, I continued unhurt. THE TESTAMENT OF ZEBULUN 4. 9—9. 8 4, 5 Lord also upon him.] And when we went down into Egypt, Joseph bore no malice against us. To whom taking heed, do ye also, my children, ‘approve yourselves without malice, and' love one 6 another ; and do not set down in account, each one of you, evil against his brother. For this breaketh unity and divideth ‘all kindred, and troubleth the soul', and weareth away the countenance. 9: Observe, ‘therefore’, the waters, and know when they flow together, they sweep along stones, trees, 2 earth, and other things. But if they are divided into many streams, the earth swalloweth them up, 3,4 and they vanish away. So shall ye also be if ye be divided. Be not ye, therefore, divided into two heads, for everything which the Lord made hath but one head, and two shoulders, two 5 hands, two feet, and all the remaining members. For I have learnt in the writing of my fathers, that Ye shall be divided in Israel, And ye shall follow two kings, And shall work every abomination. 6 And your enemies shall lead you captive, And ye shall be evil entreated among the Gentiles, With many infirmities and tribulations. a BAS! 7 And after these things ye shall remember the And after these things ye shall remember the 7 Lord and repent, Lord, and repent, And He shall have mercy upon you, for He [And He shall cause you to return]; for He is merciful and compassionate. is merciful and compassionate. And He setteth not down in account evil And He setteth not down in account evil to against the sons of men, the sons of men, because they are flesh, Because they are flesh, and are deceived through And the spirits of deceit deceive them in all their own wicked deeds. their deeds. aaefAS! bdg 8 And after these things shall there arise “unto And after these things there shall arise unto 8 you' the Lord Himself, the light of righteousness, you the Lord Himself, the light of righteousness, [And healing and compassion shall be in His wings. He shall redeem all the captivity of the sons of men from Beliar ; And every spirit of deceit shall be trodden down] ; And he shall bring back all the Gentiles into zeal for Him. aaefAS!} bdg And ye shall return unto your land. And ye shall see [God in the fashion of a man] And ye shall see Him in Jerusalem, ‘for His (the place) which the Lord shall choose, Jerusalem name’s sake!. is its name. g And again ‘through the wickedness of your works' shall ye provoke Him to anger, And ye shall be cast away ‘by Him' unto the time of consummation. THE TESTAMENT OF DAN 1. 1—5. 2 4a righteous man, he regardeth him not; ‘though a friend, he doth not acknowledge him'. For the spirit of anger encompasseth him with the net of deceit, and blindeth his eyes, and through lying 5 darkeneth his mind, and giveth him its own peculiar vision. And wherewith encompasseth it his eyes? With hatred of heart, so as to be envious of his brother. a B-a AS!
31.  For anger is an evil thing, my children, for it For anger is an evil thing, my children, for it troubleth even the soul itself. becomes a soul to the soul itself. 2 And the body of the angry man it maketh its own, and over his soul it getteth the mastery, and 3 it bestoweth upon the body ‘power that it may work all' iniquity. And when the body does all 4 these things, the soul justifieth what is done, since it seeth not aright. Therefore he that is wrathful, if he be a mighty man, hath a threefold power in his anger: one by the help of his servants; and a second by his wealth, whereby he persuadeth and overcometh wrongfully ; and thirdly, having his 5 own natural power he worketh thereby the evil. And though the wrathful man be weak, yet hath 6 he a power twofold of that which is by nature; for wrath ever aideth such in lawlessness. This spirit goeth always with lying ‘at the right hand of Satan, that with cruelty and lying’ his works may be wrought. 1,2 Understand ye, therefore, the power of wrath, that it is tvain. For it first of all giveth provocation by word ; then by deeds it ¢strengtheneth him who is angry, and with sharp losses disturbeth his 3 mind, and so stirreth up with great wrath his soul. Therefore, when any one speaketh against you, be not ye moved to anger, [and if any man praiseth you as holy men, be not uplifted: be not moved 4 either to delight or to disgust]. For first tit pleaseth the hearing}, and so maketh the mind keen to perceive the grounds for provocation ; and then being enraged, he thinketh that he is justly angry. 5 If ye fall into any loss or ruin, my children, ‘be not afflicted’; for this very spirit maketh (a man) 6 desire that which is perishable, in order that he may be enraged through the affliction. And if ye suffer loss voluntarily, or involuntarily, be not vexed ; for from vexation ariseth wrath ‘with lying’. 7 Moreover, a twofold mischief is wrath with lying ; and they assist one another in order to disturb the heart ; and when the soul is continually disturbed, the Lord departeth from it, and Beliar ruleth over it. δ: Observe, therefore, my children, the commandments of the Lord, 5 And keep His law ; Depart from wrath, ' And hate lying, : That the Lord may dwell among you, } And Beliar may flee from you. 4 2 Speak truth each one with his neighbour. So shall ye not fall into wrath and confusion ; But ye shall be in peace, having the God of peace, So shall no war prevail over you. TI Love the Lord through all your life, And one another with a true heart. I know that in the last days ye shall depart from the Lord, And ye shall provoke Levi unto anger, And fight against Judah ; But ye shall not prevail against them, For an angel of the Lord shall guide them both ; For by them shall Israel stand. And whensoever ye depart from the Lord, ye shall walk in all evil and work the abominations of the Gentiles, going a-whoring after women of the lawless ones, while with all wickedness the spirits of wickedness work ‘in you', [For I have read in the book of Enoch, the righteous, that your prince is Satan, and that all the spirits of wickedness and pride will conspire to attend constantly on the sons of Levi, to cause them to sin before the Lord. And my sons will draw near to Levi, And sin with them in all things ; And the sons of Judah will be covetous, Plundering other men’s goods like lions.] Therefore shall ye be led away [with them] into captivity, And there shall ye receive all the plagues of Egypt, And all the evils of the Gentiles. And so when ye return to the Lord ye shall obtain mercy, And He shall bring you into His sanctuary, And He shall give you peace. And there shall arise unto you from the tribe of [Judah and of] Levi the salvation of the Lord ; And he shall make war against Beliar. And execute an everlasting vengeance on our enemies ; And the captivity shall he take from Beliar [the souls of the saints], And turn disobedient hearts unto the Lord, And give to them that call upon him eternal peace. And the saints shall rest in Eden, And in the New Jerusalem shall the righteous rejoice, THE TESTAMENT OF DAN 5. 3—7. 3 And it shall be unto the glory of God for ever. 4 he was awake in the morning, he said to them, I am dying; and they believed him not. And as he 5 glorified the Lord, he grew strong and said that after yesterday’s feast he should die. And he began 6 then to say: Hear, my children, ye sons of Naphtali, hear the words of your father. I ‘was born from Bilhah, ‘and’ because Rachel dealt craftily, and gave Bilhah in place of herself to Jacob, and she 7 conceived and bare me upon Rachel’s knees, ‘therefore she called my name Naphtali. For Rachel loved me very much because I was born upon her lap’; and when I was still young she was wont 8 to kiss me, and say: May I have a brother of thine from mine own womb, like unto thee. Whence 9 also Joseph was like unto me ‘in all things’, according to the prayers of Rachel. Now my mother was Bilhah, daughter of Rotheus the brother of Deborah, Rebecca’s nurse, who was born on one and 10 the self-same day with Rachel. And Rotheus was of the family of Abraham, a Chaldean, God- 11 fearing, free-born, and noble. And he was taken captive and was bought by Laban; and he gave him Euna his handmaid to wife, and she bore a daughter, and called her name Zilpah, after the name 12 of the village in which he had been taken captive. And next she bore Bilhah, saying: My daughter hastens after what is new, for immediately that she was born she seized the breast and hastened to suck it. 2, And I was swift ‘on my feet' like the deer, and my father Jacob appointed me for all messages, 2 and as a deer did he give me his blessing. For as the potter knoweth the vessel, how much it is to contain, and bringeth clay accordingly, so also doth the Lord make the body after the likeness of 3 the spirit, and according to the capacity of the body doth He implant the spirit. And the one does not fall short of the other bya third part of a hair; for by weight, and measure, and rule was all the 4 creation made. And as the potter knoweth the use of each vessel, what it is meet for, so also doth the Lord know the body, how far it will persist in goodness, and when it beginneth in evil. For 5 there is no inclination or thought which the Lord knoweth not, for He created every man after His own image. a B-agA 6 For asa man’s strength, so also is his work ; As a man’s strength, so also is his work; and 6 as his teye, so also is his sleep; as his soul, so as his mind, so also is his skill; ‘and as his also is his word either in the law of the Lord or purpose, so also is his achievement ; and as his in the law of Beliar. heart, so also is his mouth ;' as his feye, so also is his sleep ; as his soul, so also is his word, either in the law of the Lord or in the works of Beliar. 7 And as there is a division between light and darkness, between seeing and hearing, so also is there a division between man and man, and between woman and woman ; and it is not to be said that the 8 one is like the other either in face or in mind. ‘For'God made all things good in their order, the five senses in the head, and He joined on the neck to the head, adding to it the hair also for comeliness and glory, then the heart for understanding, the belly for excrement, and the stomach for THE TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI 1. 4—5. 1 (grinding), the windpipe for taking in (the breath), the liver for wrath, the gall for bitterness, the spleen for laughter, the reins ‘for prudence, the muscles of the loins' for power, the lungs for drawing 9 in, the loins for strength, and so forth. So ‘then', my children, let all your works be done in order 10 with good intent in the fear of God, and do nothing disorderly in scorn or out of its due season. For if thou bid the eye to hear, it cannot; so neither while ye are in darkness can ye do the works of ight. 31 eo ye, therefore, not eager to corrupt your doings through covetousness or with vain words to beguile your souls; because if ye keep silence in purity of heart, ye shall understand how to hold 2 fast the will of God, and to cast away the will of Beliar. Sun and moon and stars change not their 3 order; so do ye also change not the law of God in the disorderliness of your doings. The Gentiles went astray, and forsook the Lord, and changed their order, and obeyed stocks and stones, spirits of 4 deceit. But ye shall not be so, my children, recognizing in the firmament, in the earth, and in the sea, and in all created things, the Lord who made all things, that ye become not as Sodom, which 5 changed the order of nature. In like manner the Watchers also changed the order of their nature, — the Lord cursed at the flood, on whose account He made the earth without inhabitants and fruitless. 1 These things I say unto you, my children, for I have read in the writing of Enoch that ye your- selves also shall depart from the Lord, walking according to all the lawlessness of the Gentiles, and 2 ye shall do according to all the wickedness of Sodom. And the Lord shall bring captivity upon you, and ‘there! shall ye serve your enemies, and ye shall be bowed down with every affliction and 3 tribulation, until the Lord have consumed you all. And after ye have become minished and made few, ye shall return and acknowledge the Lord your God; and He shall bring you back into your 4 land, according to His abundant mercy. And it shall be, that after that they come into the land of 5 their fathers, they shall again forget the Lord and become ungodly. And the Lord shall scatter them upon the face of all the earth, until the compassion of the Lord shall come, a man working righteousness and working mercy unto all them that are afar off, and to them that are near. 1 For in the fortieth year of my life, I saw a vision on the Mount of Olives, on the east of Jerusalem, stomach for (grinding) (‘ grinding’ supplied from (2)) = (1) (2) (3). windpipe for taking in (text, = ‘ reed for health’, corrupt) = (2) (3). Cf. (1) (4), ‘sending out.’ liver for wrath (1) (2) (3) (4). Cf. T. R. iii. 4. gall for bitterness > (2) (4): (1) (3) ‘the gall sprinkles on it a drop and quiets it.’ spleen for laughter (1) (2) (3) (4). reins for prudence (πανουργία, as Prov. i. 4, viii. 5, LXX): ‘reins for counsel’ (2), Cf. (1) (3) (4). (1) and (2) tell us that the reins give both good and bad counsel. Cf. Eccles. x. 2. muscles of the loins for power. No parallel; a dittography. lungs for drawing in (2). Cf. (1) (3) (4). But our text is corrupt. πλευρὰν eἰς tὸ καθεύδειν at πλευρὰν eἰς θήκηn B-gS'. Read πλεύμονα, TINWS AN. loins for strength. Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 11. 2 that the sun and the moon were standing still. And behold Isaac, the father of my father, said to us; Run and lay hold of them, each one according to his strength; ‘and to him that seizeth them 3 will the sun and moon belong.' And we all of us ran together, and Levi laid hold of the sun, and Judah outstripped the others and seized the moon, and they were both of them lifted up with them. 4 And when Levi became as a sun, ‘lo', a certain young man gave to him twelve branches of palm; 5 and Judah was bright as the moon, and under their feet were twelve rays. [And the two, Levi and 6 Judah, ran, and laid hold of them.] And lo, a bull upon the earth, with two great horns, and an 7 eagle’s wings upon its back; and we wished to seize him, but could not. But Joseph came, and 8 seized him, and ascended up with him on high. And I saw, for I was there, and behold a holy writing appeared to us, saying: Assyrians, Medes, Persians, [Chaldeans,]| Syrians, shall possess in captivity the twelve tribes of Israel. a And again, after seven days, I saw our father Jacob standing by the sea of Jamnia, and we were 2 with him. And behold, there came a ship sailing by, without sailors or pilot; and there was written 3 upon the ship, The Ship of Jacob. And our father said to us: Come, let us embark on our ship. 4 And when he had gone on board, there arose a vehement storm, and a mighty tempest of wind ; and 5 our father, who was holding the helm, departed from us. And we, being tost with the tempest, were borne along over the sea; and the ship was filled with water, (and was) pounded by mighty waves, 6 until it was broken up. And Joseph fled away upon a little boat, "and we were all divided upon nine 7 planks', and Levi and Judah were together. And we were all scattered unto the ends of the earth. g Then Levi, girt about with sackcloth, prayed for us all unto the Lord. And when the storm ceased, the ship reached the land ‘as it were'in peace. And, lo, our father came, and we all rejoiced with one accord. 1 These two dreams I told to my father; and he said to me: These things must be fulfilled in their season, after that Israel hath endured many things. 2 Then my father saith unto me: I believe God that Joseph liveth, for I see ‘always! that the Lord numbereth him with you. And he said, weeping: Ah me, my son Joseph, thou livest, though I behold thee. not, and thou seest not Jacob that begat thee. He caused me also, therefore, to weep by these words, and I burned in my heart to declare that ‘Joseph! had been sold, but I feared my brethren. 1 And lo! my children, I have shown unto you the last times, how everything shall come to pass in 2 Israel. Do ye also, ‘therefore', charge your children that they be united to Levi and to Judah; For through them shall salvation arise unto Israel, And in them shall Jacob be blessed. 2-3. Cf. Heb. T. Naph. ii. 2-4, which adds ‘ nine stars’. Cf. Gen. xxxvii. 9. THE TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI 5. 2---9. 3 3 For through their tribes shall God appear [dwelling among men] on earth, To save the race of Israel, And to gather together the righteous from amongst the Gentiles. 4 If ye work that which is good, my children, "Both! men and angels shall bless you; And God shall be glorified among the Gentiles through you, And the devil shall flee from you, "And the wild beasts shall fear you', And the Lord shall love you, [And the angels shall cleave to you]. 5 Asa man who has trained a child well is kept in kindly remembrance ; So also for a good work there is a good remembrance before God. 6 But him that doeth not that which is good, 'Both' angels and men shall curse, And God shall be dishonoured among the Gentiles through him, And the devil shall make him as his own peculiar instrument, And every wild beast shall master him, And the Lord shall hate him. 7 For the commandments of the law are twofold, ‘And’ through prudence must they be fulfilled. 8 For there is a season for a man to embrace his wife, And a season to abstain therefrom for his prayer. 9 So, then, there are two commandments; and, unless they be done in due order, they bring ‘very Io great’ sin "upon men'. So also is it with the other commandments. Be ye therefore wise in God, my children', and prudent, understanding the order of His commandments, and the laws of every word, that the Lord may love you. ‘ 9: And when he had charged them with many such words, he exhorted them that they should 2 remove his bones to Hebron, and that they should bury him with his fathers. And when he had : 3 eaten and drunken with a merry heart, he covered his face and died. And his sons did according to ἢ all that Naphtali their father had commanded them. THE TESTAMENT OF GAD, THE NINTH SON OF JACOB AND ZILPAH. Ἐn The copy of the testament of Gad, what things he spake unto his sons, in the hundred and twenty- 2 fifth year of his life, saying unto them: ‘Hearken, my children’, I was the ninth son born to Jacob, 3 and I was valiant in keeping the flocks. Accordingly I guarded ‘at night’ the flock ; and whenever the lion came, ‘or the wolf’, or any wild beast against the fold, I pursued it, and ‘overtaking (it)" 4 I seized its foot with my hand and hurled it about a stone’s throw, and so killed it. Now Joseph ‘my brother’ was feeding the flock with us for upwards of thirty days, and being young, he fell sick God appear. Cf. T.S. vi. 4; T. Z. ix. 8. [dwelling among men]: a Christian interpolation? the righteous from amongst the Gentiles, or ‘the righteous of the Gentiles’, i.e. conversion of the Gentiles. Cf. 1 En. x. 21, xc. 9-16, 18, 30. See T. B. ix. 2 (note). ἱ 4-6. Verses 4 and 6 are antithetic, so bracket 48, 5 by reason of the heat. And he returned to Hebron to our father, who made him lie down near him, 6 because he loved him greatly. And Joseph told our father that the sons of 'Zilpah and’ Bilhah were slaying the best ‘of the flock’ and eating them against the judgement of Reuben and Judah. 7 For he saw that I had delivered a lamb out of the mouth of a bear, and put the bear to death ; but 8 had slain the lamb, being grieved concerning it that it could not live, and that we had eatenit. And 9 regarding this matter I was wroth with Joseph ‘until the day that he was sold. And the spirit of hatred was in me’, and I wished not either to hear of Joseph with the ears, or see him with the eyes, because he rebuked us to our faces ‘saying’ that we were eating of the flock without Judah. For whatsoever things he told our father, he believed him. 21 Iconfess now my sin, my children, that oftentimes I wished to kill him, because I hated him from 2 my heart. Moreover, I hated him yet more for his dreams ; and I wished to lick him out of the land of the living, even as an ox licketh up the grass of the field. a BAS! 3 And Judah sold him secretly to the Ishmael- Therefore I and Simeon sold him to the Ish- 3 ites. maelites [ for thirty pieces of gold, and ten of them we hid, and showed the twenty to our brethren]. And thus through covetousness we were bent 4 ‘on slaying him. 5 Thus the God of our fathers delivered him And the God of my fathers delivered him from 5 from our hands, that we should not work great my hands, that I should not work lawlessness in lawlessness in Israel. Israel. 3: And now, my children, hearken to the words of truth to work righteousness, and all the law of the Most High, and go not astray through the spirit of hatred, for it is evil in all the doings of 2men. Whatsoever a man doeth the hater abominateth him: and thougha man worketh the law of the Lord, he praiseth him not; though a man feareth the Lord, and taketh pleasure in that which is 3 righteous, he loveth him not. He dispraiseth the truth, he envieth him that prospereth, he welcometh evil-speaking, he loveth arrogance, for hatred blindeth his soul ; as I talso 'then* looked} on Joseph. 1 Beware, therefore, my children of hatred; for it worketh lawlessness ‘even’ against the Lord Him- 2 self. For it will not hear 'the words oὔ" His commandments concerning the loving of one’s neigh- 3 bour, ‘and’ it sinneth against God. ‘For if a brother stumble’, it delighteth immediately to proclaim it to all men, and is urgent that he should be judged for it, and be punished and be put to death. 4 And if it be a servant it stirreth him up against his master, and with every affliction it deviseth against 5 him, if possibly he can be put to death. For hatred worketh with envy also against them that prosper: so long as it heareth of or seeth their success, it always languisheth. 6 For as love would quicken ‘even’ the dead, and would call back them that are condemned to die, so hatred would slay the living, and those that had sinned venially it would not suffer to live. 7 For the spirit of hatred worketh together with Satan, through hastiness of spirit, in all things to men’s death ; but the spirit of love worketh together with the law of God in long-suffering unto the salvation of men. THE TESTAMENT OF GAD 1. 5—6. 4
51.  Hatred, therefore, is evil’, for it constantly mateth with lying, speaking against the truth ; and it maketh small things to be great, and causeth the light to be darkness, and calleth the sweet bitter, and teacheth slander, and ‘kindleth’ wrath, and 'stirreth’ up war, and violence and all covet- 2 ousness ; it filleth the heart with evils and devilish poison. These things, 'therefore', 1 say to you from experience, my children, that ye may drive forth hatred, which is of the devil, and cleave to 3 the love of God. Righteousness casteth out hatred, humility destroyeth envy. For he that is just and humble is ashamed to do what is unjust, "being reproved not of another', but of his own heart, 4 because the Lord looketh on his inclination. He speaketh not against a holy man, because the fear 5 of God overcometh hatred. For fearing lest he should offend the Lord, he will not do wrong to any 6, 7 man, even in thought. These things I learnt at last, after I had repented concerning Joseph. For true repentance after a godly sort [destroyeth ignorance, and] driveth away the darkness, and 8 enlighteneth the eyes, and giveth knowledge to the soul, and leadeth the mind to salvation. And g those things which it hath not learnt from man, it knoweth through repentance. For God brought upon me a disease of the liver ; and had not the prayers of Jacob my father succoured me, it had to hardly failed but my spirit had departed. For by what things a man transgresseth, by the same also tris he punished. Since, ‘therefore’, my liver was set mercilessly against Joseph, in my liver too I suffered mercilessly, and was judged for eleven months, for so long a time as I had been angry against Joseph. 6: And now, my children, ‘I exhort you’, love ye each one his brother, and put away hatred from 2 your hearts, love one another in deed, and in word, and in the inclination of the soul. For in the presence of my father I spake peaceably to Joseph ; and when 1 had gone out, the spirit of hatred darkened my mind, and stirred up my soul to slay him. a BA 5: 3 Love ye one another from the heart; and if Love ye, therefore, one another from the heart ; 3 aman sin against thee, speak peaceably to him, and if a man sin against thee, cast forth the and in thy soul hold not guile; and if he repent poison of hate and speak peaceably to him, and and confess, forgive him. in thy soul hold not guile; and if he confess and repent, forgive him. 4 But if he deny it, do not get into a passion with him, lest catching the poison from thee he take ’ 4 V. 1. mateth with lying. Cf. Sir. xx. 25. causeth ... darkness. Cf. Isa. v. 20. kindleth: ‘ disturbeth’ a: > BA 5). stirreth up > BA 5". 5 to swearing and so thou sin doubly. [Let not another man hear thy secrets when engaged in legal strife, lest he come to hate thee and become thy enemy, and commit a great sin against thee; for 6 ofttimes he addresseth thee guilefully or busieth himself about thee with wicked intent.] And though he deny it and yet have a sense of shame when reproved, give over reproving him. For he who denieth may repent so as not again to wrong thee; yea, he may also honour thee, and [fear 7and] be at peace with thee. And if he be shameless and persist in his wrong-doing, even so forgive him from the heart, and leave ‘to God the avenging. 1 Ifaman prospereth more than you, do not be vexed, but pray also for him’, that he may have 2 perfect prosperity. For so it is expedient for you. And if he be further exalted, be not envious ‘of him’, remembering that all flesh shall die; and offer praise to God, who giveth things good and 3 profitable to all men. Seek out the judgements of the Lord, and thy mind will rest and be at peace. 4 And though a man become rich by evil means, even as Esau, the brother of my father, be not jeal- 5 ous; ‘but! wait for the end of the Lord. For if he taketh away (from a man) wealth gotten by evil 6 means He forgiveth him if he repent, but the unrepentant is reserved for eternal punishment. For the poor man, if free from envy he pleaseth the Lord in all things, is blessed beyond all men, because 7 he hath not the travail of vain men. Put away, therefore, jealousy from your souls, and love one another with uprightness of heart. 81 Do ye also therefore tell these things to your children, that they honour {Judah and Levit, for from 2 them shall the Lord raise up salvation to Israel. [For I know that at the last your children shall depart from Him, and shall walk in all wickedness, and affliction and corruption before the Lord.] 3 And when he had rested for a little while, he said again; My children, obey your father, and bury 4, 5 me near to my fathers. And he drew up his feet, and fell asleep in peace. And after five years they carried him up to Hebron, and laid him with his fathers. THE TESTAMENT OF ASHER, THE TENTH SON OF JACOB AND ZILPAH. 1: The copy of the Testament of Asher, what things he spake to his sons in the hundred and 2 twenty-fifth year of his life. ‘For' while he was still in health, he said to them: Hearken, ye chil- dren of Asher, to your father, and I will declare to you all that is upright in the sight of the Lord. THE TESTAMENT OF ASHER 1. 1—2. 8 3 Two ways hath God given to the sons of men, and two inclinations, ‘and two kinds of action, and 4 two modes (of action)', and ‘two! issues. Therefore all things are by twos, one over against the 5 other. ‘For' there are two ways of good and evil, and {with these are the two inclinations in our 6 breasts discriminating them}. Therefore if the soul take pleasure in the good (inclination), all its 7 actions are in righteousness ; and if it sin it straightway repenteth. For, having its thoughts set upon righteousness, and casting away wickedness, it straightway overthroweth the evil, and uprooteth 8the sin. But if it incline to the evil inclination, all its actions are in wickedness, and it driveth away the good, and cleaveth to the evil, and is ruled by Beliar; even though it work what is good, 9 he perverteth it to evil. For whenever it beginneth to do good, he forceth the issue of the action into evil for him, seeing that the treasure of the inclination is filled with an evil spirit. t A person then may with words help the good for the sake of the evil, yet the issue of the action 2 leadeth to mischief. There is a man who showeth no compassion upon him who serveth his turn in 3 evil ; and this thing hath two aspects, but the whole is evil. And there is a man that loveth him that worketh evil, because he would prefer ‘even' to die in evil for his sake ; and concerning this it is clear that it hath two aspects, but the whole is an evil work. a BS! 4 Though indeed he have love, yet is he wicked Though indeed there is love, yet it is wicked 4 who concealeth what is evil for the sake of the as it concealeth what is evil; now this thing good namef, but the end of the action tendeth seemeth good in name, but the end of the action unto evil. tendeth unto evil. 5 Another stealeth, doeth unjustly, plundereth, defraudeth, and withal pitieth the poor: this ‘too! 6 hath a twofold aspect, but the whole is evil. He who defraudeth his neighbour provoketh God, and sweareth falsely against the Most High, and yet pitieth the poor: the Lord who commandeth the 7 law he setteth at nought and provoketh, and yet he refresheth the poor. He ‘defileth the soul, and' maketh gay the body; he killeth many, and pitieth a few: this, too, hath a twofold aspect, but the 8 whole is evil. Another committeth adultery and fornication, and abstaineth from meats, and when he fasteth he doeth evil, and by the power of his wealth overwhelmeth many ; and notwithstanding his excessive wickedness he doeth 'the' commandments: this, too, hath a twofold aspect, but the 9 whoie is evil. Such men are hares; clean,—like those that divide the hoof, but in very deed are 10 unclean. For God in the tables of the commandments hath thus declared. 1 But do not ye, my children, wear two faces like unto them, of goodness and of wickedness; but 2 cleave unto goodness only, for God hath his habitation therein, and men desire it. But from wicked- ness flee away, destroying the (evil) inclination by your good works ; for they that are double-faced serve not God, but their own lusts, so that they may please Beliar and men like unto themselves. 4: For good men, even they that are of single face, though they be thought by them that are double- 2 faced to sin, are just before God. For many in killing the wicked do two works, of good and evil; 3 but the whole is good, because he hath uprooted and destroyed that which is evil. One man hateth the merciful and unjust man, and the man who committeth adultery and fasteth : this, too, hath a two- fold aspect, but the 'whole' work is good, because he followeth the Lord’s example, in that he 4 accepteth not the seeming good as the genuine good. Another desireth not to see a good day with them that riot, lest he defile his body and pollute his soul : this, too, is double-faced, but the whole is 5 good. For such men are like to stags and to hinds, because in the manner of wild animals they seem to be unclean, but they are altogether clean ; because ‘they walk’ in zeal for the Lord and abstain from what God also hateth and forbiddeth by His commandments, warding off the evil from the good, Bi Ye see, my children, how that there are two ‘in all things’, one against the other, and the one is hidden by the other: ‘in wealth (is hidden) covetousness, in conviviality drunkenness, in laughter 2 grief, in wedlock profligacy’. Death succeedeth to life, "dishonour to glory’, night to day, and darkness to light; [and all things are under the day, just things under life, “unjust things under 3 death';] wherefore also eternal life tawaiteth death. Nor may it be said that truth is a lie, nor 4 right wrong ; for all truth is under the light, ‘even as all things are under God’. All these things, therefore, I proved in my life, and I wandered not from the truth of the Lord, and I searched out the commandments of the Most High, walking according to all my strength with singleness of face unto that which is good.
61.  Take heed, therefore, ye also, my children, to the commandments of the Lord, following the truth 2 with singleness of face. For they that are double-faced are guilty of a twofold sin ; ‘for they both do the evil thing and they have pleasure in them that do it’, following the example of the spirits of 3 deceit, and striving against mankind. Do ye, ‘therefore, my children,'keep the law of the Lord, and give not heed unto evil as unto good ; but look unto the thing that is really good, and keep it in all EE el THE TESTAMENT OF ASHER 2. 9—8. 2 4 commandments of the Lord, having your conversation therein, and resting therein. For the latter ends of men do show their righteousness (or unrighteousness), when they meet the angels of the 5 Lord and of Satan. For when the soul departs troubled, it is tormented by the evil spirit which also it served in lusts and evil works. a BAS! 6 But if he is peaceful with joy he meeteth the But if peacefully ‘with joy', he hath met the 6 angel of peace, and he leadeth him into eternal angel of peace, he ¢comforteth him with life. life. -
71.  Become not, my children, as Sodom, which sinned against the angels of the Lord, and perished for 2ever. For I know that ye shall sin, and be delivered into the hands of your enemies ; ‘and’ your land shall be made desolate, and your holy places destroyed, and ye shall be scattered unto the four 3 corners of the earth. And ye shall be set at nought in the dispersion vanishing away as water. Until the Most High shall visit the earth, coming Himself [as man, with men eating and drinking], and break- ing the head of the dragon in the water. He shall save Israel and all the Gentiles [God speaking in 4 the person of man]. [Therefore do ‘ye also, my children’, tell these things to your children, that they 5 disobey Him not. For I have known that ye shall assuredly be disobedient, and assuredly act ungodly, not giving heed to the law of God, but to the commandments of men, being corrupted 6 through wickedness. And therefore shall ye be scattered as Gad and Dan my brethren, and ye shall 7 know not your lands, tribe, and tongue. But the Lord will gather you together in faith through His tender mercy, ‘and’ for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.]’ 8: And when he had said these things unto them, he commanded them, saying: Bury me in Hebron. 2 And he fell asleep and died at a good old age. And his sons did as he had commanded them, and they carried him up to Hebron, and buried him with his fathers. 4-6. A man’s latter end reveals his true character. The idea that good or evil angels meet the soul at death as it leaves the body occurs here first in Jewish literature. Cf. Kethuboth, 1042, and see my Comm. 168, 169. 1. wu 21,2 THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH, THE ELEVENTH SON OF JACOB AND RACHEL. The copy of the Testament of Joseph. When he was about to die he called his sons and his brethren together, and said to them :— My brethren and my children, Hearken to Joseph the beloved of Israel ; Give ear, my sons, unto your father. I have seen in my life envy and death, Yet I went not astray, "but persevered’ in the truth of the Lord. These my brethren hated me, but the Lord loved me: They wished to slay me, but the God of my fathers guarded me: They let me down into a pit, and the Most High brought me up again. I was sold into slavery, and the Lord of all made me free: I was taken into captivity, and His strong hand succoured me. I was beset with hunger, and the Lord Himself nourished me. I was alone, and God comforted me: I was sick, and the Lord visited me: I was in prison, and my God showed favour unto me; In bonds, and He released me; Slandered, and He pleaded my cause ; Bitterly spoken against by the Egyptians, and He delivered me; Envied by my fellow-slaves, and He exalted me. And this chief captain of Pharaoh entrusted to me his house. And I struggled against a shame- less woman, urging me to transgress with her; but the God of Israel my father delivered me from the burning flame. I was cast into prison, I was beaten, "I was mocked'; but the Lord granted me to find mercy in the sight of the keeper of the prison. For the Lord doth not forsake them that fear Him, Neither in darkness, nor in bonds, nor in tribulations, nor in necessities. For God is not put to shame as a man, Nor as the son of man is he afraid, Nor as one that is earth-born is He [weak or] affrighted. BAS! But in all places He is at hand, a But in all those things doth He give protection, And in divers ways doth He comfort, (Though) for a little space He departeth to try the inclination of the soul. TITLE a: + ‘concerning sobriety’ be fS': + ‘concerning envy’ APhefg, I—X. 4. In this Testament there appear to be two independent writings, i—x. 4 and x. 5—xviii. Yet in historical sequence x. 5—xvi should be read after i. In i—x. 4 the theme is chastity ; in x. 5—xviii it is brotherly love. In i—x. 4 Potiphar is called ‘the Egyptian man’ (iv. 5), but Pentephri(s) in x. 5—xviii (e. g. xii. 1; xiii. 1; xn. 6). In i—x. 4 his wife is called the Egyptian woman (and B-d wrongly in xvi. 1), while in x. 5—xviii she is known as the Memphian woman (so, too, the conflate reading in ili. 6). We find also recurring phrases like ‘Joseph the son of a mighty man’ (x. 6) and ‘I held my peace lest 1 should put to shame’ (x. 6, &c.) in the later section. Joseph also transgresses the Testament’s rule of truthfulness in it. I. 2. my sons .. . father: ‘the words of my mouth’ a. THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH 1. 1—5. 2 7 In ten temptations He showed me approved, And in all of them I endured ; For endurance is a mighty charm, And patience giveth many good things. 31 How often did the Egyptian woman threaten me with death! How often did she give me over to punishment, and then call me back and threaten me, and when I was unwilling to company with 2 her, she said to me: Thou shalt be lord of me, and all that is in my house, if thou wilt give thyself 3 unto me, and thou shalt be as our master. But I remembered the words of my father, and going 4 into my chamber, I ‘wept and' prayed unto the Lord. And I fasted in those seven years, and I appeared to the Egyptians as one living delicately, for they that fast for God’s sake receive beauty of face. 5 And if my lord were away from home, I drank no wine; nor for three days did I take my food, but 6 I gave it to the poor and sick. And I sought the Lord early, and I wept for the Egyptian woman of Memphis, for very unceasingly did she trouble me, for also at night she came to me under pretence of visiting me. a BAS! 7 And because she had no male child she pre- And because she had no male child she pre- tended to regard me as a son. tended to regard me as a son, and so I prayed to the Lord, and she bare a male child. 8 And for a time she embraced me as a son, and I knew it not; }but later, she sought to draw me g into fornication. And when I perceived it I sorrowed unto death; and when she had gone out, I came to myself, and lamented for her many days, because I recognized her guile and her deceit. to And I declared unto her the words of the Most High, if haply she would turn from her evil lust. 4, Often, therefore, did she flatter me with words as a holy man, and guilefully in her talk praise my 2 Chastity before her husband, while desiring to ensnare me when we were alone. ‘For’ she lauded me openly as chaste, and in secret she said unto me: Fear not my husband; for he is persuaded con- 3 cerning thy chastity: for even should one tell him concerning us, he would not believe. Owing to all these things I lay upon the ground, and besought God that the Lord would deliver me from her 4 deceit. And when she had prevailed nothing.'thereby', she came ‘again’ to me under the plea of 5 instruction, that she might learn the word of God. And she said unto me: If thou willest that I should leave my idols, lie with me, and I will persuade my husband to depart from his idols, and 6 we will walk in the law of thy Lord. And I said unto her: The Lord willeth not that those who reverence Him should be in uncleanness, nor doth He take pleasure in them that commit adultery, 7 ‘but in those that approach Him with a pure heart and undefiled lips’. But she held her peace, 8 longing to accomplish her evil desire. And I gave myself yet more to fasting and prayer, that the Lord might deliver me from her. 1 ‘And' again, at another time she said unto me: If thou wilt not commit adultery, I will kill my 2 husband by poison; and take thee to be my husband. I therefore, when I heard this, rent my garments, and said unto her: Woman, reverence God, and do not this evil deed, lest thou be 3 destroyed ; for know indeed that I will declare this thy device unto all men. She therefore, being 4 afraid, besought that I would not declare this device. And she departed soothing me with gifts, and sending to me every delight of the sons of men. 2 And ‘afterwards! she sent me food mingled with enchantments. And when the eunuch who brought it came, I looked up and beheld a terrible man giving me with the dish a sword, and 3 I perceived that (her) scheme was to beguile me. And ‘when he had gone out! I wept, nor did 4 I taste that or any other of her food. So then after one day she came to me and observed the food, 5 and said unto me: Why is it that thou hast not eaten of the food? And I said unto her: It is because thou hast filled it with ‘deadly’ enchantments ; and how saidst thou: I come not near to 6 idols, but to the Lord ‘alone’. Now therefore know that the God of my father hath revealed unto me by His angel thy wickedness, and I have kept it to convict thee, if haply thou mayst see and repent. a BAS 7 But that thou mayst learn that the wickedness But that thou mayst learn that the wickedness 7 of the ungodly hath no power over them that '| of the ungodly hath no power over them that worship God with chastity, behold I will take of worship God in chastity, I took of it and ate it and eat before thee. And having so said, I before her, saying: The God of my fathers and prayed thus: The God of my fathers and the the angel of Abraham shall be with me. angel of Abraham, be with me; and ate. 8 And ‘when she saw this! she fell upon her face at my feet, weeping; and I raised her up and admonished her. And she promised to do this iniquity no more. a BAS} t But her heart was still set upon evil, and she But (d A ‘nevertheless’) her heart was still set looked around how to ensnare me, and sighing upon me with a view to lewdness, and sighing deeply she became downcast, though she was she became downcast. not sick. 2 And when her husband saw her, he said unto her: Why is thy countenance fallen? And she said ‘unto him': I havea pain at my heart, and the groanings of my spirit oppress me; and so 3 he comforted her who was not sick. Then, accordingly seizing an opportunity, she rushed unto me while her husband was yet without, and said unto me: I will hang myself, or cast myself over a cliff, 4 if thou wilt not lie with me. And when I saw the spirit of Beliar was troubling her, I prayed unto 5 the Lord, and said unto her: Why, ‘wretched woman’, art thou troubled and disturbed, blinded through sins? Remember that if thou kill thyself, Asteho, the concubine of thy husband, thy rival, 6 will beat thy children, and thou wilt destroy thy memorial from off the earth. And she said unto me: Lo, then thou lovest me; let this suffice me: only strive for my life ‘'and’my children’, and 7 I expect that I shall enjoy my desire ‘also’. But she knew not that because of my lord I spake ——_ γi ΣN THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH 5. 2—10. 2 8 thus, and not because of her. For if a man hath fallen before the passion of a wicked desire and become enslaved by it, even as she, whatever good thing he may hear with regard to that passion, he receiveth it with a view to his wicked desire. 8: I declare, therefore, unto you, my children, that it was about the sixth hour when she departed from me ; and I knelt before the Lord all day, and all the night ; and about dawn I rose up, weeping 2 the while and praying for a release from her. At last, then, she laid hold of my garments, forcibly dragging me to have connexion with her. aA 3 When, ‘therefore’, I saw that in her madness she was holding fast to my garment, I left it behind, and fled away naked. a 4 And holding fast to the garment she falsely accused me, and when her husband came he cast me into prison in his house; and on the morrow he scourged me and sent me into Pharaoh’s prison. a 5 And when I was in bonds, the Egyptian woman was oppressed with grief, and she came and heard how I gave thanks unto the Lord and sang praises in the abode of darkness, and with glad voice rejoiced, glorifying my God that I was delivered from the lustful desire of the Egyptian woman. 9: BS When, therefore, I saw that in her madness she was holding fast by force to my garment, I fled away naked. B-d AS! And she falsely accused me to her husband, 4 and the Egyptian cast me into prison in his house, and on the morrow he scourged me and sent me into Pharaoh’s prison. B-d AS! And when I was in fetters, the Egyptian was 5 sick with grief, and she heard how I sang praises unto the Lord in the house of darkness, and with glad voice rejoicing, glorified God only that I was delivered from the lustful desire of the Egyptian woman. And often hath she sent unto me saying: Consent to ‘fulfil my desire’, and I will release thee 2 from thy bonds, ‘and I will free thee from the darkness. And not even in thought did I incline unto her. For God loveth him who in a den of wickedness combines fasting with chastity, rather than 3 the man who in kings’ chambers combines luxury with licence. And if a man liveth in chastity, and desireth also glory, and the Most High knoweth that it is expedient for him, He bestoweth this 4 also upon me. How often’, though she were sick, did she come down ‘to me’ at unlooked for times, 5 and listened to my voice as I prayed! And when I heard her groanings I held my peace. ‘For’ when I was in her house she was wont to bare her arms, and breasts, and legs, ‘that I might lie with her ; for she was! very beautiful, "splendidly adorned" in order to beguile me. And the Lord guarded me from her devices. 1,2 Ye see, therefore, my children, how great things patience worketh, and prayer with fasting. So ye too, ‘if ye follow after chastity and purity with patience and prayer, with fasting in humility of 3 heart, the Lord will dwell among you, because He loveth chastity. And wheresoever the Most High dwelleth, even though envy, or slavery, or slander befalleth (a man), the Lord who dwelleth in him, for the sake of his chastity not only’ delivereth him from evil, ‘but also exalteth him even as me. 5 For in every way the man’ is lifted up, whether in deed, or in word, or in thought. My brethren knew how my father loved me, and yet I did not exalt myself ‘in my mind’: although I was a child, 6 ‘I had the fear of God in my heart'; for I knew that all things would pass away. And I did not raise myself (against them) with evil intent, but I honoured my brethren; and out of respect for them, even when I was being sold, I refrained from telling the Ishmaelites that I was a son of Jacob, a great man and a mighty. 1 Do ye also, my children, "have the fear of God in all your works before your eyes, and’ honour 2 your brethren. For every one who doeth the law of the Lord shall be loved by Him. And when I came to the Indocolpitae with the Ishmaelites, they asked me, saying: Art thou a slave? And 3 I said that I was a home-born slave, that I might not put my brethren to shame. And the eldest of them said unto me: Thou art not a slave, for even thy appearance doth make it manifest. But 4 1 said that I was ‘their’ slave. Now when we came into Egypt they strove concerning me, which of 5 them should buy me and take me. Therefore it seemed good to all that I should remain in Egypt 6 with the merchant of their trade, until they should return bringing merchandise. And the Lord 7 gave me favour in the eyes of the merchant, and he entrusted unto me his house. And God blessed 8 him by my means, and increased him in gold and silver "and in household servants'. And I was with him three months and five days. 1 And about that time the Memphian woman, the wife of Pentephri, came down ‘in a chariot’, "with 2 great pomp, because she had heard from her eunuchs concerning me’. And she told her husband that the merchant had become rich by means of a young Hebrew, and they say that he had assuredly 3 been stolen out of the land of Canaan. Now, therefore, render justice unto him, and take away the youth to thy house; so shall the God of the Hebrews bless thee, for grace from heaven is upon him. 1 And Pentephris was persuaded by her words, and commanded the merchant to be brought, and said unto him: What is this that I hear ‘concerning thee’, that thou stealest persons out of the land 2 of Canaan, and sellest them for slaves? But the merchant fell at his feet, and besought him, saying: 3 I beseech thee, my lord, I know not what thou sayest. And Pentephris said unto him: Whence, then, THE TESTAMENT OF JOSEPH 10. 2—16. 3 is the Hebrew slave? And he said: The Ishmaelites entrusted him unto me until they should return. 4 But he believed him not, but commanded him to be stripped and beaten. And when he persisted 5 in this statement, Pentephris said: Let the youth be brought. And when I was brought in, I did 6 obeisance to Pentephris (for he was third in rank of the officers of Pharaoh). And he took me apart 7 from him, and said unto me: Art thou a slave or free? And I said: A slave. And he said: 8 Whose? And I said: The Ishmaelites’s And he said: How didst thou become their slave? And
91.  said: They bought me out of the land of Canaan. And he said unto me: ‘Truly'thou liest ; and "straightway' he commanded me to be stripped and beaten. 14: Now the Memphian woman was looking through a window ‘at me while I was being beaten, for her house was near, and she sent unto him saying': Thy judgement is unjust; for thou dost punish 2 ἃ ‘free’ man who hath been stolen, as though he were a transgressor. And when I made no change in my statement, ‘though I was beaten’, he ordered me to be imprisoned, until, he said, the owners 3 of the boy should come. And the woman said unto her husband: Wherefore dost thou detain the 4 captive and well-born lad in bonds, who ought rather to be set at liberty,and be waited upon? For 5 she wished to see me out of a desire ‘of sin’, but I was ignorant concerning all these things. And he said to her: It is not the custom of the Egyptians to take that which belongeth to others before 6 proof is given. This, therefore, he said concerning the merchant; but as for the lad, he must be imprisoned. 151 Now after four and twenty days came the Ishmaelites ; for they had heard that Jacob ‘my father! 2 was mourning ‘much' concerning me. And they came and said unto me: How is it that thou saidst that thou wast a slave? and lo, we have learnt that thou art the son of a mighty man in the land of 3 Canaan, and thy father ‘still’ mourneth for thee in sackcloth ‘and ashes'. ‘When I heard this my bowels were dissolved and my heart melted’, and I desired greatly to weep, but I restrained myself, that I should not put my brethren to shame. ‘And I said unto them, I know not, I am a slave’. 4, 5 Then, ‘therefore’, they took counsel to sell me, that I should not be found in their hands. For they feared my father, lest he [should come and] execute upon them a grievous vengeance. For they had 6 heard that he was mighty with God and with men. Then said the merchant unto them: Release 7 me from the judgement of Pentiphri. And they came and requested me, saying: ‘Say! that thou wast bought by us with money, and he will set us free. 16: νον the Memphian woman said to her husband: Buy the youth ; for I hear, said she, that they are selling him. OE a a ΘἝΩMΩ ς BAS! 2 And straightway she sent a eunuch to the And she sent a eunuch to the Ishmaelites and 2 3 Ishmaelites, and asked them to sell me. But asked them tosell me. The chief captain, there- is a: ‘hast thou’ b-A 5. / ς BAS! since the eunuch would not agree to buy me (at fore, called the Ishmaelites and asked them to their price) he returned, having made trial of sell me. ‘And since he did not agree (to their 3 them, and he made known to his mistress that price) he departed’. But the eunuch, ‘when he they asked a large price for their slave. had made trial of them’, made known to his mistress that they asked a large price ‘for their slave’. 4 ‘And she sent another eunuch’, saying: Even though they demand two minas, ‘give them", do not spare ‘the gold'; only buy the boy, and bring him to me. δ B-d AS! 5 The eunuch therefore went and gave them And he gave them eighty pieces of gold for 5 eighty pieces of gold, andt he received met; me, and told the Egyptian woman that a but to the Egyptian woman he said: I have hundred pieces had been given. given a hundred. 6 And though I knew (this) I held my peace, lest the eunuch should be put to shame. ςb 51 ' 19: And hear ye, my children, also the vision 2 which I saw. There were twelve harts feeding: and the nine were (first) dispersed’ over all the earth, and likewise also the three. ey 8 And I saw that [from Judah was born] a tvirgin [wearing a linen garment, and from her] was born a lamb, [without spot]; and on his left hand there was as it were a lion; and all the beasts rushed against him, and the lamb over- came them, and destroyed them and trod them 9 under foot. And because of him the angels and to men rejoiced, and all the land. And these things shall come to pass in their season, in the last Ἢ —_— XIX. Here the Armenian version comes to our aid. cBS! A 11 days. Do ye therefore, my children, observe do ye, my children, honour Levi and Judah, for the commandments of the Lord, and honour from them shall arise the salvation of Israel. Levi and Judah ; for from them shall arise "unto you’ [the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world] one who saveth [all the Gentiles and Israel. 12 For His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, For my kingdom which is among you shall 12 s which shall not pass away; but my kingdom come to an end as a watcher’s hammock, which among you shall come to an end as a watcher’s will not appear after the summer. . hammock, which after the summer disappeareth. 20:1 ‘For'I know that after my death the Egyptians will afflict you, but God will avenge you, and will 2 bring you into that which He promised to your fathers. But ye shall carry up my bones with you ; for when my bones are being taken up thither, the Lord shall be with you in light, and Beliar shall be in darkness with the Egyptians’. cAb*edg B si 3 And carry ye up Asenath your mother ‘to the And carry ye up Zilpah your mother, and 3 Hippodrome’, and near Rachel your mother nigh to Bilhah by the Hippodrome lay her near bury her. Rachel. 4,5 And when he had said these things he stretched out his feet, and died at a good old age. And all Israel mourned for him, and all Egypt, with a great mourning. Ὁ 8:5" 6 And when the children of Israel went out of For he felt even for the Egyptians as though 6 Egypt, they took with them the bones of Joseph, a member (of their nation), and showed them and they buried him in Hebron with his fathers, kindness, aiding them in every work, and counsel, and the years of his life were one hundred and and matter. ten years. THE TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN, THE TWELFTH SON OF JACOB AND RACHEL. THE TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN 1. 1—3. 6 21 And when I went into Egypt, to +Joseph, and my brother recognized me, he said} unto me: 2 What did they tell my father when they sold me? And I said ‘unto him’, They dabbled thy coat with blood and sent it, and said: Know whether this be thy son’s coat. ς 383 And he said unto me: Even so, brother, when they had stripped me of my coat they gave me to the Ishmaelites, and they gave me a loin cloth, and scourged me, and bade me run. 4 And as for one of them that had beaten me with a rod, alion met 5 him and slew him. And so his associates were affrighted. 31 BS? 7 not impute to them as sin ‘whatever evil they had done unto him'. And thus Jacob cried out: My good child, thou hast prevailed over the bowels of thy father Jacob. And he embraced him, and kissed him for two hours, saying : cps" A 8 In thee shall be fulfilled the prophecy of heaven In thee shall be fulfilled the prophecy of 8 [concerning the Lamb of God, and Saviour of the heaven, which says that the blameless one shall world], and that a blameless one shall be be defiled for lawless men, the sinless one shall delivered up for lawless men,and a sinlessone shall die for ungodly men. PM. die for ungodly men [in the blood of the cove- nant, for the salvation of the Gentiles and of Israel, and shall destroy Beliar and his servants]. 4: See ye, therefore, my children, the end of the good man? Be followers of his ‘compassion, there- 2 fore, with a good mind’, that ‘ye also' may wear crowns of glory. For the good man hath not 3 a tdark eye ; for he showeth mercy to all men, even though they be sinners. ‘And though they devise with evil intent concerning him, by doing good he overcometh evil, being shielded by God’; 4 and he loveth the righteous as his own soul. If any one is glorified, he envieth him not ; if any one is enriched, he is not jealous; if any one is valiant, he praiseth him; the virtuous man he laudeth; ‘on the poor man he hath mercy ; on the weak he hath compassion ;_ unto God he singeth praises’. cA B-a S} 5 And him that hath the grace of a good spirit As for him who hath the fear of God, he pro- 5 he loveth as his own soul. tecteth him as with a shield; him that loveth God he helpeth ; him that rejecteth the Most High he admonisheth and turneth back; and him that hath the grace of a good spirit he loveth as his own soul. δ. If, therefore, ye also' have a "good mind’, then will both wicked men be at peace with you, and the profligate will reverence you and turn unto good; and the covetous will not only cease from 2 their inordinate desire, but even give the objects of their covetousness to them that are afflicted. If 3 ye do well, even the unclean spirits will flee from you'; and the beasts will dread you. ‘For where there is reverence for good works and light in the mind, even darkness fleeth away from him." 4 ‘For! if any one does violence to a holy man, he repenteth; for ‘the holy man' is merciful to his reviler, and holdeth his peace. ς b- 51 δ. And if any one betrayeth a righteous man, the And if any one betrayeth a righteous soul, and 5 righteous man prayeth : though for a little he be the righteous man, though he prayeth, be hum- humbled, yet not long after he appeareth far bled for a little, yet not long after he appeareth more glorious, as was Joseph my brother. more glorious, even as was Joseph my brother. assincgA: "Ὁb-p 5" done unto c: ‘devised regarding’ bὶ 55. 6: 7: THE TESTAMENT OF BENJAMIN 8. 6—%. 4 2 angel of peace guideth his soul. 4 the Lord is his portion. The inclination of the good man is not in the power of the deceit of the spirit of Beliar, for the ‘And’ he gazeth not ‘passionately’ upon corruptible things, nor 3 gathereth together riches ‘through a desire of pleasure’, He delighteth not in pleasure, '[he grieveth not his neighbour], he sateth not himself with luxuries, he erreth not in the uplifting of the eyes’, for The good inclination receiveth not glory ‘nor dishonour' from men, and it knoweth not any guile, or lie, or fighting or reviling ; for the Lord dwelleth in him and lighteth up his 5 soul, and he rejoiceth towards all men alway. The good mind hath not two tongues, of blessing and of cursing, of contumely and ‘of honour’, of sorrow and of joy, of quietness and of confusion, of hypocrisy and of truth, [of poverty and of wealth]; but it hath one ‘disposition’, uncorrupt and pure, concerning all 6 men. It hath no double sight, nor double hearing ; for in everything which he doeth, ‘or speaketh, or 7 seeth, he knoweth that the Lord looketh on his soul. And he cleanseth his mind that he may not be condemned by men as well as' by God. And in like manner the works of Beliar are twofold, and there is no singleness in them. cBS} Therefore, my children, I tell you, flee the A Flee, my children, malice [and fornication] ; xa malice of Beliar; for he giveth a sword to them for it giveth a sword to them that obey it. that obey him. cbg 2 And the sword is the mother of seven evils. First the mind conceiveth through Beliar,} and first there is bloodshed ; second- ly ruin; thirdly, tribulation ; fourthly, exile; fifthly, dearth; sixthly, panic; seventhly, de- B-b gS? 2. And the sword is the mother of seven evils. First the mind conceiveth through Beliar: and sometimes it brings forth first, bloodshed ; secondly, ruin ; third- ly, tribulation ; fourthly, capti- vity; fifthly, dearth; sixthly. A And the sword is the mother 2 of seven evils, and it receiveth (them) through Beliar. And first there is bloodshed (&c. as in.c.p'S}): struction. panic ; seventhly, destruction. 3 Therefore was Cain also delivered over to seven vengeances by God, for in every hundred years the Lord brought one plague upon him. c BA 4 And when he was two hundred years old he When he was two hundred years old he began 4 began to suffer, and in the nine-hundredth year ! to suffer, and in his nine-hundredth year he was VI. 1. inclination. See T. A. i. 3 (note). angel of peace. See T. D. vi. 5 (note); T. A. vi. 6. ς BA he was destroyed. For on account of Abel, his destroyed [at the Flood], on account of Abel, his brother, with all the evils was he judged, but righteous brother. With the seven evils, there- Lamech with seventy times seven. fore, was Cain judged, but Lamech with seventy times ‘seven!. 5 Because for ever those who are like Cain ‘in envy and hatred of brethren’, shall be punished ‘with the same judgement’. cBS' A 81 And do ye, my children, flee evil-doing, envy, Do ye, therefore, my children, flee evil-doing and hatred of brethren, and cleave to goodness and cleave to goodness. For he that hath it 2 2and love. He that hath a pure mind in love, looketh not on a woman with a view to fornica- looketh not after a woman with a view to fornica- tion, and he beholdeth no defilement ; for there tion; for he hath no defilement in his heart, resteth upon him a holy spirit. because the Spirit of God resteth upon him. 3 For ‘as' the sun is not defiled by shining on dung and mire, ‘but rather drieth up both and driveth away the evil smell’; so also the pure mind, though encompassed by the defilements of earth, rather cleanseth (them) and is not itself defiled. 9: And I believe that there will be also evil-doings among you, from the words of Enoch the right- eous : that ye shall commit fornication with the fornication of Sodom, and shall perish, all save a few, and shall renew wanton deeds with women ; and the kingdom of the Lord shall not be among you, for straightway He shall take it away. Cpt A 2 Nevertheless the temple of God shall be in But in your portion shall be His inheritance. 2 your portion, and the last (temple) shall be more And on account of the temple of the Lord, Jacob glorious than the first. And the twelve tribes exalted me that I should be glorified through it. shall be gathered together there, and all the And the twelve tribes shall be gathered there and Gentiles, until the Most High shall send forth all the Gentiles. [And the Lord shall be treated 3 His salvation in the visitation of an tfonly- with outrage and set at nought. And He will 5 3 begotten prophet. [And He shall enter into the depart from earth to heaven: for I knew how He [first] temple, and there shall the Lord be treated is on earth and how in heaven, or what is His with outrage, and He shall be lifted up upon measure and place and way.] 4atree. And the veil of the temple shall be rent, and the Spirit of God shall pass on to the Gen- "» [at the Flood], impossible on any chronology ; even the Samaritan (1307 A. M.). With the seven evils adgA: ‘in the 700 years’ bef. Onkelos and Ps. Jon. on Gen. iv. 15 (contrast on v. 24) say he was punished for seven generations. See my Commentary, p. 208. VIII. 1-2. A seems more original, though shorter. eb 5: 5 tiles as fire poured forth. And He shall ascend from Hades and shall pass from earth into heaven. And I know how lowly He shall be upon earth, and how glorious in heaven.] figure exactly as he was. I am dying. 2 tῷ 3 Do ye, therefore, truth each one to his neigh- bour, and keep the law of the Lord and His commandments. 6 shall reveai His salvation to all Gentiles. ob5: 7 Thenshall we also rise,each one over our tribe, worshipping the King of heaven, [who appeared upon earth in the form of a man in humility. And as many as believe on Him on the earth 8 shall rejoice with Him]. Then also all men shall rise, some unto glory and some unto shame. And the Lord shall judge Israel first, for their unrighteousness ; [for when He appeared as God in the flesh to deliver them they believed Him gnot]. And then shall He judge all the Gentiles, [as many as believed Him not when He appeared to uponearth]. And He shall convict Israel through the chosen ones of the Gentiles, even as He reproved Esau through the Midianites, who tdeceived their brethren, [so that they fell into fornication, and idolatry ; and they were alienated from God], becoming therefore children in the portion of them that fear the Lord. rm IRfye' therefore, my children’, walk in holiness ‘according to the commandments of the Lord’, ye shall again dwell securely with me, and all Israel shall be gathered unto the Lord. Cc
111.  And I shall no longer be called a ravening wolf on account of your ravages, but [a worker of the Lord distributing food to them that work what is good. 2 And there shall arise in the latter days] one beloved of the Lord, [of the tribe of Judah and Levi], a doer of His good pleasure in his mouth, [with BS APPENDIX I TRANSLATION OF A LATE HEBREW TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI, WHICH CONTAINS FRAGMENTS OF THE ORIGINAL TESTAMENT These fragments are in italics, and their parallels in the original Testament given in the margin. THIS IS THE TESTAMENT OF NAPHTALI, SON OF JACOB. 1: The Testament of Naphtali, Naphtali the son of Jacob, *whom Bilhah, the handmaid of Rachel, had borne him! [the wrestlings of God|.2_ When Naphtali had grown old, and had come to a good T᾿ Naph. old age, and had completed his years of strength, and fulfilled the duty of the earth-born man, he i. 6 began to command his children, and he said unto them, ‘My children, come and draw near and 2 receive the commands of your father.’ And they answered and said unto him, ‘ Lo, we hearken to - 3 fulfil all that thou commandest us.’ And he said unto them, ‘I do not command you concerning T, Jos. my silver, nor concerning my gold, *nor all my substance* that 1 leave unto you here under the sun, xi. 6 nor do I command you any difficult thing which you may not be able to accomplish, but I speak to 4 you about an easy matter, which you can fulfil.’ And his sons answered and replied a second time, 5 and said, ‘Speak, O father, for we listen.’ He said unto them, ‘I give you no command save in 6 regard to the fear of the Lord: Him shall ye serve, and to Him shall ye cleave.’ They said unto him, ‘ What need hath He of our service?’ He said unto them, ‘It is not that He hath need of any creature, but that all creatures of the world have need of Him. But He hath not created the world for nought, but that His creatures should fear Him, and that none should do to his neighbour 7 what he doth not like for himself.’ They said unto him, ‘Our father! hast thou forsooth seen us 8 departing from thy ways, or from the ways of our fathers, either to the right or to the left?’ He said unto them, ‘ The Lord and I are witnesses that it is even as ye say; but I dread that which is Tὶ Levi to come, lest ye go astray after the gods of strange nations, and walk according to the ordinances of xix. 3 the peoples of the lands, and lest ye joiu the children of Joseph instead of the children of Levi and T. Naph. 9 the children of Fudah. They said unto him, ‘ What dost thou see that thou commandest us in this vii. 2 10 wise?’ He said unto them, ‘ Because I know that one day the children of Joseph will depart from the Lord, the God of their fathers, and cause the children of Israel to sin, and to be banished from the good land into another that is not ours, as we have been exiled through his being a bond-servant in Egypt. 1,2 ‘Further, I will tell you the vision I saw, when I was pasturing the flock. I saw, and lo, my T, Naph. twelve brothers were pasturing with me in the field ; and lo, our father came and said to us, “ My v. 1-3 3 children, run and seize ye, each *before me, what comes to his portion.” We answered and said unto 4 him, “ What shall we seize ? lo, we see nothing but the sun, moon, and the stars.” *He said unto them, “(Take hold) of them.”® When Levi heard it he seized a staff in his hand, and jumped upon 5 the sun and sat and rode thereon. And when Judah saw it, he did likewise ; and he sezzed a staff, 6 and sprang upon 2.6 moon, and rode thereon. So did *all the δ tribes; each rode upon his star and 7 his planet in the heavens ; and Joseph only remained alone upon the earth. Jacob our father said unto him, “ My son, why hast thou not done as thy brothers?” He said unto him, “ My father, what have they’ that are born of woman to do in the heavens, as in the end they must needs stand upon the earth?” 31 ‘Whilst Joseph was speaking, /o, there stood near hima huge dud/ with great wings like the wings Tὶ Naph. 2 of a stork, and his horns were huge \ike the horns of the Reém. And Jacob said to him, “ Get up, v. 6 3 my son Joseph, and ride upon him.” And Joseph got up and mounted upon the bull. And Jacob 4 our father departed from us. For about four hours Joseph gloried in the bull—at times he walked and ran, at times ἀξ flew up with him, till he came near to Judah, and Joseph stretched out the v. 7 3 5 standard he had in his hands and began to smite Judah his brother. Judah said to him, “My 1 only in P. 2 A gloss from Gen. xxx. 8. 8 J; also in A in a corrupt form. 4 For "385 read with T. Naph. v. 2, κatὰ δύναμιν, ND ἜP, The ΠΞ could fall out before the following INS bp, 5 Pj.>A. 6 A. ‘the nine’ PJ. Pye <hevzAs 6 brother, why dost thou smite me?’’ He said unto him, “ Because thou holdest in thy hands twelve 7 staves, and I have only one ; *give me ten,' and there shall be peace.” But Judah refused to give them to him, and Joseph beat him till he had taken from him ten against his will, and only two were 8 left with Judah. Joseph then said to his ten brothers, “ Wherefore run ye after Judah and Levi? 9 Depart from them and follow after me.” When his brothers heard Joseph’s words, they departed from Levi and Judah as one man, to follow Joseph, and there remained with Judah only Benjamin ro, rr and Levi. When Levi beheld this, he descended from the sun full of trouble of spirit. Joseph said
112.  to Benjamin his brother, ‘“ Benjamin, my brother! Art thou not my brother? Come thou also with me.” But Benjamin refused to go with Joseph his brother. And it came to pass when the day drew to an end, lo, there arose a mighty storm, which separated Joseph from his brothers, so that
113.  no two were left together. When I beheld this vision, I related it to Jacob my father, and he said unto me, “ My son, it is only a dream, which will neither ascend nor descend, for it hath not been repeated.” ᾿ Ἷ 41,2 ‘But no long time elapsed, when I saw another vision. Whilst we stood all together with Facob γ᾽ Naph, our father on the shore of the Great Sca, behold a ship came sailing in the middle of the sea yj. 1-3. 3 without a sailor and a man (pilot). Our father said to us,“ Do ye see what I am seeing?” We 4 said unto him, “NY see it.” He said unto us, “ Do what ye see me doing.” Thereupon Jacob our 5 father took off his clothes, and threw himself into the sea, and we all followed him. And the first 6 were Levi and Judah, and they jumped in(to the ship), and Jacob with them. And behold in that 7 ship there was all the goodness of the world. Jacob our father said unto them, “ Look at what is written on the mast; for there is no ship on which the name of the master is not written 8 on the mast.” Then Levi and Judah looked, and saw, and behold there was written, “ This ship 9 belongs to the son of Berachel, and all the good therein.” When Jacob our father heard that, he rejoiced very much, and bowed down, and thanked God. He said, “ Not enough that He has 10 blessed me on earth, He has blessed me on the sea too!” Then he said unto us, “ My children, 11 quit yourselves like men, and whatever each one of you seizes, that shall be his share.” Thereupon 12 Levi sprang to the big mast therein and sat upon it. The second after him, Judah, also leapt 13 to the second mast, which was next to Levi's mast, and he also sat thereon. And the rest of my other brothers took each his oar, and Jacob our father grasped the two rudders to steer the vi. 4.
114.  ship by them. And Joseph was left alone. Our father said unto him, “ My son Joseph, take
115.  thou also thine oar.” But Joseph refused. When my father saw that Joseph refused to take his oar, he said unto him, “Come here, my son, and take one of the rudders which I hold in tό my hands, and steer the ship, whilst thy brothers row with the oars until you reach land.” And he taught each one of us, and said unto us, “Thus ye shall steer the ship, and ye will not be afraid of the waves of the sea, nor of stormy winds when they shall arise against you.” 1,2 ‘And when he had made an end of commanding us, he disappeared from us. And Joseph took both the rudders, one with the right hand and one with the left, and the rest of my brothers were 3 rowing, and the ship sailed on and floated over the waters. And Levi and Judah sat upon the two 4 masts to look out which way the ship was to take. As long as Joseph and Judah were of one mind, and Judah showed to Joseph which was the right way, Joseph directed thither the ship, and? the 5 ship sailed on peaceably without hindrance. And after a while a quarrel arose between Joseph and Judah, and Joseph no longer steered the ship according to the words of his father and the teaching ee ee of Judah ; and the ship went a wrong course, and the waves of the sea dashed it on a rock, so that T. Naph. the ship was broken up. 6: «Then Levi and Judah descended from the masts to escape for their lives, and as for the rest of 2 the brothers, we escaped for our lives to the shore. And behold there came Jacob our father, and 3 found us dispersed, one here, and another there. He said unto us, “ What is the matter with you, 4 my sons? Perhaps you have not steered the ship as it ought, (even) as I commanded you?” And we said unto him, “ By the life of thy servants, we have not departed from anything that thou hast commanded us; but Joseph transgressed against the command; for he did not steer the ship according to thy command, and as he was instructed by Levi and Judah, for he was jealous of them.” 5 And he said unto us, “ Show me the place (of the ship).” And he saw, and behold the tops of the 6 masts were visible, and behold it was floating upon the surface of the water. And my father 7 whistled, and we all gathered round him. And he cast himself into the sea as before, and he 8 repaired the ship. And he reproved Joseph, and said unto him, “ My son, thou shalt not again deceive (nor) be jealous of thy brothers, for they were nearly lost through thee.” t ‘And when I recounted this vision to my father, he smote his hands together and sighed, and his 2, 3 eyes shed tears. And I waited till I was ashamed, but he spake no word to me. So I took the 1 Pj. ‘Come now, give them to me’, A. BASS > APT. 362 , vi. 5. APPENDIX I hand of my father to embrace it and to kiss it, and I said to him, “Oh servant of the Lord! why do 4 thine eyes shed tears?” He said unto me, “My son, because of the repetition of thy vision my heart has sunk within me, and my body is confounded by reason of Joseph my son, for I loved him above you all; and for the wickedness of my son Joseph you will be sent into captivity, and you will 5 be scattered among the nations. For thy first and second visions are both one and the same vision. 6 Therefore I command you not to unite with the sons of Joseph, but only with Levi and Fudah.” ee 81 ‘Further, I tell you my lot shall be in the best of the middle of the earth, and ye shall eat and be 2 satisfied with its delights. I warn you not to kick in your fatness, and not to rebel, and not to (Deut. 3 oppose the command of the Lord, who satisfies you with the good things of His earth. And do not xxxii. forget the Lord your God, the God of your fathers; Who was chosen by our father Abraham when 15.) 4 the nations were divided in the time of Phaleg. For at that time the Lord, blessed be He, came down from His highest heavens, and brought down with Him seventy ministering angels, Michael at their 5 head. He commanded them to teach the seventy families which sprang from the loins of Noah 6 seventy languages. Forthwith the angels descended and did according to the command of their Creator. But the holy language, the Hebrew language, remained only in the house of Shem and Eber, and in the house of Abraham our father, who is one of their descendants. 9:1 ‘And on that day Michael took a message from the Lord, and said to the seventy nations, to each 2 nation separately: “ You know the rebellion you undertook, and the treacherous confederacy into which you entered against the Lord of heaven and earth, and now choose to-day whom you will 3 worship, and who shall be your intercessor in the height of heaven.” Nimrod the wicked answered and said, “For me there is none greater than he who taught me and my people in one hour the 4 language of Kush.” In like manner also answered Put, and Migraim, and Tubal, and Javan, and Mesech, and Tiras; and every nation chose its own angel, and none of them mentioned the name of 5 the Lord, blessed be He. But when Michael said unto Abraham our father, “ Abram, whom dost thou choose, and whom wilt thou worship?” Abram answered, “I choose and select only Him who said, and the world was created; Who formed me in the womb of my mother, body within body ; Who placed in me spirit and soul; Him I choose, and to Him I will cleave, I and my seed, all the days of the world.” 10: ‘Then the Most High dispersed the nations, and apportioned and allotted to every nation its share 2 and lot. And from that time all the nations of the earth separated themselves from the Lord, blessed be He; only the house of Abraham remained with his Creator to worship Him; and after him Isaac 3 and Jacob. Therefore, my sons, I conjure you not to go astray and worship any other god than 4 Him whom your fathers have chosen. For know assuredly that there is none like unto Him, and no other who can do as He or like His works in heaven and on earth, and there is none who can do 5 wonders like unto His mighty deeds. A portion only of His power you can see in the creation of 6 man; how many notable wonders are there not in him? He created him from head to foot; with his ears he hears, and with his eyes he sees, and with his brain he understands, and with his nose he smells, and with his wind-pipe he brings forth his voice, and with his gullet he absorbs food and T. Naph. drink, and with his tongue he speaks, and with his mouth he completes (7); with his hands he does ii. 8 his work, and with his heart he reckons, and with his spleen he laughs, and with his liver he ἐς angry ; and his maw grinds, and with his feet he walks, and zs lungs are for breathing, and by his reins he 7 ἐς counselled. And none of his members changes its function, but every one keeps to its own. It is 8 therefore proper for man to lay to heart all these things, Who hath created him, and Who it is that hath wrought him out of an ill-smelling drop’ in the womb of the woman, and Who it is that bringeth him out into the light of the world, and Who hath given him the sight of eyes and the walking of the feet, and Who causeth him to stand upright, and bringeth him nigh to his Creator and to His so and hath prepared good deeds for him in the place of insight, and hath poured into him a 9 living soul and a pure spirit from Himself. Blessed is the man who does not defile the holy spirit of God which hath been put and breathed into him, and blessed is he who returns it to its Creator as pure as it was on the day when He entrusted it (to him).’ to Thus far are the words of Naphtali, the son of Israel, with which he admonished his sons, *with words sweeter than honey.’ Ϊ 1 The phrase is found also in the Pirke Aboth, iii. 1. 2 Emended. See my Text. APPENDIX II " TRANSLATION OF ARAMAIC AND GREEK FRAGMENTS OF AN ORIGINAL ; SOURCE OF THE TESTAMENT OF LEVI AND THE BOOK OF JUBILEES CAMBRIDGE ARAMAIC FRAGMENT. Col. a. 1 ...from...daughter... that all... to do according to right in... Jacob my father, and saw ... and we said to them... they desire our daughter, and we will be all br(ethren) and companions. 2 Circumcise the foreskin of your flesh and appear (like us), and be sealed like us in the circumcision oἵ... and we will be to y(ou) b(rethren). Col. 3. 3... my brother at every time, ... that were in Shechem ... my brother and Dan showed... in Shechem and what ... (doers) of violence, and Judah showed them...that I and Simeon my brother went to him. . . to Reuben our brother, who . . . Judah (?) before (that he le)ft the sheep... BODLEIAN ARAMAIC FRAGMENT. 4 [Col. a]... peace, and all the desirableness of the first-fruits of the earth, all of it for food and for dominion ; the sword, fighting and battle and slaughter and trouble and rage and murder and famine. 5 Sometimes thou shalt eat, and sometimes thou shalt be hungry; sometimes thou shalt labour, and sometimes thou shalt rest ; sometimes thou shalt sleep, and sometimes the sleep of the eye shall 6 depart. Now behold how he has made thee greater than all, and how I give thee the greatness of 7 everlasting peace. And two weeks passed from me, and I awoke from my sleep. Then I said: The T. Levi one vision ts even as the other. 1 wondered that all the vision should be (given) to him. And TJ hid viii. 18 8 this also in my heart and revealed it to no man. And I went to my father Isaac, and he also in like viii. 19 g manner (blessed) me. Then when Jacob saw (in regard to the twelve) all that should happen to him according to his vow, (and how that) I was first at the head of (the priesthood), and to me of all his sons he had granted the offering, (he gave thanks) to God, and clothed me with the garment of the priesthood, and (δ) pa my hands} and I became a priest to God... , and I offered all his offerings, viii. 10 10 and blessed my father in my life, and blessed all my brethren. Then they all blessed me, and father 11 also blessed me, and I finished [Col. 4] offering his offerings in Bethel. And we went from Bethel, 12 and dodged in the castle of Abraham our father, wth Jsaac our father. And Isaac our father saw us ix. 1, 5 13 all, and he blessed us and rejoiced. And when he knew that I was priest of the Most High God, the Lord of heaven, he began to charge me, and to seach me the rights of the priesthood, and said to ix. 7 14 me, ‘ Levi, take heed to thyself, my son, my son, against all defilement and all sin. Thy rights are 15 greater than those ofall flesh. And now, my son, I will show thee the rule of the truth, and will not hide tό from thee any matter to inform thee in the rights of the priesthood. First, sake heed to thyself, my ix. 9 17 son, against all lust and uncleanness, and against all fornication. And do thou take to thyself a wife ix. 10 of my family, and defile not thy seed with harlots ; for thou art a holy seed, and holy is thy seed 18 like the holy place, for a holy priest art thou called among all the seed of Abraham. Thou art nigh ii. 10 to (God) and nigh to all His holy ones. Now be thou pure in thy flesh from every defilement of all (Jub, xxi men. 16) 19 [Col. c] And when thou risest up to enter the *house of God, wash thyself with water, and then ix. 11 20 Clothe thyself with the garment of the priesthood. And when thou art clothed, again wash thy — 21 hands and thy feet, before thou offer anything on the altar. And when thou takest to offer all that 22 is fitting to offer on the altar, again wash thy hands and thy feet. And offer the split logs, and prove them first (free) from worms, and then offer them; for thus I saw Abraham my father taking 23 heed. Of all the zwe/we kinds of wood, he told me that those of them are fitting to burn on the ix. 12 24 altar whose smoke goes up with a sweet savour. And these are their names :—cedar, and bay, and almond, and fir, and pine,* and mountain ash, and cypress, and fig, and olive, and laurel, and myrtle, (Jub. xxi ' So Jub. xxxii. 3, ‘ His father clothed him in the garments of the priesthood, and filled his hands’ ) * Gk. Frag. and Tὶ Lev, ix. 11 give ‘ the sanctuary ’. ' Text reads ‘ thorns’ (Nm) corrupt for NY = “pine ’. APPENDIX II 25 and aspalathus.! These are they which he told me it was right to offer under the sacrifice on the altar. And when (thou hast placed) of the wood of these (trees) on the altar, and the fire begins to 26 kindle [Col. 4] them, then begin to sprinkle the blood on the sides of the altar. And again wash 27 thy hands and thy feet from the blood, and begin to offer up the limbs, salted. Offer the head first, 28 and upon it spread the fat, and let there not be seen on it the blood of the offering of the bull. And after it the neck, and after the neck its forelegs, and after its forelegs the breast with the side, and after the legs the thigh with the spine of the loin, and after the thigh the hind-legs washed together 29, 30 with the entrails. And let all be salted with salt as is fitting for them according to their need. And after this the meal mingled with oil, and after it all, wine of the drink-offering; and burn on them frankincense ; and let all thy works be in order, and all thy offerings be pleasing (?), for a sweet 31 savour before the Most High God. And whatsoever thou doest, do it in order by measure and weight ; add nothing which is not fitting, and fall not short of the account of what is fitting (?) con- 32 cerning (?) the logs that are fitting to offer for all that goes up upon the altar. For the great bullock a talent of wood by weight; and if the fat alone is offered, six minas ; and if it is a bull-calf? which is offered... . Verses 32°-66 (found only in the Greek). 33 And for the second bull fifty minas ; and for the fat alone, five minas. And for a great bullock 4 (μόσχον) forty minas. And if it be a ram or a he-goat that is offered, for such thirty minas, and for 35 the fat three minas. And if it be a lamb or a kid twenty minas; and for the fat two minas. 36 And if it be a lamb without blemish of the first year, or a kid of the goats, fifteen minas ; 37 and for the fat half a mina. And sprinkle*® salt upon the great bull to salt its flesh, and offer it on the altar. One measure is fitting for the bull. And where there is a superfluity of salt, 38 salt therewith the hide. And for the second bull five-sixths of the measure. And for the 39 bullock (μόσχον) the half of the measure. And for the ram half a measure, and for the he-goat the 40 like measure. And for the lamb and the kid the third of the measure. And the meal that is fitting 41, 42 for them. For the great* bull and for the second bull and the bullock a measure of meal. And for the ram and the he-goat two-thirds of a measure, and for the lamb and for the kid a third part of 43, 44 ἃ measure, and the oil. And the fourth of the measure for the bull mingled with this meal. And for the ram the sixth of the measure, and for the lamb the eighth of the measure tand of the lambf. And as for the wine, pour a libation according to the measure of the oil on the bull and the ram and 45 the kid. Of frankincense six shekels for the bull, and the half thereof for the ram, and the third 46 thereof for the kid, and (let) all the meal (be) mingled. If you offer this not upon (?) the fat, let there be offered upon it a weight of two shekels of frankincense. And the third of the measure is the 47 third of the ephah. And the two parts of the bath and the weight of the mina are of fifty shekels. And of the shekel the fourth part is a weight.° The shekel comes to be about sixteen thermoi 48 (θερμοί) and of one (and the same) weight. And now, my son, hear my words and give ear to my commands, and let not these my words depart from your heart throughout all thy days, because thou 49 art a holy priest of the Lord. And all thy seed shall be priests. And to thy sons so give com- 50 mandment that they do according to this use ® as I have shown thee. For so my father Abraham 51 commanded me to do and to give commandment to my sons. And now, my son, I rejoice that thou hast been chosen to the holy priesthood, and to offer sacrifice to the Lord Most High, as it is 52 befitting to do according to that which is ordained for Him. When thou takest a sacrifice to offer before the Lord of any flesh, according to the reckoning of the wood so receive (it) as I command thee, and the salt and the meal and the wine and the frankincense receive at their hands for all the 53 animals. And always wash’ thy hands and thy feet when thou goest to the altar, and when thou yy), xxi goest forth from the sanctuary let no blood touch thy garments. Thou shalt not {kindle it the same 16. 18 — 55 day}. And thy hands and thy feet wash continually from all flesh. And let no blood be seen upon verses 56 thee, fand every soul,} for the blood is the life (soul) in the flesh. And if thou preparest for thyself ® ; 326 any flesh at home to eat, cover its blood first in the earth before thou eatest of the flesh, and thou 57 shalt not eat of the blood. For so my father Abraham commanded me; for so he found it in the 100. xxi 58 writing of the Book of Noah concerning the blood. And now, as I tell thee, my beloved son, thou; =~ art beloved of thy father and holy unto the Lord Most High, and thou shalt be loved beyond all thy 54 1 The list in the Aramaic practically agrees with that in Jub. xxi.12. The Greek fragment diverges in omitting the almond and the olive, and adding the oyivos. See my text of the Testaments, 249. 2 The Greek has ‘the second bull’ here and in verses 38, 41. * Emended. See my Text. 59 brethren. +By thy seed shall be blessed in the earth, and thy seed shall be enrolled in the book of 60 the memorial of life unto all ages. And thy name and the name of thy seed shall not be blotted 61 out unto all the ages. And now, my son Levi, thy seed shal! be blessed upon the earth unto all the 62 generations of the ages.’ And when four weeks were fulfilled in the years of my life, i.e. ix my T. Lev twenty-eighth year, I took unto myself a wife of the lineage of my father, even Milcah, the daughter of xi. 1 63 Bethuel, the son of Laban, my mother’s brother. And she conceived and bare me a first son, and Xi. 2 I called his name Gershom ; for I said that my seed would be sojourners in the land where I was 64 born. We are sojourners as...in the land... And in the case of the lad I saw in my vision that xi. 3 6; he would be cast out, he and his seed from the chief priesthood .... Thirty years old was I in my 66 life when he was born, and in the tenth month he was born towards sunset. And again she conceived and bare me about the time that is fitting with women, and 7 called his name Kohath.: xi. 6 CAMBRIDGE ARAMAIC FRAGMENT. 66 [Col.c] (And it happen)ed about the ti(me of women that I was with her, and she concei)ved 67 again (and bare me another son, and) I (call)ed his name (Kohath. And I saw) that to him xi. 5 (would b)e the gathering of all (the people, for) his would be the high-(priest)hood (over all Is)rael. 68 In the folur and thirt)teth year of my life was he born, in the fir(st) month, (on the fir)st day of the xi. 4 69 mo(nth), at sunrise. And again I was wi(th her), and she bare me a third son and 7 called his name xi. ἢ Merari, for it was bitter to me concerning him exceedingly, for as soon as he was born he died ; and it was very bitter to me concerning him, because he was like to die,and I besought and prayed for γi him, and it was in all bitterness. Jn the fortieth year of my life she bare, in the third month. And 72 again I was with her, and she conceived and bare me a daughter, and I made her name Fochebed, xi. 8 (for) I sai(d), as she hath borne to me honour, she hath borne for me glory to Israel. Ju the sixty- fourth year of my life she bare, in the first day of the seventh month, after that [Col. 4.7 we entered 73 Egypt. In the sixte(enth) year we entered the land of Egypt, and to my sons (were given) the ; 74 daughters of my brothers at the time . . . to them sons. The names of the sons of Gershon (Libnai xii. 1, 2. and) Shimei ; and the names of the sons of Ko(hath, Amra)m and Ishar and Hebron and Uzziel; xii. 3 75 (and the names of) the sons of Merari, Mahli and Mushat. (And) Amram (took) to him as wife xii. 4 76 Fochebed my daughter, while I was yet living in the 9(4)™ year of my life. And I called the name of Amram, when he was born, Amram, for I said when he was born, this (child) (shall br)ing out the 77 people from the (land of Eg)ypt. Therefore his name was called the exalted people. Ox one day xii. 4 78 (were they born he) and Jochebed my daughter. Eighteen years old was 7 when I went in(to the l)and Xi. 5 of Canaan, and (nine)teen years old when I slew She(chem) and destroyed the workers of violence. 79 And I was nineteen years old when I became priest, and twenty-eight years old when I took to me 80a wife. And eight and forty years old was I when we went into the land of Egypt, and eighty and nine years I lived in Egypt. 81 ΠΣ 4] And all the days of my life were 1(3)7 years, and I saw my sous of the third generation) xix. 4 82 before I died. And in the (hundred and eigh)teenth (year) of my life, that is, the y(ear) in which xii. 6, 7 Foseph my brother died, T called (my) so(ns) and their sons, and began to charge them with all that was in my heart. 83 And I answered and said to (my) sons: (Hear) the word of Levi your father, And hearken to the commands of God’s beloved ; 84 give you a charge, my sons, xiii, 1 And I show you the truth, my beloved. 85 Letthe sum of your works be truth, (Ps. cxix And (let) righteousness abide with you for ever. 160) 86 And the tr(uth)... And to them the harvest is blessed. 87 He that soweth good, reapeth good ; xiii, 6 And he that soweth evil, his seed returneth upon him. 88 And now, my sons, a book of instruction in wisdom ¢each your sons, xiii, 2 And let wisdom be with you an everlasting honour. 89 He that learneth wisdom, she is an honour to him, xiii. 3 And whoso despiseth wisdom is given over to contempt. 90 My sons, behold Yoseph my brother, xiii. 9 Who gave instruction in the writings and discipline of wisdom. xiii, 2 ? This verse is indeed found in the Aramaic, but I have given the translation of the Greek, as the Aramaic is for 4 the most part wanting.


# The Sibylline Oracles


