CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


FROM 


^he  i'T-ies   ""Jll  T.ibrar/ 


CORNELL  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 


3   1924  092  322  522 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/cletails/cu31924092322522 


WORD  STUDIES 


NEW  TESTAMENT 


BY 


MARVIN   R.  VINCENT,  D.D. 

BALDWIN  PROFESSOR  OF  SACRED  LITERATURE  IN  UNION  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY, 
NEW  YORK. 


VOLUME  I. 

THE   SYNOPTIC  GOSPELS 

ACTS   OF   THE   APOSTLES 

EPISTLES   OF   PETER,  JAMES,  AND  JUDE 


*  The  worda  that  I  have  spofeen  tmto  you  are  spirit,  and  are  life." 

John  vi„  63, 


NEW   YORK 
CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

1900 


^.   I  ofeM- 


Copyright,  1887,  by 
CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 


TROW'B 

PniNTINQ  AND  BOOKBINDtNG  COMPAKV» 

NEW  YORK. 


HENRY   DRISLER,  LL.D. 

JAT  PROFESSOR   OF  THE   GREEK  LANGUAGE  AND  LITERATURE 

IN    COLTJMBIA    COLLEGE,    NEW    TORK 

THIS  WORK  IS  DEDICATED 

IN  GRATEFUL   REMEMBRANCE  OF  THE   INSTRUCTIONS   OF  EARLIER  YEARS 

BY  HIS  PUPIL  AND  FRIEND 


PREFACE. 


New-Testament  commentaries  are  so  numerous,  and,  many 
of  them,  so  good,  that  a  new  essay  requires  some  explanation. 
The  present  work  is  an  attempt  in  a  field  which,  so  far  as  I  am 
aware,  is  not  covered  by  any  one  book,  though  it  has  been  care- 
fully and  ably  worked  by  many  scholars.  Taking  a  position 
midway  between  the  exegetical  commentary  and  the  lexicon 
and  grammar,  it  aims  to  put  the  reader  of  the  English  Bible 
nearer  to  the  stand-point  of  the  Greek  scholar,  by  opening  to 
him  the  native  force  of  the  separate  words  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment in  their  lexical  sense,  their  etymology,  their  history,  their 
inflection,  and  the  peculiarities  of  their  usage  by  different  evan- 
gelists and  apostles. 

The  critical  student  of  the  Greek  Testament  will,  therefore, 
find  himself  here  on  familiar,  and  often  on  rudimental,  ground, 
and  will  understand  that  the  book  has  not  been  prepared  with 
any  design  or  expectation  of  instructing  him.  It  has  in  view, 
first  of  all,  those  readers  whose  ignorance  of  Greek  debars  them 
from  the  quickening  contact  of  the  original  words,  and  to  whom 
is  unknown  the  very  existence  of  those  tracks  which  the  Greek 
scholar  threads  with  unconscious  ease  and  in  clear  light. 

No  scholar  will  maintain  that  such  a  task  is  rendered  super- 
fluous by  even  the  most  idiomatic  and  accurate  translation. 
The  most  conscientious  and  competent  translator  is  fettered  by 
difficulties  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  a  translation.  Some- 
thing must  exhale  in  the  transfer  from  one  language  to  an- 


VI  PREFACE. 

other ;  something  which  is  characteristic  in  proportion  to  its 
subtlety.  Eeading  an  author  in  a  translation  is  like  hearing 
through  a  telephone.  The  words  may  reach  the  ear  distinctly, 
but  the  quality  of  the  most  familiar  voice  is  lost.  In  transla- 
tion, as  in  exchange  of  money,  transfer  often  necessitates  break- 
ing up — the  destruction  of  the  original  symbol,  in  order  to 
embody  its  contents  in  the  symbols  of  another  tongue.  A  par- 
ticular coin  of  one  country  may  have  no  exact  representative  in 
a  coin  of  another  country ;  and  the  difference  must  be  made 
out  with  small  change.  A  single  Greek  word  often  requires 
two  or  three  words  for  its  reproduction  in  English,  and  even 
then  the  partial  equivalent  must  be  made  good  by  comment 
or  paraphrase.  There  are,  besides,  certain  features  of  every 
language,  and  particularly  of  every  dead  language,  which  defy 
transfer  by  any  process — embodiments  of  a  subtle  play  of  per- 
ception or  of  thought  which  has  vanished,  like  the  characteris- 
tic expression  from  a  dead  face,  and  which,  though  it  may  give 
some  hint  of  itself  to  an  English  mind,  eludes  the  grasp  of  an 
English  formula. 

Difficulties  like  these  can  be  met  only  by  the  study  of  indi- 
vidual words.  The  translator  is  compelled  to  deal  mainly  with 
the  contents  of  sentences  and  periods ;  to  make  the  forms  of 
thought  subordinate  to  the  substance.  A  translation  which 
should  literally  reproduce  the  idiomatic  structure  of  its  original 
would  be  a  monstrosity.  If  the  thought  is  to  circulate  freely 
and  familiarly  in  Anglo-Saxon  society,  and  to  do  its  best  work 
upon  Anglo-Saxon  minds,  it  must  assume  the  Anglo-Saxon 
dress.  It  must  modify  or  abandon  its  native  habits.  It  can- 
not be  continually  thrusting  into  notice  its'  native  antecedents, 
and  the  forms  of  the  life  which  evolved  it.  It  must  be  natural- 
ized throughout.  Hence  the  translator  is  compelled  to  have 
mainly  in  view  his  own  audience ;  to  expound  the  message 
rather  than  to  flatter  the  nationality  of  the  messenger.  He 
cannot  stop  to  show  his  reader  how  each  constituent  word  of 


PREFACE.  vii 

the  original  sentence  is  throbbing  with  a  life  of  its  own,  and 
aglow  with  the  fascination  of  a  personal  history.  This  is  rather 
the  work  of  the  commentator ;  and  not  of  the  commentator 
who  explains  the  meaning  and  the  relation  of  verses  and  chap- 
ters, but  of  one  who  deals  with  words  in  detail,  and  tells  their 
individual  stories. 

For  a  language  is  not  made  to  order  and  out  of  hand.  It 
is  a  growth  out  of  a  people's  life ;  and  its  words  are  not  arbi- 
trary symbols  fixed  by  decree  or  by  vote,  but  are  struck  out,  as 
needed,  by  incidents  and  crises.  They  are  the  formulas  in 
which  new  needs  and  first  impressions  of  external  facts  spon- 
taneously voice  themselves,  and  into  which  social  customs  run. 
Hence  language  becomes  more  picturesque  as  we  recede  toward 
its  earlier  forms.  Primitive  speech  is  largely  figurative ;  primi- 
tive words  are  pictures.  As  the  language  becomes  the  expres- 
sion of  a  more  conventional  and  artificial  life,  and  of  a  deeper 
and  more  complex  thought,  new  words  are  coined  representing 
something  more  subjective  and  subtle ;  and  the  old  words,  as 
they  become  pressed  into  the  new  service  and  stretched  to  cover 
a  wider  range  of  meaning,  lose  their  original  sharpness  of  out- 
line. They  pass  into  conventional  symbols  in  the  multiform 
uses  of  daily  speech ;  they  become  commonplace  factors  of  a 
commonplace  present,  and  remain  historic  only  to  lexicogra- 
phers and  philologists.  None  the  less,  these  words  forever 
carry  hidden  in  their  bosom  their  original  pictures  and  the 
mark  of  the  blow  which  struck  each  into  life ;  and  they  will 
show  them  to  him  who  lovingly  questions  them  concerning 
their  birth  and  their  history. 

These  remarks  apply  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  the  Greek  lan- 
guage, which  was  the  outgrowth  of  a  national  character  at  once  . 
poetic  and  passionate,  logical  and  speculative,  and  which  was 
shaped  by  an  eventful  and  romantic  history  and  by  a  rich  and 
powerful  literature.  The  words  of  a  language  which  traverses 
the  period  from  Homer  to  Aristotle,  from  Marathon  to  Leuc- 


VIU  PREFACE. 

tra ;  which  told  the  stories  of  Herodotus,  carried  the  mingled 
fire  and  logic  of  Demosthenes,  voiced  the  tremendous  passion 
of  Oedipus,  and  formulated  the  dialectic  of  Plato  and  the  rea- 
soning of  Aristotle,  must  enfold  rare  treasures ;  and  the  more 
as  we  follow  it  into  its  later  development  under  the  contact  of 
Oriental  thought,  which  fused  it  in  the  alembic  of  Alexandria, 
ran  the  new  combination  into  the  mould  of  the  Septuagint,  and 
added  the  last  element  necessary  to  constitute  it  the  bearer  of 
the  Gospel  message.  The  highest  testimony  to  the  resources 
of  this  wonderful  tongue  is  furnished  in  its  exquisite  sensitive- 
ness to  the  touch  of  the  new  faith,  and  its  ready  adaptation  to 
the  expression  of  the  new  truth.  Its  contact  with  the  fresh, 
quickening  ideas  of  the  Gospel  seemed  to  evoke  from  it  a  cer- 
tain deep-lying  quality,  overlaid  till  then  by  the  baser  moral 
conceptions  of  Paganism,  but  springing  up  in  prompt  response 
to  the  summons  of  Christian  thought  and  sentiment.  Yet 
even  the  words  which  lent  themselves  so  readily  to  the  new 
and  higher  message  of  Christianity  could  not  abjure  their 
lineage  or  their  history.  They  bore  the  marks  of  the  older 
and  less  sacred  burdens  they  had  carried.  In  the  histories  of 
its  choicest  words,  Christianity  asserts  itself  as  a  redeemer  of 
human  speech.  The  list  of  New-Testament  words  lifted  out  of 
ignoble  associations  and  uses,  and  mitred  as  ministers  of  sacred 
truth,  is  a  long  and  significant  one ;  and  there  are  few  more 
fascinating  lines  of  study  than  this,  to  which  Archbishop 
Trench  long  ago  directed  English  readers  in  his  "  Study  of 
Words"  and  his  "New-Testament  Synonyms." 

The  biblical  student  may  therefore  profitably  combine  two 
distinct  lines  of  study  ;  the  one  directed  at  the  truth  of  script- 
ure in  mass,  the  other  at  the  medium  or  vehicle  of  the  truth  in 
detail.  A  thorough  comprehension  of  scripture  takes  in  the 
warp  no  less  than  the  woof.  Labor  expended  upon  etymolo- 
gies, synonynis,  and  the  secrets  of  particles  and  tenses,  upon 
the  wide  range  of  pictures  and  hints  and  histories  underly- 


PREFACE.  ix 

ing  the  separate  words  and  phrases  of  the  New  Testament, 
is  not  thrown  away,  and  issues  in  a  larger  result  than  the 
mere  accumulation  of  curious  lore.  Even  as  nature  fills  in  the 
space  between  the  foreground  and  the  background  of  her  land- 
scapes with  countless  details  of  form  and  color,  light  and 
shadow,  so  the  rich  details  of  New-Testament  words,  once  ap- 
prehended, impart  a  depth  of  tone  and  a  just  relation  and  per- 
spective to  the  salient  masses  of  doctrine,  narrative,  and  proph- 
ecy. How  much  is  habitually  lost  to  the  English  student 
through  the  use  of  one  and  the  same  term  in  rendering  two 
words  which  the  writer  selected  with  a  clear  recognition  of  a 
distinction  between  them.  How  often  a  picture  or  a  bit  of  his- 
tory is  hidden  away  in  a  word,  of  which  a  translation  gives  and 
can  give  no  hint.  How  many  distinctive  characteristics  of  a 
writer  are  lost  in  a  translation.  How  often,  especially  in  the 
version  of  1611,  the  marvellous  play  of  the  Greek  tenses,  and 
the  nicely-calculated  force  of  that  potent  little  instrument,  the 
article,  are  utterly  overlooked.  As  the  reader  steps  securely 
over  the  carefully-fitted  pavement  laid  for  him  by  modern 
revisers,  he  does  not  even  guess  at  the  rare  and  beautiful 
things  lying  beneath  almost  every  separate  block. 

Can  the  reader  who  knows  no  Greek  be  put  in  possession  of 
these  treasures?  Not  of  all;  yet  certainly  of  a  goodly  share  of 
them.  It  has  seemed  to  me  that  the  following  results  might 
be  reached : 

1.  Where  a  word  has  a  history,  he  may  learn  it,  and  may 
be  shown  through  what  stages  the  word  has  attained  its  pres- 
ent meaning,  and  how  its  variations  have  successively  grown 
out  of  each  other.  Illustrations  are  furnished  by  such  words 
as  "  humility,"  "  meekness,"  "  blessed." 

2.  He  may  be  shown,  in  part,  at  least,  the  peculiar  form  in 
which  a  thought  comes  to  a  Greek  mind ;  or,  in  other  words, 
lie  may  form  some  acquaintance  with  Greek  idioms.  Thus,  to 
take  some  very  simple  instances,  he  can  easily  see  how,  when 


PREFACE. 


he  thinks  of  his  food  as  set  hefore  him  on  the  table,  the  Greek 
thinks  of  it  as  set  heside  him,  and  writes  accordingly ;  or  how 
his  idea  of  sitting  down  to  the  table  comes  to  the  Greek  as  re- 
clining ;  or  he  can  understand  how,  when  Liike  says,  "  we  came 
the  next  day"  the  idea  of  the  next  or  second  day  comes  to  him 
in  the  form  of  an  adjective  qualifying  we,  so  that  he  thinks  of 
himself  and  his  companions  as  second-day  men.  Sometimes, 
when  two  languages  develop  a  difference  of  idiom  in  their 
classical  usage,  the  classical  idiom  of  the  one  reappears  in  the 
vulgar  dialect  of  the  other.  The  spirit  of  numerous  Greek 
words  or  phrases,  even  in  the  I^ew  Testament,  could  be  re- 
produced most  faithfully  by  English  expressions  which  have 
been  banished  from  polite  diction. 

3.  He  can  be  shown  the  picture  or  the  figure  hidden  away 
in  a  word.     See,  for  example,  the  note  on  comjpel,  Matt.  v.  41. 

4.  He  may  learn  something  of  Greek  synonyms.  He  may 
be  shown  how  two  different  Greek  words,  rendered  by  the 
same  English  word,  represent  different  sides  or  phases  of  the 
same  idea,  and  why  each  word  is  used  in  its  own  place.  Thus, 
the  word  "  net "  occurs  in  both  Matt.  iv.  18  and  Matt.  xiii.  47 ; 
but  the  Greek  word  is  different  in  each  verse,  and  either  word 
would  have  been  inappropriate  in  the  place  of  the  other. 

6.  He  may  be  shown  how  two  English  words,  having  appar- 
ently no  connection  with  each  other,  are  often  expressed  by 
the  same  Greek  word ;  and  he  may  be  put  in  possession  of 
the  connecting  idea.  He  does  not  suspect  that  "  bosom,"  in 
Luke  vi.  38,  and  "creek"  or  "bay,"  in  Acts  xxvii.  39,  are  one 
and  the  same  word ;  or  that  there  is  any  connection  between 
the  "  winding  up "  of  Ananias'  body  (Acts  v.  6)  and  Paul's 
assertion  that  the  time  is  '^ short"  (1  Cor.  vii.  29). 

6.  He  may  be  made  to  understand  the  reasons  for  many 
changes  of  rendering  from  an  older  version,  which,  on  their 
face,  seem  to  him  arbitrar}'  and  useless. 

7.  He  can  be  taught  something  of  the  characteristic  usage  of 


PREFACE.  Xi 

words  and  phrases  by  different  aiithors,  and  may  learn  to  de- 
tect, even  through  the  English  version,  certain  differences  of 
style.     (See  the  Introductions  to  the  different  books.) 

8.  He  can  be  shown  the  simpler  distinctions  between  the 
Greek  tenses,-  and  the  force  of  the  Greek  article ;  and  how  the 
observance  of  these  distinctions  adds  to  the  vigor  and  liveliness 
of  the  translation. 

Much  valuable  matter  of  this  kind  is  contained  in  commen- 
taries ;  and  in  some  popular  commentaries  considerable  promi- 
nence is  given  to  it,  notably  in  the  two  admirable  works  of  Dr. 
Morison  on  Matthew  and  Mark.  But  it  is  scattered  over  a 
wide  surface,  and  is  principally  confined  to  commentaries  pre- 
pared for  the  critical  student;  while  very  much  lies  hidden 
in  lexicons  and  etymological  treatises,  and  in  special  essays 
distributed  through  voluminous  periodicals.  I  have  collected 
and  sifted  a  large  amount  of  this  material  from  various  and 
reliable  sources,  and  have  applied  it  to  the  treatment  of  the 
words  as  they  occur,  verse  by  verse,  divesting  it  of  technicali- 
ties, and  trying  to  throw  it  into  a  form  suited  to  the  students  of 
the  English  Bible. 

I  had  these  so  prominently  in  view  at  the  beginning  that  I 
seriously  contemplated  the  entire  omission  of  Greek  words. 
On  further  thought,  however,  I  decided  that  my  plan  might, 
without  detriment  to  the  original  purpose,  be  stretched  so  as 
to  include  beginners  in  the  study  of  the  Greek  Testament,  and 
certain  college-bred  readers  who  have  saved  a  little  Greek  out 
of  the  wreck  of  their  classical  studies.  For  the  convenience  of 
such  I  have  inserted  the  original  words  wherever  it  seemed  ex- 
pedient; but  always  in  parentheses  and  with  the  translation 
appended.  The  English  reader  may  therefore  be  assured  that 
any  value  which  the  book  may  have  for  him  will  not  be  im- 
paired by  the  presence  of  the  unfamiliar  characters.  He  has 
but  to  pass  them  over,  and  to  confine  his  attention  to  the  Eng- 
lish text. 


Xil  PREFACE. 

It  is  evident  that  my  purpose  relieves  me  of  the  duty  of  the 
exegesis  of  passages,  save  in  those  cases  where  tlie  word  under 
consideration  is  the  point  on  which  the  meaning  of  the  entire 
passage  turns.  The  temptation  to  overstep  this  limit  has  been 
constantly  present,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  I  may  have 
occasionally  transgressed.  But  the  pleasure  and  the  value  of 
the  special  study  of  words  will,  I  think,  be  enhanced  for  the 
student  by  detaching  it  from  the  jungle  of  exegetical  matter  in 
which,  in  ordinary  commentaries,  it  is  wellnigh  lost. 

A  few  words  should  be  said  respecting  a  name  which  the 
title  of  this  book  will  at  once  suggest  to  New-Testament  stu- 
dents— I  mean  Bengel.  The  indebtedness  of  all  workers  in  this 
field  to  John  Albert  Bengel  it  is  uot  easy  to  overstate.  His 
well-known  "  Gnomon,"  which  still  maintains  a  high  and  hon- 
orable rank  among  commentaries  after  the  lapse  of  nearly  a 
century  and  a  half,  was  the  pioneer  in  this  method  of  treating 
scripture.  My  own  obligations  to  him  are  very  great  for  the 
impulse  to  this  line  of  study  which  I  received  in  translating  the 
"  Gnomon  "  more  than  twenty-five  years  ago  ;  more  for  that,  in- 
deed, than  for  any  large  amount  of  help  in  the  present  work. 
For  his  own  labors  have  contributed  to  the  great  extension 
of  his  special  line  of  study  since  the  appearance  of  the  "  Gno- 
mon "  in  1742.  The  entire  basis  of  ISTew-Testament  philology 
and  textual  criticism  has  been  shifted  and  widened,  and  many 
of  his  critical  conclusions,  therefore,  must  be  either  modified  or 
rejected.  His  work  retains  its  value  for  the  preacher.  He 
must  always  stand  pre-eminent  for  his  keen  and  deep  spiritual 
insight,  and  for  that  marvellously  terse  and  pithy  diction  with 
which,  as  with  a  master-key,  he  so  often  throws  open  by  a  sin- 
gle turn  the  secret  chambers  of  a  word  ;  but  for  critical  results 
the  student  must  follow  later  and  surer  guides. 

As  to  materials,  let  it  suffice  to  say  that  I  have  freely  used 
whatever  I  have  found  serviceable.  The  book,  however,  is  not 
a  compilation.     My  plan  has  compelled  me  to  avoid  lengthy 


PREFACE.  Xiii 

discussions  and  processes,  and  to  confine  myself  mostly  to  the 
statement  of  results.  In  order  to  avoid  encumbering  the  pages 
with  a  multitude  of  references,  I  have  appended  a  list  of  the 
sources  on  which  I  have  drawn  ;  and  the  names  of  other  authors 
not  mentioned  there  will  be  found  appended  to  quotations. 

I  have  not  attempted  textual  criticism.  I  have  followed 
principally  the  text  of  Westcott  and  Hort,  comparing  it  with 
Tischendorf's  eighth  edition,  and  commonly  adopting  any  read- 
ing in  which  the  two  agree.  It  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  necessary 
to  say  that  the  very  literal  and  often  uncouth  renderings  which 
frequently  occur  are  given  merely  in  order  to  throw  sentences 
or  phrases  as  nearly  as  possible  into  their  Greek  form,  and  are 
not  suggested  for  adoption  as  versions.  Each  word  or  passage 
commented  upon  is  cited  first  according  to  the  authorized  ver- 
sion. 

My  task  has  been  a  labor  of  love,  though  pursued  amid  the 
numerous  distractions  and  varied  duties  of  a  city  pastorate.  I 
hope  to  complete  it  in  due  time  by  an  additional  volume  con- 
taining the  writings  of  John  and  Paul. 

It  is  said  that  there  was  discovered,  some  years  ago,  in  one 
of  our  Western  States,  a  magnificent  geode,  which,  on  being 
broken,  disclosed  a  mass  of  crystals  arranged  in  the  form  of  a 
cross.  It  will  be  a  great  joy  to  me  if,  by  this  attempt  to  break 
the  shell  of  these  words  of  life,  and  to  lay  bare  their  hidden 
jewels,  I  may  help  a  Bible-student  here  and  there  to  a  clearer 
vision  of  that  cross  which  is  the  centre  and  the  glory  of  the 
Gospel. 

MARYIN  R.  YINCENT. 

Covenant  Paksonagb,  New  York,  October  30,  1886. 


PREFACE  TO  SECOND  EDITION. 


In  this  second  edition  a  number  of  errors  in  the  Scripture 
references  have  been  corrected,  together  with  sundry  typo- 
graphical mistakes  in  the  Greek  text,  such  as  misplaced  accents, 
omitted  breathings,  etc.  A  few  changes  have  also  been  made 
in  accordance  with  the  suggestions  of  my  reviewers.  For  many 
pf  the  corrections  in  the  Greek  text  I  am  under  great  obliga- 
tions to  my  old  friend  Dr.  Henry  Drisler,  of  Columbia  College, 
whose  invaluable  aid  it  would  never  have  occurred  to  me  to  ask 
in  such  a  matter  of  literary  drudgery,  but  who  voluntarily,  and 
most  kindly,  furnished  me  with  a  list  of  the  errors  noted  by 
him  in  his  perusal  of  the  volume. 

New  York,  December  10,  1888. 


LIST   OF  AUTHORS  AND   EDITIONS. 


Angus,  Joseph :  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  Ne'rt 
York,  1883. 

Apocrypha,  Greek  and  English.     Bagster,  London,  1871. 

Abbot,  Edwin  A. :  Article  "Gospels,"  in  Encyclopaedia Britannica, 
9th  edition. 

Arnold,  W.  T. :  Roman  Provincial  Administration.    London,  1879. 

Autenrieth,  G6org  :  Homeric  Dictionary.     New  York,  1880. 

Augustine  :  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Edited  by  Trench.  3d 
edition.     London,  1869. 

Alford,  Henry  :  Greek  Testament.     5  vols.     London,  1857-61. 

Becker,  W.  A. :  Gallus.  Translated  by  E.  Metcalfe.  London, 
1849. 

Becker,  W.  A.  :  Charicles.     New  edition.     London,  1854. 

Barrow,  Isaac  :  Sermons.     3  vols.     London,  1861. 

Butler,  Joseph :  Sermons.     Bohn,  London,  1855. 

Bosworth,  Joseph,  and  Waring,  G.  :  Gothic  and  Anglo-Saxon 
Gospels,  with  the  Versions  of  Wycliffe  and  Tyndale.  2d  edition. 
London,  1874. 

Bengel:  Gnomon  Novi  Testamenti.  Edited  by  Steudel.  Tu- 
bingen, 1855. 

Bengel:  Gnomon  Novi  Testamenti.  Auslegung  in  fortlaufen- 
den  Anmerkungen  von  C.  F.  Werner.     2  vols.     Stuttgart,  1853. 

Bengel :  Gnomon  Novi  Testamenti.  Translated  by  C.  T.  Lewis 
and  M.  E.  Vincent.     2  vols.     Philadelphia,  1860. 

Burgon,  John  W. :  Letters  from  Eome  to  Friends  in  England. 
London,  1862. 


XVI  LIST  OF  AUT'HORS  AND  EDITIONS. 

Bruce,  Alexander  B.  :  The  Parabolic  Teaching  of  Jesus.  New 
York,  1883. 

Bryennios,  Philotheos :  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostlea 
Translated  and  edited  by  Roswell  D.  Hitchcock  and  Francis  Brown. 
New  York,  1885. 

Bryennios,  Philotheos:  The  Same.  Edited  by  Philip  Sehaff. 
New  York,  1886. 

Cox,  Samuel :  The  Book  of  Job.     London,  1880.. 

Cox,  Samuel :  An  Expositor's  Note-Book.     London,  1872. 

Cox,  Samuel :  Biblical  Expositions.     London,  1874. 

Cadena,  Mariano  Velazquez  de  la :  Pronouncing  Dictionary  of 
the  Spanish  and  English  Languages.     New  York,  1882. 

Cheyne,  T.  K. :  The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah.  2d  edition.  2  vols. 
London,  1882. 

Clarke,  Mrs.  Cowden :  Concordance  to  Shakespeare.  London, 
1879. 

Conybeare,  "W.  J.,  and  Howson,  J.  S. :  Life  and  Epistles  of  St. 
Paul.     2  vols.     London,  1856. 

Cremer,  Hermann :  Biblico-Theological  Lexicon  of  New  Testa- 
ment Greek.     Edinburgh,  1878. 

Crosby,  Howard  :  The  New  Testament,  Old  and  New  Versions. 
New  York,  1884. 

Curtius,  Ernst :  History  of  Greece.     5  vols.     London,  1868. 

Cook,  P.  C.  :  Commentary  on  First  Peter,  in  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary.    New  York. 

Davies,  S.  S.  :  St.  Paul  in  Greece,  in  series  "  The  Heathen 
World  and  St.  Paul."     London. 

Dollinger,  John  J.  J. :  The  Gentile  and  the  Jew.  Translated  by 
N.  Darnell.     2  vols.     London,  1862. 

Dixon,  Hepworth  ;  The  Holy  Land.     2  vols.     London,  1865. 

Davidson,  Samuel :  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    2d  edition.     2  vols.     London,  1882. 

De  Wette,  W.  M.  L. :  Kurzgefasstes  Exegetisches  Handbuch 
zum  Neuen  Testament.     4th  edition.     5  vols.     Leipzig,  1857. 

De  Wette,  W.  M.  L. :  Die  Heilige  Schrift.  4th  edition.  Heidel- 
berg, 1858. 


LIST  OP  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS.  xvii 

Delitzsch,   Franz:  Commentary  on  Job,   "Clark's  Theological 
Library."     2  vols.     Edinburgh,  1869. 

Di  Cesnola,  Louis  P. :  Cyprus ;  its  Ancient  Cities,  Tombs,  and 
Temples.     New  York,  1878. 

Edwards,  Thomas  C. :  Commentary  on  First  Corinthians.     Lon- 
don, 1885. 

Edersheim,  Alfred :  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.     2 
vols.     London,  1883. 

Edersheim,  Alfred :  The  Temple  ;  its  Ministry  and  Services  at 
the  Time  of  Jesus  Christ.     Boston,  1881. 

Edersheim,  Alfred :  Sketches  of  Jewish  Social  Life  in  the  Days 
of  Christ.     London,  1876. 

Expositor.     1st  and  2d  series.     20  vols.     London,  1875-84. 

Ellicott,  Charles  J. :  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  Paul.    2  vols. 
Andover,  1872. 

Eadie,  John  :  The  English  Bible.     2  vols.     London,  1876. 

Eastwood,  J.,  and  Wright,  W.  Aldis:    The  Bible  Word-Book. 
New  York,  1874. 

Englishman's  Greek  Concordance  to  the  New  Testament.     New 
York,  1859. 

Findlay,  Alexander  G. :  Classical  Atlas.     London. 

Farrar,  Frederic  W. :  The  Life  of  Christ.     2  vols.     New  York, 
1874. 

Farrar,  Frederic  W.  :  The  Life  and  "Work  of  St.  Paul.     2  vols. 
London,  1879. 

Farrar,  Frederic  W. :  The  Messages  of  the  Books.    London,  1885. 

Farrar,  Frederic  W. :  Greek  Syntax.     London,  1876. 

Farrar,   Frederic  W.  :    Language  and  Languages.     New  York, 
1878. 

Fuerst,  Julius  :■  Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Lexicon  to  the  Old  Testar 
ment.     Translated  by  S.  Davidson.     4th  edition.     London,  1871. 

Ford,  James  :    The  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  Elustrated.     London, 
1851. 

Grote,  George  :  History  of  Greece.     8  vols.     London,  1862. 

Godet,  F.  :  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.     3d  edition, 
2  vols.     Edinburgh,  1879. 


XVUl  LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AiO)  EDITIONS. 

Gibbon,  Edward  :  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Eoman  Empire.  8 
vols.    London,  1838. 

Grimm,  C.  L.  Willibald  :  Wilke's  Clavis  Novi  Testamenti.  2d  edi- 
tion.    Leipzig,  1879. 

Grimm,  C.  L.  Willibald :  The  Same.  Translated,  revised,  and 
enlarged  by  Joseph  H.  Thayer.     New  York,  1887. 

Gloag,  Paton  J. :  Critical  and  Exegetical  Commentary  on  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.     2  vols.     Edinburgh,  1870. 

Gloag,  Paton  J.  :  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  of  James.  New 
York,  1883. 

Geikie,  Cunningham :  The  Life  and  Words  of  Christ.  2  vols. 
in  one.     New  York,  1880. 

Goebel   Siegfried  :  The  Parables  of  Jesus.     Edinburgh,  1883. 

Gladstone,  W.  E.  :  Studies  on  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age. 
3  vols.     Oxford,  1858. 

Grimm,  Wilhelm  and  Jacob :  Deutsches  Worterbuch.  6  vols. 
Leipzig,  1854-73. 

Howson,  J.  H.  :  The  Metaphors  of  St.  PauL     New  York,  1871. 

Hackett,  Horatio  B. :  Commentary  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
Boston,  1858. 

Hobart,  William  K. :  The  Medical  Language  of  St.  Luke.  Lon- 
don, 1882. 

Herzog,  J.  J.,  and  Plitt,  G.  L.  :  Real  Encyklopadie  fiir  Protes- 
tantische  Theologie  und  Kirche.  2d  edition.  16  vols.  Leipzig, 
1877-85. 

Herodotus.  Translated  by  George  Eawhnson.  4  vols.  Lon- 
don, 1858. 

Huther,  John  Edward  :  Kritisch  Exegetisches  Handbuch  iiber 
den  1  Brief  des  Petrus,  den  Brief  des  Judas,  und  den  2  Brief  des 
Petrus.     2d  edition.     Gottingen,  1859. 

Huther,  John  Edward  :  Kritisch  Exegetisches  Handbuch  iiber 
den  Brief  des  Jakobus.     Gottingen,  1858. 

Jameson,  Mrs.  :  History  of  our  Lord.  2d  edition.  2  vols.  Lon- 
don, 1865. 

Jameson,  Mrs.  :  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art.  4th  edition.  2  vols. 
London,  1863. 


LIST   OP   AUTHORS  AifD  EDITIONS.  xix 

Jelf,  William  Edward  :  A  Grammar  of  the  Greek  Language. 
2  vols.     Oxford,  1851. 

Jowett,  B.  :  The  Dialogues  of  Plato,  translated  into  EnglisL  2d 
edition.     5  vols.     Oxford,  1875. 

Josephus  :  The  Jewish  War.  Translated  by  Traill.  London, 
1868. 

Kypke,  George  David  :  Observationes  Sacrae  in  Nov.  Foed.  Li- 
bros.     2  vols,  in  one.     Breslau,  1755. 

Lange,  J.  P.  :  Critical,  Doctrinal,  and  Homiletical  Commentary. 
New  York. 

Lightfoot,  J.  B.  :  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  London, 
1866. 

Lightfoot,  J.  B.  :  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  Lon- 
don, 1869. 

Lightfoot,  J.  B.  :  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Phile- 
mon.    London,  1875. 

Lightfoot,  J.  B.  :  On  a  Fresh  Revision  of  the  New  Testament. 
2d  edition.     New  York,  1873. 

Liddon,  Henry  P.  :  The  Divinity  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.     London,  1867. 

Liddell,  Henry  G.,  and  Scott,  Robert :  Greek-EngUsh  Lexicon. 
7th  edition.     New  York,  1883. 

Liddell,  Henry  G.  :  History  of  Rome.     2  vols.     London,  1855. 

Lumby,  J.  Rawson  :  Commentary  on  Second  Peter,  in  Speaker's 
Commentary.     New  York. 

Lumby,  J.  Rawson  :  Commentary  on  Jude,  in  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary.    New  York. 

Lewin,  Thomas :  The  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  2  vols. 
New  York,  1875. 

Lewis,  Charlton  T.,  and  Short,  Charles  A. :  New  Latin  Diction- 
ary.    Oxford  and  New  York,  1879. 

Lucas,  Newton  Ivory  :  Deutsch-Englisches  Worterbuch.  Bre- 
mep,  1868. 

Lardner,  Nathaniel :  Works.     5  vols.     London,  1815. 

Merivale,  Charles  :  History  of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire. 
2d  edition  of  Vols.  I.-HI.     7  vols.     London,  1852-62, 


XX  LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS. 

Meyer,  Heinricli  W.  H  :  Commentaries  on  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke 
Acts.     New  York,  1884. 

Mommsen,  Theodor  :  History  of  Rome.  Translated  by  Dickson. 
4  vols.     London,  1867. 

Morison,  James  :  A  Practical  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  ac- 
cording to  St.  Matthew.     Boston,  1884. 

Morison,  James :  A  Practical  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  ac- 
cording to  St.  Mark.     Boston,  1882. 

McClintock,  John,  and  Strong,  James  :  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical, 
Theological,  and  Ecclesiastical  Literature.  10  vols.  New  York, 
1867-81. 

Mansel,  Henry  L.  :  The  Gnostic  Heresies  of  the  First  and  Sec- 
ond Centuries.     Edited  by  J.  B.  Lightfoot.     London,  1875. 

Newman,  J.  H.  :  CaUista.     London. 

Northcote,  J.  S.,  and  Brownlow,  "W.  R :  Roma  Sotterranea. 
London,  1869. 

Old  Testament.     Revision  of  1885.     Cambridge. 

Parker,  J.  H. :  Primitive  Fortifications  of  Rome.  2d  ed.  London. 

Palgrave,  William  Gifford :  Central  and  Eastern  Arabia.  Lon- 
don, 1873. 

Plutarch:  Lives.  Translated  by  A.  H.  Clough.  5  vols.  Bos- 
ton, 1859. 

Phrynichus  :  Eclogae  Nominum  et  Verborum  Atticorum.  Edited 
by  C.  A.  Lobeck.     Leipzig,  1820. 

Porter,  J.  L. :  Handbook  for  Syria  and  Palestine.  New  edition. 
2  vols.     London,  1868. 

Plumptre,  E.  H.  :  St.  Paul  in  Asia  Minor,  in  series  "  The 
Heathen  World  and  St.  Paul."    London. 

Plumptre,  E.  H.  :  The  Spirits  in  Prison,  and  Other  Studies  on 
the  Life  after  Death.     New  York,  1885. 

Revisers'  Text  of  the  Greek  Testament.     Oxford,  1881. 

Reynolds,  Henry  R.  :  John  the  Baptist.     London,  1874. 

Robinson,  Edward  :  Greek  and  English  Lexicon  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament.    New  York,  1859. 

Robinson,  Edward:  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  in  Greek.  Re- 
vised by  M.  B.  Riddle.     Boston,  1885. 


LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS.  xxl 

Eiddle,  M.  B.,  and  Schaff,  Philip  :  Commentary  on  the  Gospel 
of  Mark.     New  York,  1879. 

Eiddle,  M.  B.,  and  Schaff,  Philip  :  Commentary  on  the  Gospel 
of  Luke.     New  York,  1879. 

Eawlinson,  George  :  Ancient  Monarchies.  2d  edition.  3  vols. 
New  York,  1871. 

Eawlinson,  George  :  History  of  Ancient  Egypt.  2  vols.  Lon- 
don and  New  York,  1881. 

Euskin,  John  :  Modern  Painters.     5  vols.     New  York,  1862, 

Scott,  Eobert  :  Commentary  on  the  Epistle  of  James,  in  Speak- 
er's Commentary.     New  York. 

Schaff,  Philip  :  Encyclopaedia  of  Eeligious  Knowledge.  3  vols. 
New  York,  1882-83. 

Schaff,  Philip,  and  Eiddle,  M.  B. :  Commentary  on  the  Gospel 
of  Matthew.     New  York,  1879. 

Schaff,  Philip  :  History  of  the  Christian  Church.  Vols.  I.,  XL 
New  York,  1882. 

Stirling,  William  :  Annals  of  the  Artists  of  Spain.  3  vols.  Lon- 
don, 1848. 

Salmond,  S.  D.  F.  :  Commentary  on  First  and  Second  Peter. 
New  York,  1883. 

Stormonth,  J.  :  Etymological  and  Pronouncing  Dictionary  of 
the  English  Language.     Edinburgh,  1877. 

Septuagint.    According  to  the  Vatican  edition.   Bagster,  London. 

Skeat,  Walter  W. :  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Lan- 
guage.    Oxford,  1882. 

Stier,  Eudolph  :  The  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  8  vols.  Edin- 
burgh, 1855. 

St.  John,  J.  A.  :  History  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  Ancient 
Greece.     3  vols.     London,  1842. 

Schmidt,  J.  H.  H.  :  Synonymik  der  Griechischen  Spraehe.  4 
vols.     Leipzig,  187^-86. 

Smith,  James :  The  Voyage  and  Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul.  3d  edi- 
tion.   London,  1866. 

Smith,  William  :  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Eoman  Biography 
and  Mythology.     3  vols.    London  and  Boston,  1849. 


XXii  LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIONS. 

Smith,  William  ;  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Eoman  Geography. 
2  vols.     Boston,  1854. 

Smith,  William  :  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities. 
Edited  by  Anthon.     New  York,  1855. 

Stanley,  Arthur  P.  :  The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 
4th  edition.     London,  1876. 

Stanley,  Arthur  P. :  Sinai  and  Palestine.     New  York,  1863. 

Stanley,  Arthur  P.  :  The  Jewish  Church.  3  vols.  New  York, 
1864-76. 

Stanley,  Arthur  P.  .  Sermons  and  Essays  on  the  Apostolic  Age. 
Oxford  and  London,  1874. 

Scrivener,  Frederick  H. :  A  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism 
of  the  New  Testament.    2d  edition.    Cambridge  and  London,  1874. 

Trench,  Eichard  C.  :  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testament.  8th 
edition.     London,  1876. 

Trench,  Eichard  C.  :  Notes  on  the  Miracles  of  our  Lord.  2d 
American  edition.     New  York,  1862. 

Trench,  Eichard  C.  :  Notes  on  the  Parables  of  our  Lord.  2d 
American  edition.     New  York,  1862. 

Trench,  Eichard  C.  :  Studies  in  the  Gospels.     New  York,  1867. 

Trench,  Eichard  C. :  On  the  Study  of  Words.     New  York,  1856. 

Trench,  Eichard  C.  :  Proverbs  and  their  Lessons.  5th  edition. 
London,  1861. 

Trench,  Eichard  C. :  On  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  New 
Testament.     New  York,  1873. 

Trench,  Eichard  C. :  English,  Past  and  Present.  13th  edition. 
London,  1886. 

Trench,  Eichard  C.  :  Select  Glossary  of  English  Words.  5th 
edition.     London,  1879. 

Theologische  Studien  und  Kritiken. 

Tholuck,  A.  :  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount.     Edinburgh,  1874. 

Thomson,  William  M. :  The  Land  and  the  Book.   London,  1870. 

Thomson,  William  M.  :  The  Land  and  the  Book.  3  vols.  New 
York,  1880-86. 

Thorns,  John  A.  :  Concordance  to  the  Revised  Version  of  the 
New  Testament.     New  York,  1883. 


LIST  OP  AUTHOES  AND  EDITIONS.  XXiii 

Tischendorf,  Constantine :  Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  8th 
edition.     Leipzig,  1878. 

Tregelles,  S.  P. :  An  Account  of  the  Printed  Text  of  the  Greek 
New  Testament.     London,  1854. 

Westcott,  Brooke  Foss :  Litroduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Gos- 
pels.    5th  edition.     London,  1875. 

Westcott,  Brooke  Foss,  and  Hort,  Fenton  J.  A. :  The  New  Testa- 
ment in  the  Original  Greek.     American  edition.     New  York,  1881. 

Westcott,  Brooke  Foss:  The  Epistles  of  St.  John.  London, 
1883. 

Winer,  G.  B.  :  Grammar  of  New  Testament  Greek.  8th  English 
edition.     Edited  by  W.  F.  Moulton.     Edinburgh,  1877. 

Wilkinson,  Gardner  :  The  Ancient  Egyptians.  7  vols.  London, 
1837-41. 

Wilkinson,  Gardner  :  Modem  Egypt  and  Thebes.  2  vols.  Lon- 
don, 1843. 

Zeschwitz,  Gerhard  von :  Profangracitat  vmd  Biblischer  Sprach- 
geist.     Leipzig,  1859. 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


A.  V.     Authorized  Version. 
Apoc.     Apocalypse. 
Cit.     Cited. 
=     Equivalent  to. 
Expn.     Explanation. 
Lit.     Literally. 

Rev.     Eevised  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
Rev.  O.  T.     Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Sept,     Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Sqq.     Following. 
Synop.     Synoptists. 
Tex.  Ree.     Received  Text. 

Tynd.     Tyndale's  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
Vulg.     Vulgate  or  Latin  Translation  of  the  New  Testament. 
Wye.     Wycliffe's  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  phrase   "only  here  in  New  Testament"  refers  to  Greek 
words  only. 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  MATTHEW. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CoNCEKNiiiG  Matthew  personally  we  know  very  little.  He 
was  a  son  of  Alphaeus,  a  brother  of  James  the  Little,  possibly 
a  brother  of  Thomas  Didymus.  The  only  facts  which  the  gos- 
pels record  about  him  are  his  call  and  his  farewell  feast.  He 
had  been  a  publican  or  tax-collector  under  the  Roman  govern- 
ment ;  an  office  despised  by  the  Jews  because  of  the  extortions 
which  commonly  attended  it,  and  because  it  was  a  galling  token 
of  subjection  to  a  foreign  power.  When  called  by  Christ, 
Matthew  forsook  at  once  his  office  and  his  old  name  of  Levi. 
Tradition  records  of  him  that  he  lived  the  life  of  an  ascetic,  on 
herbs  and  water.  There  is  a  legend  that  after  the  dispersion  of 
the  apostles  he  travelled  into  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  preaching 
the  Gospel ;  that  he  was  entertained  in  the  capital  of  Ethiopia 
in  the  house  of  the  eunuch  whom  Philip  baptized,  and  that  he 
overcame  two  magicians  who  had  afflicted  the  people  with 
diseases.  It  is  further  related  that  he  raised  the  son  of  the 
king  of  Egypt  from  the  dead,  healed  his  daughter  Iphigenia  of 
leprosy,  and  placed  her  at  the  head  of  a  community  of  virgins 
dedicated  to  the  service  of  God ;  and  that  a  heathen  king,  at- 
tempting to  tear  her  from  her  asylum,  was  smitten  with  leprosy, 
and  his  palace  destroyed  by  fire. 

According  to  the  Greek  legend  he  died  in  peace  ;  but  accord- 
ing to  the  tradition  of  the  Western  Church  he  suffered  mar- 
tyrdom. 

Mrs.  Jameson  ("  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art")  says:  "Few 
churches  are  dedicated  to  St.  Matthew.     I  am  not  aware  that 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

he  is  the  patron  saint  of  any  country,  trade,  or  profession,  un- 
less it  be  that  of  tax-gatherer  or  exciseman  ;  and  this  is  perhaps 
the  reason  that,  except  where  he  figures  as  one  of  the  series  of 
evangelists  or  apostles,  he  is  so  seldom  represented  alone,  or  in 
devotional  pictures.  When  he  is  portrayed  as  an  evangelist, 
he  holds  a  book  or  a  pen ;  and  the  angel,  his  proper  attribute  and 
attendant,  stands  by,  pointing  up  to  heaven  or  dictating,  or  he 
holds  the  inkhorn,  or  he  supports  the  book.  In  his  character  of 
apostle,  St.  Matthew  frequently  holds  a  purse  or  money-bag, 
as  significant  of  his  former  vocation." 

Matthew  wrote,  probably  in  Palestine,  and  evidently  for  Jew- 
ish Christians.  There  are  two  views  as  to  the  language  in 
which  his  gospel  was  originally  composed :  one  that  he  wrote  it 
in  Hebrew  or  Syro-Chaldaic,  the  dialect  spoken  in  Palestine  by 
the  Jewish  Christians ;  the  other  that  he  wrote  it  in  Greek.  The 
former  theory  is  supported  by  the  unanimous  testimony  of  the 
early  church  ;  and  the  fathers  who  assert  this,  also  declare  that 
his  work  was  translated  into  Greek.  In  that  case  the  transla- 
tion was  most  probably  made  by  Matthew  himself,  or  under  his 
supervision.  The  drift  of  modern  scholarship,  however,  is 
toward  the  theory  of  a  Gi-eek  original.  Great  uncertainty  pre- 
vails as  to  the  time  of  composition.  According  to  the  testimony 
of  the  earliest  Christian  fathers,  Matthew's  gospel  is  the  first  in 
order,  though  the  internal  evidence  favors  the  priority  of  Mark. 
Evidently  it  was  written  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
(a.d.  70).  "  Had  that  event  preceded  the  writing  of  the  sy- 
noptic gospels  and  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul,  nothing  is  more 
certain  than  that  it  must  have  been  directlj'  mentioned,  and  that 
it  must  have  exercised  an  immense  influence  on  the  thoughts 
and  feelings  of  the  apostles  and  evangelists.  No  writer  deal- 
ing with  the  topics  and  arguments  and  prophecies  with  which 
they  are  constantly  occupied,  could  possibly  have  failed  to  ap- 
peal to  the  tremendous  sanction  which  had  been  given  to  all 
their  views  by  God  himself,  who  thus  manifested  his  provi- 
dence in  human  history,  and  showed  all  things  by  the  quiet 
light  of  inevitable  circumstances  "  (Farrar,  "  Messages  of  the 
Books  "). 

Matthew's  object  was  to  exhibit  the  Gospel  as  the  fulfilment 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

of  the  law  and  the  prophecies ;  to  connect  the  past  with  the 
present ;  to  show  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  of  the  Jews,  and 
that  in  the  Old  Testament  the  New  was  prefigured,  while  in  the 
New  Testament  the  Old  was  revealed.  Hence  his  gospel  has  a 
more  decidedly  Jewish  flavor  than  any  other  of  the  synoptics. 
The  sense  of  Jewish  nationality  appears  in  the  record  of  Christ's 
words  about  the  "  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel "  (xv.  24) ;  in 
the  command  not  to  go  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles  nor  into 
the  villages  of  the  Samaritans  (x.  5) ;  in  the  prophecy  that  the 
apostles  shall  sit  as  judges  in  "the  regeneration"  (xix.  28). 
Also  in  the  tracing  of  the  genealogy  of  our  Lord  no  further 
back  than  to  Abraham ;  in  the  emphasis  laid  on  the  works  of 
the  law  (v.  19  ;  xii.  33,  37) ;  and  in  the  prophecy  which  makes 
the  end  of  Israel  contemporaneous  with  the  "  consummation 
of  the  age  "  (xxiv.  3,  22  ;  x.  23). 

On  the  other  hand,  a  more  comprehensive  character  appears 
in  the  adoration  of  the  infant  Jesus  by  the  Gentile  magi ;  in 
the  prophecy  of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom 
to  all  the  world  (xxiv.  14),  and  the  apostolic  commission  to  go 
to  all  nations  (xxviii.  19) ;  in  the  commendation  of  the  faith  of 
a  Gentile  above  that  of  Israel  (viii.  10-12 ;  compare  the  story 
of  the  Syrophcenician  woman,  xv.  28) ;  in  the  use  of  the  word 
"  Jews,"  as  if  he  were  outside  the  circle  of  Jewish  nationality ; 
in  the  parables  of  the  laborers  in  the  vineyard  (xx.  1-16),  and 
of  the  marriage  of  the  king's  son  (xxii.  1-14) ;  in  the  threat  of 
taking  away  the  kingdom  from  Israel  (xxi.  43),  and  in  the  value 
attached  to  the  moral  and  religious  element  of  the  law  (xxii.  40  ; 
xxiii.  23).  The  genealogy  of  Jesus  contains  the  Gentile  names 
of  Eahab  the  Canaanite,  and  Ruth  the  Moabitess.  To  Matthew 
Jesus  is  alike  the  Messiah  of  the  Jew  and  the  Saviour  of  the 
world. 

It  being  his  task  to  show  how  the  law  and  the  prophets  were 
fulfilled  in  Christ,  his  allusions  are  frequent  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment scriptures.  He  has  upward  of  sixty  references  to  the 
Old  Testament.  His  citations  are  of  two  classes :  those  which 
he  quotes  himself  as  fulfilled  in  the  events  of  Christ's  life,  such 
as  i.  23  ;  ii.  15,  18  ;  iv.  15,  16  ;  and  those  which  are  a  part  of 
the  discourse  of  his  different  characters,  such  as  iii.  3 ;  iv.  4,  6, 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

7,  10  ;  XV.  4,  8,  9.  He  exhibits  the  law  of  Christ,  not  only  as 
the  fulfilment  of  the  Mosaic  law,  but  in  contrast  with  it,  as  is 
illustrated  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Yet,  while  represent- 
ing the  new  law  as  gentler  than  the  old,  he  represents  it,  at  the 
same  time,  as  more  stringent  (see  v.  28,  32,  34,  39,  44).  His 
gospel  is  of  a  sterner  type  than  Luke's,  which  has  been  rightly 
styled  "  the  Gospel  of  universality  and  tolerance."  The  retribu- 
tive element  is  more  prominent  in  it.  Sin  appeals  to  him 
primarily  as  the  violation  of  law ;  and  therefore  his  word  for 
iniquity  is  dvofiia,  lawlessness,  which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the 
Gospels.  He  alone  records  the  saying,  "  Many  are  called,  but 
few  are  chosen  "  (xxii.  14),  and,  as  Professor  Abbot  has  acute- 
ly remarked,  the  distinction  between  the  called  (kXtjtoI)  and 
the  chosen  {i/cKsKToi)  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  Paul  uses 
the  two  words  almost  indifferently,  and  Luke,  although  he  too 
has  the  parable  of  the  unworthy  guests,  has  not  ventured  to  use 
kXtjtoi  in  Matthew's  disparaging  signification  (Art.  "  Gospels," 
in  Encyclop.  Britannica).  To  him,  also,  is  peculiar  the  record 
of  the  saying  that  "  Whosoever  shall  break  one  of  the  least 
commandments,  and  teach  men  so,  shall  be  called  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  "  (v.  19).  To  continue  the  quotation  from 
Professor  Abbot,  "  Matthew,  more  than  the  rest  of  the  evangel- 
ists, seems  to  move  in  evil  days,  and  amid  a  race  of  backsliders, 
among  dogs  and  swine,  who  are  unworthy  of  the  pearls  of 
truth  ;  among  the  tares  sown  by  the  enemy ;  among  fishermen 
who  have  to  cast  back  again  many  of  the  fish  caught  in  the  net 
of  the  Gospel.  The  broad  way  is  ever  in  his  mind,  and  the 
multitude  of  those  that  go  thereby,  and  the  guest  without  the 
wedding  garment,  and  the  foolish  virgins,  and  the  goats  as  well 
as  the  sheep,  and  those  who  even  cast  out  devils  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord,  and  yet  are  rejected  by  him  because  they  work  '  law- 
lessness.' Where  Luke  speaks  exultantly  of  joy  in  heaven  over 
one  repentant  sinner,  Matthew,  in  more  negative  and  sober 
phrases,  declares  that  it  is  not  the  will  of  the  Father  that  one 
of  the  little  ones  should  perish ;  and  as  a  reason  for  not  being 
distracted  about  the  future,  it  is  alleged  that  '  suflScient  for  the 
day  is  the  evil  thereof.'  The  condition  of  the  Jews,  their  increas- 
ing hostility  to  the  Christians,  and  the  wavering  or  retrogres- 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

sion  of  many  Jewish  converts  when  the  hostility  became  inten- 
sified shortly  before  and  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem — this 
may  well  explain  one  side  of  Matthew's  gospel ;  and  the  other 
side  (the  condemnation  of  '  lawlessness  ')  might  find  an  explana- 
tion in  a  reference  to  Hellenizing  Jews,  who  (like  some  of  the 
Corinthians)  considered  that  the  new  law  set  them  free  from  all 
restraint,  and  who,  in  casting  aside  every  vestige  of  nationality, 
wished  to  cast  aside  morality  as  well.  Yiewed  in  the  light  of 
the  approaching  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  retrogression  of 
great  masses  of  the  nation,  the  introduction  into  the  Lord's 
Prayer  of  the  words  •'  Deliver  us  from  the  evil,'  and  the  predic- 
tion that  *  by  reason  of  the  multiplying  of  lawlessness  the  love 
of  many  shall  wax  cold,'  will  seem  not  only  appropriate,  but 
typical  of  the  character  of  the  whole  of  the  First  Gospel." 

As  related  to  the  other  synoptical  gospels,  Matthew's  contains 
fourteen  entire  sections  which  are  peculiar  to  him  alone.  These 
include  ten  parables :  The  Tares ;  the  Hid  Treasure ;  the 
Pearl ;  the  Draw-net ;  the  Unmerciful  Servant ;  the  Laborers  in 
the  Yineyard ;  the  Two  Sons ;  the  Marriage  of  the  King's 
Son ;  the  Ten  Yirgins,  and  the  Talents.  Two  miracles :  The 
Cure  of  Two  Blind  Men,  and  the  Coin  in  the  Fish's  Mouth. 
Four  events  of  the  infancy :  The  Yisit  of  the  Magi ;  the  M3,s- 
sacre  of  the  Infants ;  the  Flight  into  Egypt,  and  the  Keturn  to 
Nazareth.  Seven  incidents  connected  with  the  Passion  and  the 
Eesurrection  :  the  Bargain  and  Suicide  of  Judas ;  the  Dream 
of  Pilate's  "Wife ;  the  Eesurrection  of  the  Departed  Saints ; 
the  "Watch  at  the  Sepulchre ;  the  Story  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and 
the  Earthquake  on  the  Kesurrection  Morning.  Ten  great  pas- 
sages of  our  Lord's  discourses  :  Parts  of  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
(v.-vii.) ;  the  Revelation  to  Babes ;  the  Invitations  to  the  "Weary 
(xi.  25-30) ;  Idle  "Words  (xii.  36,  37) ;  the  Prophecy  to  Peter 
(xvi.  17-19) ;  Humility  and  Forgiveness  (xviii.  15-35) ;  Eejec- 
tion  of  the  Jews  (xxi.  43) ;  the  Great  Denunciation  (xxiii.) ; 
the  Discourse  about  Last  Things  (xxv.  31-46) ;  the  Great  Com- 
mission and  Promise  (xxviii.  18-20). 

Hence  Matthew's  is  pre-eminently  the  didactic  Gospel,  one- 
quarter  of  the  whole  being  occupied  with  the  actual  words  and 
discourses  of  the  Lord. 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

Matthew  is  less  characteristic  in  style  than  in  arrangement  and 
matter.  The  orderly,  business-like  traits  which  had  been  fos- 
tei-ed  by  his  employment  as  a  publican,  appear  in  his  methodical 
arrangement  and  grouping  of  his  subject.  His  narrative  is  more 
sober  and  less  graphic  than  either  Mark's  or  Luke's.  The  pict- 
ure of  our  Lord's  life,  character,  and  work,  as  Teacher,  Saviour, 
and  Messianic  King,  is  painted  simply,  broadly,  and  boldly,  but 
without  minute  detail,  such  as  abounds  in  Mark.  His  diction 
and  construction  are  the  most  Hebi'aistic  of  the  synoptists, 
though  less  so  than  those  of  John's  gospel.  The  following 
Hebrew  peculiarities  are  to  be  noted :  1.  The  phrase.  King- 
dom, of  Heaven  {^aaiXeia  toov  ovpavwv),  which  occurs  thirty- 
two  times,  and  is  not  found  in  the  other  evangelists,  who  use 
Kingdom  of  God.  2.  Father  ^Vl  Heamen,  or  Heavenly  Father 
(o  iraTrjp  6  iv  ovpavolv:  6  irarrip  6  ovpdvio<;).  This  occurs  fif- 
teen times  in  Matthew,  only  twice  in  Mark,  and  not  at  all  in 
Luke,  xi.  2  being  a  false  reading.  3.  Son  of  David,  seven 
times  in  Matthew,  three  in  Mark,  three  in  Luke.  4.  The  Holy 
City  (Jerusalem),  in  Matthew  only.  5.  The  end  of  the  world,  or 
consummation  of  the  age  irj  avvreKeia  tov  al&vo<i),  in  Matthew 
only.  6.  In  order  that  it  might  he  fulfilled  which  was  spoken 
(im  or  oTTta?  irXrjpcoSfj  to  pr}9^ev),  eiglit  times  in  Matthew,  and  not 
elsewhere  in  this  form.  This  is  Matthew's  characteristic  for- 
mula. 7.  That  which  was  spoken  (to  pTjS-iv),  twelve  times ;  It 
was  spoken  {eppr)Bnr{),  six  times.  Not  elsewhere  used  of  script- 
ure, for  Mark  xiii.  14  is  a  false  reading.  Matthew  always 
uses  that  which  was  spoken  {to  prj^iv)  when  quoting  scripture 
himself.  In  other  quotations  he  has  It  is  written  {yeypaTTTai), 
like  the  other  evangelists.  He  never  uses  the  singular  jpatfir} 
(properly  a  passage  of  scripture).  8.  And  behold  {kuI  Idov),  in 
narrative,  twenty- three  times ;  in  Luke,  sixteen.  9.  Heathen 
(eSi'tKo?),  in  Matthew  only.  10.  To  swear  in  {ofivveiv  iv,  i.e.,  iy), 
thirteen  times,  in  Matthew  and  Apoc.  x.  6. 

A  number  of  words  condemned  by  the  grammarians  as  un- 
classical  or  as  slang  are  employed  by  Mark,  and  a  few  of  these 
may  be  found  in  Matthew,  such  a,a  fi,ov6(p3-aXp,o'i,  having  one  eye  : 
KoWv/SicrTal,  money-changers  j  Kopdcnov,  m,aid ,'  paif>l<i,  a  needls. 
He  also  uses  some  Latinisms,  three  at  least  in  common  with 


mTRODUCTION.  7 

Mark:  •n-paiTcoptov,  jprmtorium ;  K7]va-o<;,  tribute;   ^'P^^J^^^oo:, 
to  scourge ;  also  KovaT(t^ZCa,  guard,  peculiar  to  him  alone. 

He  frequently  uses  the  words  to  come  or  go  {iTpoakpxoiiaL, 
iropivw)  after  the  oriental  manner,  to  expand  his  narrative  ;  as, 
when  the  tempter  came  he  said  (iv.  3) ;  a  centurion  came  beseech- 
ing (viii.  5) ;  a  scribe  came  and  said  (viii.  19) ;  the  disciples  of 
John  came,  saying  (ix.  li).  The  former  of  these  verbs  {irpoaep- 
X°t''"-i)  occiars  fifty-one  times,  while  in  Mark  it  is  found  but  six 
times,  and  in  Luke,  ten.  The  word  ouap,  a  dream,  is  used  by 
him  alone  in  the  New  Testament,  and  always  in  the  phrase  /car 
ova  ,  in  a  dream.  It  occui's  six  times.  Td<po<i,  a  tomb,  is  also 
peculiar  to  him,  the  other  evangelists  using  /ivrifta  or  fivrjfxeLov, 
the  latter  being  used  also  by  Matthew.  6  Xeyop.evo';,  who  is  called, 
is  a  favorite  expression  in  announcing  names  or  surnames  (i. 
16  ;  X.  2 ;  xxvi.  3, 14).  He  adds  of  the  people  to  scribes  or  elders 
(ii.  4 ;  xxi.  23  ;  xxvi.  3,  47 ;  xxvii.  1).  He  writes,  into  the 
name  {ek  to  opofia),  where  the  other  evangelists  have  iv,  in,  or 
eVt,  upon  (x.  41,  42  ;  xviii.  20  ;  xxviii.  19).  His  favorite  parti- 
cle of  transition  is  rare,  then,  which  occurs  ninety  times,  to  six 
in  Mark  and  fourteen  in  Luke  (ii.  1 ;  iii.  5 ;  viii.  26 ;  xi.  20, 
etc.).  There  are  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  words  which  are 
used  by  him  alone  in  the  ISew  Testament.  Two  instances  oc- 
cur of  a  play  upon  words  :  a<^av(^ovai  cfiavScri,  they  make  their 
real  faces  disappear,  in  order  that  they  may  appear  (vi.  16) ; 
KUKoii';  KaKm<;,  he  will  evilly  destroy  those  evil  husbandmen " 
(xxi.  41). 

The  writer  is  utterly  merged  in  his  narrative.  The  very  lack 
of  individuality  in  his  style  corresponds  with  the  fact  that,  with 
the  single  exception  of  the  incident  of  his  call  and  feast,  he  does 
not  appear  in  his  gospel,  even  as  asking  a  question.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  traces  of  his  old  employment  appear  in  the  use 
of  the  word  tribute-money,  instead  oipenny,  and  in  the  record 
of  the  miracle  of  the  coin  in  the  fish's  mouth  ;  but  the  name 
"Matthew  the  publican"  serves  rather  to  emphasize  his  ob- 
scurity. The  Jew  who  received  the  Messiah  he  portrayed 
could  never  lose  his  disgust  for  the  office  and  class  which  he 
represented.  A  gospel  written  by  a  publican  would  seem  least 
of  all  adapted  to  reach  the  very  people  to  whom  it  was  addressed. 


nSTTRODUCTIOISr. 


Whether  or  not  the  perception  of  this  fact  may  have  combined 
to  produce  this  reticence,  with  the  humility  engendered  by  his 
contemplation  of  his  Lord,  certain  it  is  that  the  evangelist 
himself  is  completely  hidden  behind  the  bold,  broad  masses  in 
which  are  depicted  the  Messiah  of  Jewish  hope,  the  Saviour  of 
mankind,  the  consummate  flower  of  the  ancient  law,  and  the  per- 
fect hfe  and  unrivalled  teaching  of  the  Son  of  David. 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  MATTHEW. 


SUPERSCRIPTION. 


The  Gospel  (eiayjeKiov).  Signifies  originally  apresent  gwen 
m  return  Jbr  joyful  news.  Thus  Homer  makes  Ulysses  say  to 
Eumffius,  "  Let  this  rewa/rd  eiayyekiovhe  given  me  for  my  good 
news  "  (Od.,  xiv.  152).  In  Attic  Greek  it  meant  (in  the  plural) 
a  sacrifice  Jhr  good  tidings.  Later  it  comes  to  mean  the  good 
news  itself— the  joyful  tidings  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  Though 
the  word  came  naturally  to  be  used  as  the  title  of  books  con- 
taining the  history  of  the  good  tidings,  in  the  New  Testament 
itself  it  is  never  employed  in  the  sense  of  a  written  book,  but 
always  means  the  word  preached. 

According  to  (/eara).  This  is  not  the  same  as  the  phrase 
Gospel  of  Matthew.  The  Gospel  is  God's,  not  Matthew's  nor 
Luke's ;  and  is  substantially  one  and  the  same  in  all  the  evan- 
gelists' writings.  The  words  "  according  to,"  therefore,  imply 
a  generic  element  in  the  Gospel  which  Matthew  has  set  forth  in 
his  own  peculiar  style.  The  meaning  is,  the  good  tid/mgs  of  the 
kingdom,  as  delivered  or  represented  Tyy  Matthew. 

M  atth  e w  (^lar^alov).  The  names  Matthew  and  Levi  denote 
the  same  person  (Matt.  ix.  9  ;  Mark  ii.  14 ;  Luke  v.  27).  The 
name  Levi  is  wanting  in  all  lists  of  the  apostles,  but  Matthew  is 
named  in  all  these  lists.  The  Jews  marked  decisive  changes  in 
their  life  by  a  change  of  name  (compare  Simon  and  Peter ;  Saul 
and  Paul) ;  so  that  it  is  evident  that  Levi,  after  his  call  to  the 
apostolate,  styled  himself  Matthew,  a  contracted  form  of  the 


10  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

Hebrew  Mattathias,  meaning  gift  of  God;  a  name  reproduced 
in  the  Greek  Theodore  (^eo?,  God ;  lS>pov,  a  gift).  This  nauie 
so  completely  displaced  the  old  one  that  it  is  anticipated  by 
Matthew  himself  in  ch.  ix.  9,  where  he  is  called  Matthew  ; 
whereas  Mark  and  Luke,  in  narrating  his  call,  more  correctly 
style  him  Levi  (Mark  ii.  14  ;  Luke  v.  27) ;  while  in  their  lists 
of  the  apostles  (Mark  iii.  18 ;  Luke  vi.  15 ;  Acts  i.  13)  they 
rightly  call  him  Matthew. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Yer.  1.  Christ  (Xptcrro?).  Properly  an  adjective,  not  a  noun, 
and  meaning  anointed  (%/3(^ft),  to  anoint).  It  is  a  translation  of 
the  Hebrew  Messiah,  the  king  and  spiritual  ruler  from  David's 
race,  promised  under  that  name  in  the  Old  Testament  (Ps.  ii. 
2  ;  Dan.  ix.  25,  26).  Hence  Andrew  says  to  Simon,  "  "We  have 
found  the  Messiah,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  Christ  (John  i. 
41 ;  compare  Acts  iv.  27 ;  x.  38  ;  xix.  28).  To  us  "  Christ  "  has 
become  a  proper  name,  and  is  therefore  written  without  the 
definite  article ;  but,  in  the  body  of  the  gospel  narratives,  since 
the  identity  of  Jesus  with  the  promised  Messiah  is  still  in  ques- 
tion with  the  people,  the  article  is  habitually  used,  and  the  name 
should  therefore  be  translated  "  the  Christ."  After  the  resur- 
rection, when  the  recognition  of  Jesus  as  Messiah  has  become 
general,  we  find  the  word  beginning  to  be  used  as  a  proper 
name,  with  or  without  the  article.  In  this  passage  it  omits  the 
article,  because  it  occurs  in  the  heading  of  the  chapter,  and  ex- 
presses the  evangelist's  own  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Messiah. 

Anointing  was  applied  to  kings  (1  Sam.  ix.  16  ;  x.  1),  to 
prophets  (1  Kings  xix.  16),  and  to  priests  (Exod.  xxix.  29  ;  xl. 
15  ;  Lev.  xvi.  32)  at  their  inauguration.  "  The  Lord's  anointed  " 
was  a  common  title  of  the  king  (1  Sam.  xii.  3,  5  ;  2  Sam.  i.  14, 
16).  Prophets  are  called  "Messiahs,"  or  anointed  ones  (1 
Chron.  xvi.  22;  Ps.  cv.  15).  Cyrus  is  also  called."  the  Lord's 
Anointed,"  because  called  to  the  throne  to  deliver  the  Jews  out 
of  captivity  (Isa.  xlv.  1).     Hence  the  word  "  Christ "  was  repre- 


Ch.  I.]  MATTHEW.  H 

seiitative  of  our  Lord,  who  united  in  himself  the  offices  of  king, 
prophet,  and  priest. 

It  is  interesting  to  see  how  anointing  attaches  to  our  Lord  in 
other  and  minor  particulars.  Anointing  was  an  act  of  hospi- 
tality and  a  sign  of  festivity  and  cheerfulness.  Jesus  was 
anointed  by  the  woman  when  a  guest  in  the  liouse  of  Simon 
the  Pharisee,  and  rebuked  his  host  for  omitting  this  mark  of 
respect  toward  liini  (Luke  vii.  35,  46).  In  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  (i.  8,  9),  the  words  of  the  Messianic  psalm  (xlv.  7)  are 
applied  to  Jesus,  "  God,  even  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee 
M'ith  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows." 

Anointing  was  practised  upon  the  sick  (Mark  vi.  13 ;  Luke  x. 
34;  Jas.  v.  14).  Jesus,  "the  Great  Physician,"  is  described  by 
Isaiah  (Ixi.  1,  2  ;  compare  Luke  iv.  18)  as  anointed  by  God  to 
bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  and  to  give  the  inournfnl  the  oil  of 
joy  for  mourning.  He  himself  anointed  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
man  (John  ix.  6,  11) ;  and  the  twelve,  in  his  name,  "  anointed 
with  oil  many  that  were  sick,  and  healed  them  "   (Mark  vi.  13). 

Anointing' was  practised  upon  the  dead.  Of  her  who  brake 
the  alabaster  upon  his  head  at  Bethany,  Jesus  said,  "  She  hath 
anointed  my  body  aforehand  for  the  burying  "  (Mark  xiv.  8  ; 
see,  also,  Luke  xxiii.  56). 

The  Son  {ym).  The  word  rexvov  {child}  is  often  used  in- 
terchangeably with  uto9  {son),  but  is  never  applied  to  Christ. 
(For  TeKvov,  see  on  1  John  iii.  1.)  While  in  tskvov  there  is 
commonly  implied  the  passive  or  dependent  relation  of  the 
children  to  the  parents,  v'm  fixes  the  thought  on  the  person 
himself  rather  than  on  the  dependence  upon  his  parents.  It 
suggests  individuality  rather  than  descent;  or,  if  descent, 
mainly  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  the  son  was  worthy  of  his 
parent.  Hence  the  word  marks  the  filial  relation  as  carrying 
with  it  privilege,  dignity,  and  freedom,  and  is,  therefore,  the 
only  appropriate  term  to  express  Christ's  sonship.  (See  John  i. 
18;  iii.  16;  Kom.  viii.  29;  Col.  i.  13,  15.)  Through  Christ 
the  dignity  of  sons  is  bestowed  on  believers,  so  that  the  same 
word  is  appropriate  to  Christians,  sons  of  God.  (See  Eom.  viii. 
14;  ix.  26;  Gal.  iii.  26;  iv.  6,  6,  7.) 


12  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X 

6.  David  the  king  {tov  JavelS  rbv  ^aa-i\ea,  "  the  Ba.vid,  the 
king ").  Both  words  are  thus  emphasized :  the  David  from 
whom  Christ,  if  he  were  the  Messiah,  mmt  have  descended ; 
the  king  with  whom  the  Messiah's  genealogy  entered  upon  the 
kingly  dignity.  In  this  genealogy,  where  the  generations  are 
divided  symmetrically  into  three  sets  of  fourteen,  the  evangelist 
seems  to  connect  the  last  of  each  set  with  a  critical  epoch  in  the 
history  of  Israel :  the  first  reaching  from  the  origin  of  the  race 
to  the  commencement  of  the  monarchy  ("  David  the  king ") ; 
the  second,  from  the  commencement  of  the  monarchy  to  the 
captivity  in  Babylon  ;  the  third  and  last,  from  the  captivity  to 
the  coming  of  "tA«  Christ."  The  same  emphatic  or  demon- 
strative use  of  the  article  occurs  with  the  name  of  Joseph  (ver. 
16),  marking  his  peculiar  relation  to  Jesus  as  the  husband  of 
Mary :  the  Joseph,  the  husband  of  Mary. 

18.  Espoused  Qivrjarev'^elcrr]^:  Eev.,  betrothed;  Tyn.,  maryed). 
The  narrative  implies  a  distinction  between  betrothal  and  mar- 
riage. From  the  moment  of  her  betrothal  a  woman  was  treated 
as  if  actually  married.  The  union  could  be  dissolved  only  by 
regular  divorce.  Breach  of  faithfulness  was  regarded  as  adul- 
tery, and  was  punishable  with  death  (Dent.  xxii.  23,  24),  and 
the  woman's  property  became  virtually  that  of  her  betrothed, 
unless  he  had  expressly  renounced  it ;  but,  even  in  that  case, 
he  was  her  natural  heir. 

19.  Not   willing    (pTj  ^iXmv) — was   minded    (i^ovXij'^rf). 

These  two  words,  describing  the  working  of  Joseph's  mind, 
and  evidently  intended  to  express  different  phases  of  thought, 
open  the  question  of  their  distinctive  meanings  in  the  New 
Testament,  where  they  frequently  occur  {^eXco  much  oftener 
than  ^ov\ofj,ai),  and  where  the  rendering,  in  so  many  cases  by 
the  same  words,  furnishes  no  clue  to  the  distinction.  The  origi- 
nal words  are  often  used  synonymously  in  cases  where  no  dis- 
tinction is  emphasized  ;  but  their  use  in  other  cases  reveals  a 
radical  and  recognized  difference.  An  interchange  is  inad- 
missible when  the  greater  force  of  the  expression  requires 
^iXeiv.     For  instance,  ^ovXeff^ai,  would  be  entirely  inappro- 


Ch.  I.]  MATTHEW. 


13 


priate  at  Matt,  viii.  3,  "7  wiU,  be  thou  cleansed;"  or  at 
Bom.  vii.  16. 

The  distinction,  which  is  abundantly  illustrated  in  Homer,  is 
substantially  maintained  by  the  classical  writers  throughout 
and  in  the  New  Testament.  ' 

QiKetvie,  the  stronger  word,  and  expresses  a  ^purpose  or  de- 
termination or  decree,  the  execution  of  which  is,  or  is  believed 
to  be,  in  the  power  of  him  who  wills.  BovXea^ai  expresses 
wish,  vncUnation,  or  disposition,  whether  one  desires  to  do  a 
thing  himself  or  wants  some  one  else  to  do  it.  GeKeiv,  there- 
fore, denotes  the  active  resolution,  the  will  urging/  on  to  action. 
BovXea-Sai  is  to  ha/oe  a  mind,  to  desire,  sometimes  a  little 
stronger,  running  into  the  sense  of  pm;pose.  0e\eiv  indicates 
the  impulse  of  the  will ;  /3oi/Xeo-^at,  its  tendency.  BovXeaSai 
can  always  be  rendered  by  SiXew,  but  SeXeiv  cannot  always  be 
expressed  by  fiovXea'Aai. 

Thus,  Agamemnon  says,  "  I  would  not  {ovk  e^ekov)  receive 
the  ransom  for  the  maid  {i.e.,  I  refused  to  receive),  because  I 
greatly  desire  (fiovXofiai)  to  have  her  at  home  "  (Homer,  "  D.," 
i.  112).  So  Demosthenes  :  "  It  is  fitting  that  you  should  ie 
willing  (iSeXeiv)  to  listen  to  those  who  wish  (fiovXofiivwv)  to  ad- 
vise "  ("  Olynth.,"  i.  1).  That  is  to  say.  It  is  in  your  power  to 
determine  whether  or  not  yon  will  listen  to  those  who  desire  to 
advise  you,  but  whose  power  to  do  so  depends  on  your  consent. 
Again  :  "  If  the  gods  will  it  {BeXaai)  and  you  wish  it  {^ov\ij(T^e)" 
(Demosth.,  «  Olynth.,"  ii.  20).* 

In  the  New  Testament,  as  observed  above,  though  the  words 
are  often  interchanged,  the  same  distinction  is  recognized.  Thus, 
Matt.  ii.  18,  "Eachael  would  not  (ijSeXe)  be  comforted  ; "  obsti- 
nately and  positively  refused.  Joseph,  having  the  right  and 
power  under  the  (assumed)  circumstances  to  make  Mary  a  pub- 
lic example,  resohed  {'^eXav)  to  spare  her  this  exposure.  Then 
the  question  arose — What  should  he  do  ?     On  this  he  thought, 

*  A  full  dlscussioft  of  the  olasBieal  usage  would  require  an  essay.  The 
critical  student  is  referred  to  the  article  fioixeabai  in  Schmidt's  Synonymik  der 
Griechischen  Sprache,  vol.  iii.,  p.  602.  See,  also,  the  art,  ^i\a,  in  Grimm's 
Clayis  Nov.  Test.  His  classification  of  meanings,  however,  needs  careful  re- 
vision. 


14  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

and,  having  thought  {€v^vixr]^evTo<;),  his  mind  molined  (ten- 
dency), he  was  minded  {e^ovXrjSr})  to  put  her  away  secretly. 

Some  instances  of  the  interchanged  use  of  the  two  words  are 
the  following:  Mark  xv.  15,  "Pilate  willing"  (/SouXo/iew?)  ; 
compare  Luke  xxiii.  20,  "Pilate  willing"  {^iXtov).  Acts 
xxvii.  43,  "  The  centurion  willing  "  (fiouXo/iei/os) ;  Matt,  xxvii. 
17,  "  Whom  will  ye  that  I  release  "  (.JeXere) ;  so  ver.  21.  John 
xviii.  39,  "  ^¥ill  ye  that  I  release  "  (;8ouXe<rSe)  ;  Matt.  xiv.  5, 
"  AVhen  he  would  have  put  liim  to  death  "  {$i\(ov).  Mark  vi. 
48,  "  lie  W02dd  have  passed  hy  them  "  (r/^eXe)  ;  Acts  xix.  30, 
"Paul  would  have  entered"  {0ovXo/xevov).  Acts  xviii.  27, 
"  lie  was  disposed  to  pass  "  {^ovXo/jievov).  Tit.  iii.  8,  "  I  will 
that  thou  affirm  "  {^ov\oiJ,ai,).  Mark  vi.  25,  ''  I  will  that  thou 
give  me"  (^eXw),  etc.,  etc. 

In  the  New  Testament  3eX(o  occurs  in  the  following  senses : 

1.  A  decree  or  determination  of  the  will,  (a)  Of  God  (Matt, 
xii.  7  ;  Rom.  ix.  16,  18  ;  Acts  xviii.  21 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  19  ;  xii.  18  ; 
XV.  38).  (h)  Of  Christ  (Matt.  viii.  3  ;  John  xvii.  24 ;  v.  21 ; 
xxi.  22).  (c)  Of  men  (Acts  xxv.  9).  Festus,  having  the  power 
to  gratify  the  Jews,  and  determining  to  do  so,  says  to  Paul,  who 
has  the  right  to  decide,  "  Wilt  thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ? " 
John  vi.  67,  Others  of  the  disciples  had  decided  to  leave 
Jesus.  Christ  said  to  the  twelve,  "  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  "  Is 
that  your  determination  ?  John  vii.  17,  If  any  man  sets  his 
will,  is  determined  to  do  God's  will.  John  viii.  44,  The  lusts 
of  your  father  your  will  is  set  to  do.     Acts  xxiv.  6. 

2.  A  ^oish  or  desire.  Very  many  of  the  passages,  however, 
which  are  cited  under  this  head  (as  by  Grimm)  may  fairly  be 
interpreted  as  implying  something  stronger  than  a  wish  ;  nota- 
bly Mark  xiv.  36,  of  Christ  in  Gethsemane.  Our  Lord  would 
hardly  have  used  what  thou  wilt  in  so  feeble  a  sense  as  that  of 
a  desire  or  wish  on  God's  part.  Mark  x.  43,  "  Whosoever 
will  be  great,"  expresses  more  than  the  desire  for  greatness.  It 
is  the  purpose  of  the  life.  Matt,  xxvii.  15,  It  was  given  to 
the  Jews  to  decide  what  prisoner  should  be=released.  Luke  i. 
62,  The  name  of  the  infant  John  was  referred  to  Zacharias' 
decision.  John  xvii.  24,  Surely  Christ  does  more  than  desire 
that  those  whom  the  Father  has  given  him  shall  be  with  him. 


Ch.  I]  MATTHEW.  15 

Luke  ix.  54,  It  is  for  Jesus  to  command  fire  upon  the 
Samaritan  villages  if  he  so  wills.  (See,  also,  John  xv.  7 ;  1  Cor. 
iv.  21 ;  Matt.  xvi.  25 ;  xix.  17  ;  John  xxi.  22  ;  Matt.  xiii.  28  ; 
xvii.  12.)  In  the  sense  of  wish  or  desi/re  may  fairly  be  cited  2 
Cor.  xi.  12  ;  Matt.  xii.  38 ;  Luke  viii.  20  ;  xxiii.  8  ;  John  xii. 
21 ;  Gal.  iv.  20 ;  Matt.  vii.  12  ;  Mark  x.  35. 

3.  A  liking  (Mark  xii.  38 ;  Luke  xx.  46  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  43). 
(See  note  there.) 

Bov\o/Mai  occurs  in  the  following  senses : 

1.  Indinaiion  or  disposition  (Acts  xviii.  27 ;  xix.  30 ;  xxv. 
22 ;  xxviii.  18 ;  2  Cor.  i.  15). 

2.  Stronger,  with  the  idea  of  purpose  (1  Tim.  vi.  9  ;  James 
i.  18  ;  iii.  4  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  11 ;   Heb.  vi.  17). 

In  most,  if  not  all  of  these  cases,  we  might  expect  ^eXetv  ; 
but  in  this  use  of  ^ov\ofiai  there  is  an  implied  emphasis  on  the 
element  of  free  choice  or  self-determ,ination,  which  imparts  to 
the  desire  or  inclination  a  decretory  force.  This  element  is  in  the 
human  will  by  gift  and  consent.  In  the  divine  will  it  is  inherent. 
At  this  point  the  Homeric  usage  may  be  compared  in  its  occa- 
sional employment  of  ^ovXofiai  to  express  determination,  but 
only  with  reference  to  the  gods,  in  whom  to  wish  is  to  will. 
Thus,  "  Whether  Apollo  will  (/SoOXerat)  ward  off  the  plague  " 
{"  II.,"  i.  67).  "  Apollo  ^uilled  (/SouXero)  victory  to  the  Tro- 
jans" ("II.,"  vii.  21). 

To  make  a  public  example  {Beiyfiaria-ai).  The  word  is 
kindred  to  heiicvviJLi,,  to  exhibit,  display,  point  out.  Here,  there- 
fore, to  expose  Mary  to  public  shame  (Wye,  publish  her ;  Tyn., 
defame  her).  The  word  occurs  in  Coloss.  ii.  15,  of  the  victo- 
rious Saviour  displaying  the  vanquished  powers  of  evil  as  a 
general  displays  his  trophies  or  captives  in  a  triumphal  proces- 
sion. "  He  made  a  show  of  them  openly."  A  compound  of 
the  same  word  {■n-apaBeiyfiaTi^co)  appears  in  Heb.  vi.  6,  "  They 
crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  a,nd  put  him  to  an  open  shame." 

21.  Shalt  call.  Thus  committing  the  office  of  a  father  to 
Joseph.  The  naming  of  the  unborn  Messiah  would  accord  with 
popular  notions.     The  Eabbis  had  a  saying  concerning  the  six 


16  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

whose  names  were  given  before  their  birth :  "  Isaac,  Ishmael, 
Moses,  Solomon,  Josiah,  and  the  name  of  the  Messiah,  whom 
may  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  His  name,  bring  quickly  in  our 
days." 

Jesus  (Itjo-ow).  The  Greek  form  of  a  Hebrew  name,  which 
had  been  borne  by  two  illustrious  individuals  in  former  periods 
of  the  Jewish  history — Joshua,  the  successor  of  Moses,  and 
Jeshua,  the  high-priest,  who  with  Zerubbabel  took  so  active  a 
part  in  the  re-establishment  of  the  civil  and  religious  polity  of 
the  Jews  on  their  return  from  Babylon.  Its  original  and  full 
form  is  Jekoshua,  becoming  by  contraction  Joshua  or  Jeshua. 
Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  the  successor  of  Moses,  was  originally 
named  Hoshea  {saving),  which  was  altered  by  Moses  into 
Jehoshua  {Jehovah{pur)  Salvation)  (Num.  xiii.  16).  The  mean- 
ing of  the  name,  therefore,  finds  expression  in  the  title  Saviour, 
applied  to  our  Lord  (Luke  i.  47 ;  ii.  11 ;  John  iv.  42). 

Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  is  a  type  of  Christ  in  his  office  of 
captain  and  deliverer  of  his  people,  in  the  military  aspect  of 
his  saving  work  (Apoc.  xix.  11-16).  As  God's  revelation  to 
Moses  was  in  the  character  of  a  law-giver,  his  revelation  to 
Joshua  was  in  that  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  (Josh.  v.  13,  14).  • 
Under  Joshua  the  enemies  of  Israel  were  conquered,  and  the 
people  established  in  the  Promised  Land.  So  Jesus  leads  his 
people  in  the  fight  with  sin  and  temptation.  He  is  the  leader 
of  the  faith  which  overcomes  the  world  (Heb.  xii.  2).  Follow- 
ing him,  we  enter  into  rest. 

The  priestly  office  of  Jesus  is  foreshadowed  in  the  high-priest 
Jeshua,  who  appears  in  the  vision  of  Zechariah  (ch.  iii.;  compare 
Ezra  ii.  2)  in  court  before  God,  under  accusation  of  Satan,  and 
clad  in  filthy  garments.  Jeshua  stands  not  only  for  himself, 
but  as  the  representative  of  sinning  and  suffering  Israel.  Satan 
is  defeated.  The  Lord  rebukes  him,  and  declares  that  he  will 
redeem  and  restore  this  erring  people  ;  and  in  token  thereof  he 
commands  that  the  accused  priest  be  clad  in  clean  robes  and 
crowned  with  the  priestly  mitre. 

Thus  in  this  priestly  Jeshua  we  have  a  type  of  our  "  Great 
High-Priest,  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and 


Ch.  L]  MATTHEW.  IT 

in  all  points  tempted  and  tried  like  as  we  are ; "  confronting 
Satan  in  the  wilderness  ;  trying  conclusions  with  him  upon  the 
victims  of  his  malice — the  sick,  the  sinful,  and  the  demon-ridden. 
His  royal  robes  are  left  behind.  He  counts  not  "  equality  with 
God  a  thing  to  be  grasped  at,"  but  "  empties  himself,"  taking 
the  "form  of  a  servant,''  humbling  himself  and  becoming 
"  obedient  even  unto  death  "  (Philip,  ii.  6, 7,  Kev.).  He  assumes 
the  stained  garments  of  our  humanity.  He  who  "  knew  no 
sin  "  is  "  made  to  be  sin  on  our  behalf,  that  we  might  become 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  him  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  He  is  at  once 
priest  and  victim.  He  pleads  for  sinful  man  before  God's 
throne.  He  will  redeem  him.  He  will  rebuke  the  malice  and 
cast  down  the  power  of  Satan.  He  will  behold  him  "  as  lightning 
fall  from  heaven "  (Luke  x.  18).  He  will  raise  and  save  and 
purify  men  of  weak  natures,  rebellious  wills,  and  furious  pas- 
sions— cowardly  braggarts  and  deniers  like  Peter,  persecutors 
like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  charred  brands— and  make  them  witnesses 
of  his  grace  and  preachers  of  his  love  and  power.  His  king- 
dom shall  be  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  the  song  of  his  redeemed 
church  shall  be,  "  unto  him  that  loveth  us,  and  loosed  us  from 
our  sins  by  his  own  blood,  and  made  us  to  be  a  kingdom,  to  be 
priests  unto  his  God  and  Father ;  to  him  be  the  glory  and  the 
dominion  forever  and  ever.    Amen"  (Apoc.  i.  5,  6,  in  Kev.). 

It  is  no  mere  fancy  which  sees  a  suggestion  and  a  foreshadow- 
ing of  the  prophetic  work  of  Jesus  in  the  economy  of  salvation, 
in  a  third  name  closely  akin  to  the  former.  Soshea,  which  we 
know  in  our  English  Bible  as  Hosea,  was  the  original  name  of 
Joshua  (compare  Kom.  ix.  25,  Kev.)  and  means  saving.  He  is,  in 
a  peculiar  sense,  the  prophet  of  grace  and  salvation,  placing  his 
hope  in  God's  personal  coming  as  the  refuge  and  strength  of 
humanity ;  in  the  purification  of  human  life  by  its  contact  with 
the  divine.  The  great  truth  which  he  has  to  teach  is  the  love 
of  Jehovah  to  Israel  as  expressed  in  the  relation  of  hushand, 
an  idea  which  pervades  his  prophecy,  and  which  is  generated 
by  his  own  sad  domestic  experience.  He  foreshadows  Jesus  in 
his  pointed  warnings  against  sin,  his  repeated  offers  of  diving 
mercy,  and  his  patient,  forbearing  love,  as  manifested  in  his 
dealing  with  an  unfaithful  and  dissolute  wife,  whose  soul  he 
2 


IS  WOED   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca  I. 

succeeded  in  rescuing  from  sin  and  death  (Hosea  i.-iii.)-  So 
long  as  he  lived,  he  was  one  continnal,  living  prophecy  of  the 
tenderness  of  God  toward  sinners ;  a  picture  of  God's  love  for 
us  when  alien  from  him,  and  with  nothing  in  us  to  love.  The 
faithfulness  of  the  prophetic  teacher  thus  blends  in  Hosea,  as 
in  our  Lord,  with  the  compassion  and  sympathy  and  sacrifice 
of  the  priest. 

H  e  (avT09).  Emphatic ;  and  so  rightly  in  Eev.,  "  For  it  is  He 
that  shall  save  his  people." 

Their  sins  (dfiapTiwv).  Akin  to  a/j,apTdva>,  to  miss  a  mark,' 
as  a  warrior  who  throws  his  spear  and  fails  to  strike  his  adver- 
sary, or  as  a  traveller  who  misses  his  way.*  In  this  word,  there- 
fore, one  of  a  large  gi-oup  which  represent  sin  under  different 
phases,  sin  is  conceived  as  a  failing  and  m,issing  the  1/rue  end 
and  scape  of  our  lives,  which  is  God. 

22.  Through  the  prophet  (8to).  So  the  Eev.  rightly,  in- 
stead of  ly.  In  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  the  writers 
habitually  use  the  preposition  hia  {through)  to  denote  the  instru- 
m,entality  through  which  God  works  or  speaks,  while  they  re- 
serve viro  (by)  to  express  the  primary  agency  of  God  himself. 
So  here  the  prophecy  in  ver.  23  was  spoken  hy  the  Lord,  but  was 
communicated  to  men  through  his  prophet. 

23.  The  virgin  (?;  irap^evo<s).  Note  the  demonstrative  force 
of  the  article,  pointing  to  a  particular  person.  Not,  some  virgin 
or  other.  ^ 

They  shall  call  (leaXea-ova-iv.)  In  Yev.  21,  it  is  thou  shalt  call. 
The  original  of  Isaiah  (vii.  14)  has  she  shall  call ;  but  Matthew 
generalizes  the  singular  into  the  plural,  and  quotes  the  prophecy 
in  a  form  suited  to  its  larger  and  final  fulfilment :  men  shall  call 
his  name  Immanuel,  as  they  shall  come  to  the  practical  knowl- 
edge that  God  will  indeed  dwell  with  men  upon  the  earth. 

immanuel  (Hebrew,  Godis  with  us).  To  protect  and  save.  A 
comment  is  furnished  by  Isa.  viii.  10,  "  Devise  a  device,  but  it 
shall  come  to  naught ;  speak  a  word,  but  it  shall  not  standj  for 

*  See  Homer,  "  Iliad,"  ix.,  501  ;  Sophocles,  "  Oedipus  Tyranuus,"  631. 


Oh.  n.]  MATTHEW.  19 

with  US  is  God.""  Some  suppose  that  Isaiah  embodied  the  pur- 
port of  his  message  ia  the  names  of  his  children:  Maher- 
shalal-hash-'baz  {speed-prey),  a  warning  of  the  coming  of  the 
fierce  Assyrians ;  Shear-Jashub  {a  remnant  shall  return),  a  re- 
minder of  God's  mercy  to  Israel  in  captivity,  and  Immanuel 
( God  is  with  us),  a  promise  of  God's  presence  and  succor.  How- 
ever this  may  be,  the  promise  of  the  name  is  fulfilled  in  Jesus 
(compare  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,"  Matt,  xxviii.  20)  by  his 
helpful  and  saving  presence  with  his  people  in  their  sorrow, 
their  conflict  with  sin,  and  their  struggle  with  death. 

24.  The  or  his  sleep  [rod  iiirvov).  The  force  of  the  defi- 
nite article  ;  the  sleep  in  which  he  had  the  vision.  So  Eev., 
"Arose  from  his  sleep." 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  Bethlehem.  Hebrew,  House  of  Bread,  probably  from 
its  fertility.  The  birthplace  of  him  who  calls  himself  the  Bread 
of  Life  (John  vi.  35),  and  identified  with  the  history  of  his 
human  ancestry  through  Ruth,  who  wa§  liere  married  to  Boaz, 
and  was  the  ancestress  of  David  (i.  5,  6),  and  through  David 
himself,  who  was  born  there,  and  anointed  king  by  Samuel  (com- 
pare Luke  ii.  11,  city  of  Da/oid). 

Wise  men,  or  Magi  {fid'foi).  Wycliffe  renders  hmgs.  A 
priestly  caste  among  the  Persians  and  Medes,  which  occupied 
itself  principally  with  the  secrets  of  nature,  astrology,  and 
medicine.  Daniel  became  president  of  such  an  order  in  Baby- 
Ion  (Dan.  ii.  48).  The  word  became  transferred,  without  dis- 
tinction of  country,  to  all  who  had  devoted  themselves  to  those 
sciences,  which  were,  however,  frequently  accompanied  with 
the  practice  of  magic  and  jugglery  ;  and,  under  the  form  magi- 
ciari,  it  has  come  to  be  naturalized  in  many  of  the  languages  of 
Europe.  Many  absurd  traditions  and  guesses  respecting  these 
visitors  to  our  Lord's  cradle  liave  found  their  way  into  popular 
belief  and  into  Christian  art.     They  were  said  to  be  kings,  and 


20  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

three  in  number ;  they  were  said  to  be  representatives  of  the 
three  families  of  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet,  and  therefore  one  of 
them  is  pictured  as  an  Ethiopian ;  their  names  are  given  as 
Caspar,  Balthasar,  and  Melchior,  and  their  three  skulls,  said  to 
have  been  discovered  in  the  twelfth  century  by  Bishop  Reinald 
of  Cologne,  are  exhibited  in  a  priceless  casket  in  the  great 
cathedral  of  that  city. 

2.  The  east  {avaroXri).  Literally,  the  risim^.  Some  com- 
mentators prefer  to  render  at  its  rising,  or  when  it  rose.  In 
Luke  i.  78,  the  word  is  translated  dayspring,  or  damn.  The 
kindred  verb  occurs  in  Matt.  iv.  16,  "light  did  sprirtg  wp" 
{aviTeiKev). 

4.  All  the  chief  priests.  We  should  expect  only  owe  chief 
priest  to  be  mentioned ;  but  the  oflElce  had  become  a  lucrative 
one,  and  frequently  changed  hands.  A  rabbi  is  quoted  as  say- 
ing that  the  first  temple,  which  stood  about  four  hundred  and 
ten  years,  had  only  eighteen  high-priests  from  first  to  last; 
while  the  second  temple,  which  stood  four  hundred  and  twenty 
years,  had  more  than  three  hundred  high-priests.  The  refer- 
ence here  is  not  to  a  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrim,  since  the  elders, 
who  are  not  mentioned,  belonged  to  this ;  but  to  an  extraordi- 
nary convocation  of  all  the  high-priests  and  learned  men.  Be- 
sides the  high-priest  in  actual  oflBce,  there  might  be  others  who 
had  been  his  predecessors,  and  who  continued  to  bear  the  name, 
and  in  part  the  dignity.  It  may  possibly  have  included  the 
heads  of  the  twenty-four  courses  of  priests. 

6.  Land  of  Judah.  To  distinguish  it  from  Bethlehem  in 
the  territory  of  Zebulon. 

Shall  be  shepherd  of  (Troifiavel),  irom  troi/j.'^v,  a  shepherd. 
So  Eev.,  rightly,  instead  of  shall  rule.  The  word  involves  the 
whole  office  of  the  shepherd — guiding,  guarding,  folding,  as 
well  as  feeding.  Hence  appropriate  and  often  applied  to  the 
guides  and  guardians  of  others.  Homer  calls  kings  "  the  shep- 
herds of  the  people."    To  David  the  people  said,  "The  Lord 


Oh.  II.]  MATTHEW.  gj 

said  to  thee,  Thou  shalt  feed  (as  a  shepherd)  my  people  Israel " 
(g  Sam.  V.  2 ;  compare  Ps.  Ixxviii.  TO-72).  God  is  often  called 
a  shepherd  (Gen.  xlviii.  15  ;  Ps.  xxiii.  1 ;  Ixxvii.  20  ;  Ixxx.  1 ; 
Isa.  xl.  11 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  11-31).  Jesus  calls  himself  the  good 
shepherd  (John  x.  11).  Peter,  who  is  bidden  by  Jesus  to  shep- 
herd hie  sheep  (John  xxi.  16,  iro^fiaive,  Eev.,  tend),  calls  him  the 
Sh&pherd  of  Souls  (1  Pet.  ii.  25),  and  the  Chief  Shepherd  (1 
Pet.  V.  4) ;  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (xiii.  20),  he  is 
styled  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep.  In  Apoc.  ii.  27,  rule  is 
literally  to  shepherd  (compare  xix.  15) ;  but  Christ  will  shep- 
herd his  enemies,  not  with  the  pastoral  crook,  but  with  a  sceptre 
of  iron.  Finally,  Jesus  will  perpetuate  this  name  and  oflSce  in 
heaven  among  his  redeemed  ones,  for  "the  Lanib,  which  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,  shall  ie  their  shepherd  (Apoc.  vii.  17,  Rev.). 
In  this  verse  the  word  governor  is  in  harmony  with  the  idea  of 
shepherding,  since  the  word  ■nyov/ievo';  originally  means  one 
who  goes  before,  or  leads  the  way,  and  suggests  Christ's  words 
about  the  good  shepherd  in  John  x.  3,  4 :  "  He  calleth  his  own 
sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out.  .  .  .  He  goeth 
before  them,  and  the  sheep  follow  him." 

Inquired  diligently  (^Kp^/Saxrei').  Better  learned aG(yurately. 
The  verb  is  formed  from  aKpo<s,  at  the  point  or  end.  The  idea 
is,  therefore,  he  ascertavned  to  the  last  point ;  denoting  the  ex- 
actness of  the  information  rather  than  the  diligence  of  the 
search  for  it.  Compare  ver.  8,  "  Search  out  ca/refully  "  {uKpi- 
|8ffl?).     So  the  Eev.  for  diUgenily. 

What  time  the  star  appeared  (tw  -xp^vov  rov  ^aivo/ihov 
cunepofs).  Lit.,  the  tvme  of  the  appearvng  sta/r.  Herod  asks, 
"  How  long  does  the  star  mahe  itself  visible  since  its  rising  in 
the  East  f  rather  than  '■^  At  what  time  did  it  appear  f  " 

12.  Being  warned  {yjpi]p.arujMvTe<i).  The  verb  means  to 
give  a  response  to  one  who  asks  or  consults :  hence,  in  the  pas- 
sive, as  here,  to  receive  an  answer.  The  word  therefore  implies 
that  the  wise  men  had  sought  counsel  of  God ;  and  so  Wycliffe, 
"  And  answer  taken  in  sleep.''^ 


22  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IIL 

16.  The  children  {tov9  TratSa?).  Male  children,  as  is  indi- 
cated by  the  masculine  form  of  the  article,  and  so  Eev. 

23.  The  prophets.  Note  the  plural,  as  indicating  not  any 
one  prediction  in  particular,  but  a  summary  of  the  import  of 
several  prophetic  statements,  such  as  Ps.  xxii.  6,  8  ;  Ixix.  11, 
19 ;  Isa.  liii.  2,  3,  4. 

A  Nazarene.  A  term  of  contempt  (compare  John  i.  46,  and 
vii.  52).  The  very  name  of  Nazareth  suggested  insignificance. 
In  Hebrew  it  meant  sprout  or  sAoot.  The  name  is  prophetically 
given  to  the  Messiah  (Isa.  xi.  1).  In  Isa.  x.  33,  34,  the  fate  of 
Assyria  is  described  imder  the  figure  of  the  felling  of  a  cedar- 
forest.  The  figure  of  the  tree  is  continued  at  the  opening  of 
ch.  xi.  concerning  the  Jewish  state.  The  cedar  throws  out  no 
fresh  suckers,  but  the  oak  is  a  tree  "  in  which,  after  the  felling, 
a  stock  remaineth  "  (Isa.  vi.  13  ;  compare  Job  xiv.  9).  There  is  a 
future  then  for  Israel,  represented  by  the  oak.  "  There  shall 
come  forth  a  shoot  from  the  stock  of  Jesse,  and  a  twig  from 
his  roots  shall  bear  fruit."  As  David  sprang  from  the  humble 
family  of  Jesse,  so  the  Messiah,  the  second  David,  shall  arise 
out  of  great  humiliation.  The  fact  that  Jesus  grew  up  at  Naz- 
areth was  sufficient  reason  for  his  being  despised.  He  was  not 
a  lofty  branch  on  the  summit  of  a  stately  tree ;  not  a  recog- 
nized and  honored  son  of  the  royal  house  of  David,  now  fallen, 
but  an  insignificant  sprout  from  the  roots  of  Jesse ;  a  Hazarene, 
of  an  upstart  sprout-town. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  In  those  days.  The  phrase  is  indefinite,  but  always 
points  back  to  a  preceding  date  ;  in  this  case  to  the  date  of  the 
settlement  of  the  family  at  Nazareth.  "  In  those  days,"  i.e., 
some  time  during  the  nearly  thirty  years  since  that  settlement 

John.  Hebrew,  meaning  God  has  dealt  graoiomly.  Compare 
the  German  GoUhold. 


Ch.  III.]  MATTHEW.  23 

Came  {irapaylverai.).  Rev.,  cometh.  The  verb  is  used  in 
what  is  called  the  historical ^esent,  giving  vividness  to  the  nar- 
rative, as  Carlyle  ("  French  Revolution  ") :  "  But  now  also  the 
National  Deputies  from  all  ends  of  France  are  in  Paris  with 
their  commissions."     "  In  those  days  appears  John  the  Baptist." 

Preaching  {KTjpvaawv).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  5. 

Wilderness  {ttj  ipi]/j,^).  Not  suggesting  absolute  barrenness 
but  unappropriated  territory  affording  free  range  for  shepherds 
and  their  flocks.  Hepworth  Dixon  ("  The  Holy  Land  ")  says, 
"  Even  in  the  wilderness  nature  is  not  so  stern  as  man.  Here 
and  there,  in  clefts  and  basins,  and  on  the  liillsides,  grade  on 
grade,  you  observe  a  patch  of  corn,  a  clump  of  olives,  a  single 
palm." 

2.  Repent  (/ieravoetTe).  A  word  compounded  of  the  preposi- 
tion fMerd,  after,  with  ;  and  the  verb  vokto,  to  percevve,  and  to 
think,  as  the  result  of  perceiving  or  observing.  In  tliis  com- 
pound the  preposition  combines  the  two  meanings  of  time  and 
change,  which  may  be  denoted  by  after  and  diferent  /  so  that 
the  whole  compound  means  to  think  differently  after.  Merd- 
voia  [repentance)  is  therefore,  primarily,  an  after-thought, 
different  from  the  former  thought ;  then,  a  change  of  mind 
which  issues  in  regret  and  in  change  of  conduct.  These  latter 
ideas,  however,  have  been  imported  into  the  word  by  scriptural 
usage,  and  do  not  lie  in  it  etymologically  nor  by  primary  usage. 
Repentance,  then,  has  been  rightly  defined  as  "  Such  a  vii-tuous 
alteration  of  the  mind  and  purpose  as  begets  a  like  virtuous 
change  in  the  life  and  practice."  Sorrow  is  not,  as  is  popularly 
conceived,  the  primary  nor  the  prominent  notion  of  the  woi'd. 
Paul  distinguishes  between  sorrow  (Xvirr))  and  repentance  {fMerd- 
voia),  and  puts  the  one  as  the  outcome  of  the  other.  "  Godly 
sorrow  worketh  repentance"  (2  Cor.  vii.  10). 

The  kingdom  of  heaven.  Lit.,  thekingdom  of  the  heavens 
(jj  ^offCKeia  twv  olpavmv).  An  expression  peculiar  to  Matthew. 
The  more  usual  one  is  the  kingdom  of  Ood.     It  is  a  kingdom 


24  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IIL 

of  heaven  because  its  origin,  its  end,  its  king,  the  character  and 
destiny  of  its  subjects,  its  laws,  institutions,  and  privileges — all 
are  heavenly.  In  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  in  the  apostolic 
writings  tlie  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  is  the  actual  consumma- 
tion of  the  prophetic  idea  of  the  rule  of  God,  without  any 
national  limitation,  so  that  participation  therein  rests  only  on 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  on  the  moral  renewal  which  is  condi- 
tioned by  the  same.  It  is  the  combination  of  all  rights  of 
Christian  citizenship  in  this  world,  and  eternal  blessedness  in 
the  next.  All  its  senses  are  only  different  sides  of  the  same 
great  idea — the  subjection  of  all  things  to  God  in  Christ. 

Voice.  John's  personality  is  thrown  into  shadow  behind 
Christ.  "  What  would  be  the  duty  of  a  merely  human  teacher 
of  the  highest  moral  aim,  entrusted  with  a  great  spiritual  mis- 
sion and  lesson  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  ?  The  example  of 
St.  John  Baptist  is  an  answer  to  this  inquiry.  Such  a  teacher 
would  represent  himself  as  a  mere  '  voice,'  crying  aloud  in  the 
moral  wilderness  around  him,  and  anxious,  beyond  aught  else, 
to  shroud  his  own  insignificant  person  beneath  the  majesty  of 
his  message  "  (Liddon,  "  Our  Lord's  Divinity  "). 

6.  Were  baptized  {i^aTrri^ovro).     See  on  Mark  vii.  4. 

Confessing  their  sins  {i^ofioXoyovftevot  ra?  dfiapTia<;  avr&v). 
The  words  imply  :  1.  That  confession  was  connected  with  bap- 
tism. They  were  baptized  while  in  the  act  of  confessing.  2. 
An  open  confession,  not  a  private  one  to  John  (e'f,  compare 
Acts  xix.  18  ;  Jas.  v.  16).  3.  An  imdvoidual  confession  ;  possi- 
bly a  specific  one.     (See  Luke  iii.  10-15.) 

9.  These  stones.  Pointing,  as  he  spoke,  to  the  pebbles  on 
the  beach  of  the  Jordan. 

10.  Is  laid  {jcu-raC).  Not,  is  applied,  as  "  She  layeth  her 
hands  to  the  spindle  "  (Prov.  xxxi.  19),  but  is  lying. 

Is  hewn  down  and  cast.     The  present  tense  is  graphic,  denot 
ing  what  is  to  happen  at  once  and  certainly. 


Ch.  in.]  MATTHEW.      »  25 

11.  To  bear.  Compare  to  unloose,  Mark  i.  7.  John  puts  him- 
self in  the  position  of  the  meanest  of  servants.  To  lea/r  the  san- 
dals of  their  masters,  that  is,  to  bring  and  take  them  away,  as 
well  as  to  fasten  or  to  take  them  off,  was,  among  the  Jews, 
Greeks,  and  Romans,  the  business  of  slaves  of  the  lowest  rank. 

12.  Fan,  floor  (Wye.  has  corn-floor).  The  picture  is  of  a 
farmer  at  his  threshing-floor,  the  area  of  hard-beaten  earth  on 
which  the  sheaves  are  spread  and  the  grain  trodden  out  by 
animals.  Hisyan,  that  is  his  winnowmg-shovel  or  forJc,  is  in  his 
hand,  and  with  it  he  throws  up  the  mingled  wheat  and  chaff 
against  the  wind  in  order  to  separate  the  grain.* 

Throughly  cleanse  {SiaKoSapiel).  Throuffhh/ {retained  by 
Kev.)  obsolete  form  of  thoroughly,  is  the  force  of  the  preposi- 
tion Bid  {through).  In  that  preposition  lies  the  picture  of  the 
farmer  beginning  at  one  side  of  the  floor,  and  working  through 
to  the  other,  cleansing  as  he  goes. 

The  whole  metaphor  represents  the  Messiah  as  separating 
the  evil  from  the  good,  according  to  the  tests  of  his  kingdom 
and  Gospel,  receiving  the  worthy  into  his  kingdom  and  con- 
signing the  unworthy  to  destruction  (compare  Matt.  xiii.  30 ; 
39^3;  48-50). 

14.  Forbad  {Sieiemkvev).  The  A.  V.,  following  "Wye.  and 
Tynd.,  misses  the  meaning  of  the  verb.  As  in  so  many  in- 
stances, it  overlooks  the  force  of  the  imperfect  tense,  which  ex- 
presses past  action,  either  in  progress  or  in  process  of  concep- 
tion, in  the  agent's  mind.  John  did  not  forbid  Jesus,  but  had 
it  m  mind  to  prevent  him  :  was  for  himdervng  him.  Hence 
Eev.,  properly,  would  home  hindered  him.  Again,  the  prepo- 
sition {hid)  intensifies  the  verb,  and  represents  strong  feeling  on 
John's  part.  He  was  moved  to  sbremuous  protest  against  Jesus' 
baptism  by  him. 

16.  As  a  dove  (wo-ei  Trepurrepav).  In  the  form  of  a  dove,  and 
not,  as  some  interpret,  referring  merely  to  the  manner  of  the 
descent — swiftly  and  gently  as  a  dove  (compare  Luke  iii.  22  "  Jn 

*  Floor,  S\<i>ya,  properly  a  circular  space.  Used  also  of  t?ie  disk  of  the  sun 
or  moon,  or  of  a  halo,  which  is  a  transcript  of  the  Greek  word. 


26  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HI- 

a  bodily  form,  as  a  dove").  The  dove  was  an  ancient  symbol 
of  purity  and  innocence,  adopted  by  onr  Lord  in  Matt.  x.  16. 
It  was  the  only  bird  allowed  to  be  offered  in  sacrifice  by  the 
Levitical  law.  In  Christian  art  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  that  in  his  Old  Testament  manifestations  as  well  as 
in  those  of  the  New  Testament.  From  a  very  early  date  the 
dove  brooding  over  the  waters  was  the  type  of  the  opening 
words  of  Genesis.  An  odd  fresco  on  the  choir- walls  of  the 
Cathedral  of  Monreale,  near  Palermo,  represents  a  waste  of 
waters,  and  Christ  above,  leaning  forward  from  the  circle  of 
heaven  with  extended  arms.  From  beneath  him  issues  the 
divine  ray  along  which  the  dove  is  descending  upon  the  waters. 
So  Milton : 

"Thou  from  the  first 
Wast  present,  and  with  mighty  wings  outspread 
Dove-like  sat'st  brooding  on  the  vast  abyss 
And  mad'st  it  pregnant." 

In  art,  the  double-headed  dove  is  the  peculiar  attribute  of  the 
prophet  Elisha.  A  window  in  Lincoln  College,  Oxford,  repre- 
sents him  with  the  double-headed  dove  perched  upon  his 
shoulder.  The  symbol  is  explained  by  Elisha's  prayer  that  a 
double  portion  of  Elijah's  spirit  might  rest  upon  him. 

It  has  been  asserted  that,  nmong  the  Jews,  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  presented  under  the  symbol  of  a  dove,  and  a  passage  is 
cited  from  the  Talmud  ;  "  The  Spirit  of  God  moved  on  the  face 
of  the  waters  like  a  dove."  Dr.  Edersheim  ("  Life  and  Times 
of  Jesus  the  Messiah  ")  vigorously  contradicts  this,  and  says 
that  the  passage  treats  of  the  supposed  distance  between  the 
upper  and  the  lower  waters,  which  was  only  three  finger- 
breadths.  This  is  proved  by  Gen.  i.  2,  where  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  said  to  brood  over  the  face  of  the  waters,  "  just  as  a  dove 
broodeth  over  her  young  without  touching  them."  "  Thus  the 
comparison  is  not  between  the  Spirit  and  the  dove,  but  between 
the  closeness  with  which  a  dove  broods  over  her  young  without 
touching  them,  and  the  supposed  proximity  of  the  Spirit  to  the 
lower  waters  without  touching  them."  He  goes  on  to  say  that 
the  dove  was  not  the  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  of  Israel. 
"  If,  therefore,  r<M>im,ic  illustration  of  the  descent  of  the  Holv 


Ch.  IV.]  MATTHEW.  27 

Spirit  with  the  visible  appearance  of  a  dove  must  be  sought  for, 
it  would  lie  in  the  acknowledgment  of  Jesus  as  the  ideal  typical 
Israelite,  the  representative  of  his  people." 


CHAPTER  lY. 

1.  The  Devil  {tov  Bui^6\ov).  Theword  means  calumniator, 
slanderer.  It  is  sometimes  applied  to  men,  as  to  Judas  (John  vi. 
70) ;  in  1  Tim.  iii.  11  {slanderers) ;  and  in  2  Tim.  iii.  3,  and  Tit.  ii. 
3  {false  accusers).  In  such  cases  never  with  the  article.  The 
Devil,  Satan,  the  god  of  this  world  (o  Sid^oXo<;),  is  always  with 
the  article  and  never  plural.    This  should  be  distinguished  from 

another  word,  also  wrongly  rendered  devil  in   the  A.  Y. 

haifxcov,  and  its  more  common  neuter  form  8ai/u,6vi,ov,  both  of 
which  should  be  translated  demon,  meaning  the  unclean  spir- 
its which  possessed  men,  and  were  cast  out  by  Christ  and  his 
apostles.  The  Eev.,  unfortunately,  and  against  the  protest  of 
the  American  revisers,  retains  devil  for  both  words,  except  in 
Acts  xvii.  18,  where  it  renders  as  A.  V.  gods. 

The  Son  of  God.  By  its  position  in  the  sentence  Son  is  em- 
phatic.    "  If  thou  standest  to  God  in  the  relation  of  Son." 

Bread  (ajOTot).  Lit.,loaves  or  cakes.  So  Wye,  loaves.  These 
stones  were  perhaps  those  "  silicious  accretions,"  which  assume 
the  exact  shape  of  little  loaves  of  bread,  and  which  were  repre- 
sented in  legend  as  the  petrified  fruits  of  the  cities  of  the  plain. 
By  a  similar  fancy  certain  crystallizations  on  Mount  Carmel  and 
near  Bethlehem  are  called  "  Elijah's  melons,"  and  the  "  Virgin 
Mary's  peas ; "  and  the  black  and  white  stones  found  along  the 
shores  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee  have  been  transformed  into  traces 
of  the  tears  of  Jacob  in  search  of  Joseph.  The  very  appearance 
of  these  stones,  like  the  bread  for  which  the  faint  body  hun- 
gered, may  have  added  force  to  the  temptation.  This  resem- 
blance may  have  been  present  to  Christ's  mind  in  his  words  at 
Matt.  vii.  9. 


28  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV, 

4.  It  is  written  {yeypaTTToi).  The  perfect  tense.  "It  has 
been  written,  and  stands  written."  The  first  recorded  words  of 
Jesus  after  his  entrance  npon  his  ministry  are  an  assertion  of 
the  authority  of  scripture,  and  that  though  he  had  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit.  When  addressing  man,  our  Lord  seldom  quoted 
scripture,  but  said,  /  say  unto  you.  In  answer  to  Satan  he  says, 
li  is  written. 

6.  Talceth  {vapaXafi^dvei,).  The  preposition  irapd  {with,  hy 
the  side  of),  implies  taketh  along  with  himself,  or  conditcteth. 
It  is  the  same  word  which  all  three  evano;elists  use  of  our  Lord's 
taking  his  chosen  apostles  to  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  (Matt. 
X7ii.  1 ;  Mark  ix.  2 ;  Luke  ix.  28). 

The  holy  city.  Matthew  alone  calls  Jerusalem  by  this 
name,  in  accordance  with  the  general  intent  of  his  gospel  to  con- 
nect the  old  economy  with  the  new. 

Pinnacle  of  the  temple  (to  Trrepvytov  roviepov).  Pinnacle, 
from  the  Latin  pvnnacuhim,  a  diminutive  of  pinna  or  penna 
(a  wing),  is  a  literal  translation  of  irrepvyiov,  which  is  also  a 
diminutive  {a  little  wing  or  winglet).  Nothing  in  the  word 
compels  us  to  infer  that  Christ  was  placed  on  the  top  of  a  tower 
or  spire,  which  is  the  popular  meaning  of  pinnacle.  The  word 
may  be  used  in  the  familiar  English  sense  of  the  wing  of  a 
building.  Herod's  temple  had  two  wings,  the  northern  and 
southern,  of  which  the  southern  was  the  higher  and  grander  ; 
that  being  the  direction  in  which  the  chief  enlargement  of  the 
temple  area  made  by  Herod  was  practicable.  That  enlarge- 
ment, according  to  Josephus,  was  effected  by  building  up  walls 
of  solid  masonry  from  the  valley  below.  At  the  extremity  of 
the  southern  side  of  the  area,  was  erected  the  "  royal  portico," 
a  magnificent  colonnade,  consisting  of  a  nave  and  two  aisles, 
running  across  the  entire  space  from  the  eastern  to  the  western 
wall.  Josephus  further  says,  that  "  while  the  valley  of  itself 
was  very  deep,  and  its  bottom  could  scarcely  be  seen  when  one 
looked  down  from  above,  the  additional  vastly  high  elevation 
of  the  portico  was  placed  on  that  height,  insomuch  that,  if  any 


Ch.  IV.]  MATTHEW.  29 

one  looked  down  from  the  summit  of  the  roof,  combining  the 
two  altitudes  in  one  stretch  of  vision,  he  would  be  giddy,  while 
his  sight  could  not  reach  to  such  an  immense  depth."  This,-  in 
comparison  with  the  northern  wing,  was  so  emphatically  the 
wing  of  the  temple  as  to  explain  the  use  of  the  article  here,  as 
a  well-known  locality.  The  scene  of  the  temptation  may  have 
been  (for  the  whole  matter  is  mainly  one  of  conjecture)  the 
roof  of  this  portico,  at  the  southeastern  angle,  where  it  joined 
Solomon's  Porch,  and  from  which  the  view  into  the  Kedron 
valley  beneath  was  to  the  depth  of  four  hundred  and  iifty  feet. 
The  word  temple  {iepov,  lit.,  sacred  place)  signifies  the  whole 
compass  of  the  sacred  inclosure,  with  its  porticos,  courts,  and 
other  subordinate  buildings ;  and  should  be  carefully  distin- 
guished from  the  other  word,  va6<:,  also  rendered  temple,  which 
means  the  temple  itself — the  "  Holy  Place  "  and  the  "  Holy  of 
Holies."  "When  we  read,  for  instance,  of  Christ  teaching  in  the 
temple  (Iepov)  we  must  refer  it  to  one  of  the  temple-porches. 
So  it  is  from  the  lepop,  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  that  Christ 
expels  the  money-changers  and  cattle-merchants.  In  Matt. 
xxvii.  51,  it  is  the  veil  of  the  vao'i  which  is  rent ;  the  veil  sepa- 
rating the  holy  place  from  the  holy  of  holies.  In  the  account 
of  Zacharias  entering  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn  in- 
cense (Luke  i.  9),  the  word  is  vao^,  the  holy  place  in  which  the 
altar  of  incense  stood.  The  people  were  "  without,"  in  the  fore- 
courts. In  John  ii.  21,  the  tenyple  of  his  hody,  Iepov  would  be 
obviously  inappropriate. 

6.  In  their  hands  (eVt).  On  their  hands  (so  Eev.)  is  more 
correct,  and  gives  a  different  picture  from  the  A.  V.  in :  lifted 
on  their  hands,  as  on  a  litter  or  platform. 

7.  Again  {m-aXiv).  Emphatic,  meaning  on  the  other  hcmd^ 
with  reference  to  Satan's  it  is  written  (ver.  6) ;  as  if  he  had  said, 
"  the  promise  which  you  quote  must  be  explained  by  another 
passage  of  scripture."  Archbishop  Trench  aptly  remarks,  "  In 
that  '  It  is  written  again '  of  Christ,  lies  a  great  lesson,  quite 
independent  of  that  particular  scripture  which,  on  this  occasion, 
he  quotes,  or  of  the  use  to  which  he  turns  it.     There  lies  in  it 


30  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

the  secret  of  our  safety  and  defence  against  all  distorted  use  of 
isolated  passages  in  holy  scripture.  Only  as  we  enter  into  the 
unity  of  scripture,  as  it  balances,  completes,  and  explains  itself, 
are  we  warned  against  error  and  delusion,  excess  or  defect  on 
this  side  or  the  other.  Thus  the  retort,  '  It  is  written  agaim.,^ 
must  be  of  continual  application ;  for  indeed  what  very  often 
are  heresies  but  one-sided,  exaggerated  truths,  truths  rent  away 
indeed  from  the  body  and  complex  of  the  truth,  without  the 
balance  of  the  counter-truth,  which  should  have  kept  them  in 
their  due  place,  co-ordinated  with  other  truths  or  subordinated 
to  them  ;  and  so,  because  all  such  checks  are  wanting,  not  truth 
any  more,  but  error." 

12.  Was  cast  into  prison  {irapeho^).  The  verb  means, 
first,  to  gi/ve,  or  hand  over  to  another.  So,  to  surrender  a  city 
or  a  person,  often  with  the  accompanying  notion  of  treachery. 
The  Rev.,  therefore,  rightly  renders,  was  delvuered  uj>. 

16.  The  people  which  sat  (6  Ka!^/j,evo<;) ;  Wye,  dwelt.  The 
article  with  the  participle  (lit.,  the  people,  tlie  one  sitting)  signi- 
fying something  characteristic  or  habitual  :  the  people  v)hose 
cha/racteristic  it  was  to  sit  in  darkness.  This  thought  is  em- 
phasized by  repetition  in  a  stronger  form  ;  sitting  in  the  region 
and  shadow  of  Death.  Death  is  personified.  This  land,  whose 
inhabitants  are  spiritually  dead,  belongs  to  Death  as  the  realm 
of  his  government. 

17.  To  preach  {Knjpvara-eiv).  Originally,  to  discharge  the 
duty  of  a  herald  {icrjpv^) ;  hence  to  cry  out,  proclaim  (see  on 
2  Pet.  ii.  5).  The  standing  expression  in  the  New  Testament 
for  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel ;  but  confined  to  the  pri- 
mary announ£ement  of  the  message  and  facts  of  salvation,  and 
not  including  continuous  instruction  in  the  cmitents  and  con- 
nections of  the  message,  which  is  expressed  by  htlda-Keiv  {to 
teach).     Both  words  are  used  in  Matt.  iv.  23 ;  ix.  35  ;  xi.  1). 

18.  The  sea  {r-qv  ^aXacraav).  The  small  lake  of  Gennesa- 
ret,  only  thirteen  miles  long  and  six  wide  in  its  broadest  part, 


Ch.  IV.]  MATTHEW.  31 

is  called  the  sea,  by  the  same  kind  of  popular  usage  by  which 
Swiss  and  German  lakes  are  called  See ;  as  the  Konigsee,  the 
Trauensee.  So,  also,  in  Holland  we  have  the  Zuyder  Zee.  The 
Latin  mare  {the  sea)  likewise  becomes  meer  in  Holland,  and  is 
used  of  a  lake,  as  Haarlemmer  Meer ;  and  in  England,  mere, 
as  appears  in  Wmdermere,  ChrasTnere,  etc. 

A  net  (d/i^t/SXijo-rpoi').  Froma/i^i,  around,  and  jSaXXo),  to 
throw.  Hence  the  casting-net,  which,  being  cast  over  the 
shoulder,  spreads  into  a  circle  {dfj,^l).  The  word  is  sometimes 
used  by  classical  Greek  writers  to  denote  a  garment  which  en- 
compasses the  wearer.  In  ver.  20,  the  word  net  again  occurs,  but 
representing  a  different  Greek  word  (hUivov)  which  is  the  gen- 
eral name  for  all  kinds  of  nets,  whether  for  taking  fish  or  fowl. 
Still  another  word  occurs  at  Matt.  xiii.  47,  a-cvyqvr),  the  d/ra/w- 
net.     See  farther  on  that  passage. 

21.  Mending  (/caTaprt^oi/Ta?).  IS ot  iD.ecGBB&'nlj  repairing  • 
the  word  means  to  adjitst,  to  "j)m#  to  rights.''^  It  may  mean 
here  prepari/ng  the  nets  for  the  next  fishing. 

23,  24.  Sickness,  Disease,  Torments,  Taken,  Lunatic. 

The  description  of  the  ailments  to  which  our  Lord's  power  was 
applied  gains  in  vividness  by  study  of  the  words  in  detail.  In  ver. 
23,  the  Eev.  rightly  transposes  sickness  and  disease ;  for  wcro? 
(A.  Y.,  sickness)  carries  the  notion  of  something  severe,  dan- 
gerous, and  even  violent  (compare  the  Latin  noceo,  to  hurt,  to 
which  the  root  is  akin).  Homer  always  represents  i/otro?  as  the 
visitation  of  an  angry  deity.  Hence  used  of  the  plague  which 
Apollo  sent  upon  the  Greeks  ("  Iliad,"  i.  10).  So  Sophocles 
("  Antigone,"  421)  calls  a  whirlwind  ^eiav  vocrov  {a  divine  visita- 
tion). Disease  is,  therefore,  the  more  correct  rendering  as  ex- 
pressing something  stronger  than  sickness  or  debility.  Sick- 
ness, however,  suits  the  other  word,  fidkaKiav.  The  kindred 
adjective,  fj,a\aK6<;,  means  soft,  as  a  couch  or  newly -ploughed 
furrow,  and  thus  easily  runs  into  our  invidious  moral  sense  of 
softness,  namely,  effeminacy  or  cowardice,  and  into  the  physical 


32  WOBD  STUDIES  IN    THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

sense  of  weakness,  siokness.     Hence  the  word  emphasizes  the 
idea  of  debility  rather  than  of  violent  suffering  or  danger. 

In  ver.  24  we  have,  first,  a  general  expression  for  ailments  of 
all  kinds  :  all  that  were  sick  (lit.,  all  who  had  themselves  in  evil 
case;  wavTa';  tov<;  kukw  exovTat).  Then  the  idea  of  suffering 
is  emphasized  in  the  word  taken  (crvvexo/ievov<;),  which  means 
literally  held-together  or  compressed ;  and  so  the  Rev.  hjMen 
is  an  improvement  on  taTc^n,  in  which  the  A.  V.  has  followed 
Wye.  and  Tyn.  The  word  is  used  of  the  multitude  thronging 
Christ  (Luke  viii.  45).  Compare,  also,  "how  am  I  straitened 
(Luke  xii.  50) ;  and  lam  in  a  strait  (Philip  i.  23).  Then  fol- 
low the  specific  forms  of  suffering,  the  list  headed  again  by 
the  inclusive  word  v6(toi<;,  diseases,  and  the  kuI  following  hav- 
ing the  force  of  and  jpartioularly.  Note  the  word  torments 
(fiaaavoii).  Bda-avo<;  originally  meant  the  "  Lydian  stone,"  or 
touchstone,  on  which  pure  gold,  when  rubbed,  leaves  a  peculiar 
mark.  Hence,  naturally,  a  test  y  then  a  test  or  trial  by  torture. 
"  Most  words,"  says  Professor  Campbell  ("  On  the  Language  of 
Sophocles")  "have  been  originally  metaphors,  and  metaphors 
are  continually  falling  into  the  rank  of  words,"  used  by  the 
writer  as  mere  vehicles  of  expression  witliout  any  sense  of 
the  picturesque  or  metaphorical  element  at  their  core.  Thus  the 
idea  of  a  test  gradually  passes  entirely  out  of  0daavo<;,  leaving 
merely  the  idea  of  steering  or  torture.  This  is  peculiarly 
noticeable  in  the  use  of  this  word  and  its  derivatives  through- 
out the  New  Testament ;  for  although  suffering  as  a  test  is  a 
familiar  New  Testament  truth,  these  words  invariably  express 
simply  torment  or  pain.  Wycliffe  renders,  "  They  offered  to 
him  all  men  having  evil,  taken  with  divers  sorrows  and  tor- 
ments ; "  and  Tyndale,  "  All  sick  people  that  were  taken  with 
divers  diseases  and  gripings."  Lunatic,  or  moon-strucJc, 
(a-eXrivia^ofiivovs;),  is  rendered  by  Rev.  epileptic,  with  reference 
to  the  real  or  supposed  influence  of  the  changes  of  the  moon 
upon  the  victims  of  epilepsy. 


Ch.  v.]  MATTHEW.  33 


CHAPTER    r. 

1.  A  mountain  {to  opo<s).  The  Kev.  recognizes  the  force  of 
the  definite  article,  and  renders  "  the  mountain,"  that  particular 
mountain  in  the  place  where  Jesus  saw  the  multitudes.  The 
mountain  itself  cannot  be  identified.  Delitzsch  calls  the  Mount 
of  Beatitudes  "  The  Sinai  of  the  New  Testament." 

When  he  was  set  (/co^to-wTo?),  following  Tyndale.  Eev., 
more  literally,  when  he  had  sat  down  (compare  "Wye,  when  he 
had  sete).  After  the  manner  of  the  rabbis,  he  seated  himself 
ere  he  began  to  teach. 

2.  Taught  (iBiSaa-Kev).  The  imperfect  signifies  iegan  to 
teach. 

3.  Blessed  (jjMicdpioi).  As  this  word  and  its  cognates  occur 
at  least  fifty-five  times  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is  important 
to  understand  its  history,  which  is  interesting  because  it  is  one 
of  those  numerous  words  which  exhibit  the  influence  of  Chris- 
tian association  and  usage  in  enlarging  and  dignifying  their 
meaning.  It  is  commonly  rendered  Messed,  both  in  the  A.  V. 
and  Eev.,  and  that  rendering  might  properly  be  given  it  in 
every  instance. 

Its  root  is  supposed  to  be  a  word  meaning  great,  and  its 
earlier  meaning  appears  to  be  limited  to  outward  prosperity  ; 
so  that  it  is  used  at  times  as  synonymous  with  7'ich.  It  scarcely 
varies  from  this  meaning  in  its  frequent  applications  to  the 
Grecian  gods,  since  the  popular  Greek  ideal  of  divine  blessed- 
ness was  not  essentially  moral.  The  gods  were  hlessed  because 
of  their  power  and  dignity,  not  because  of  their  holiness.  "  In 
general,"  says  Mr.  Gladstone  ("  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age  ") 
"  the  chief  note  of  deity  with  Homer  is  emancipation  from  the 
restraints  of  moral  law.  Though  the  Homeric  gods  have  not 
yet  ceased  to  be  the  vindicators  of  morality  upon  earth,  they 
have  personally  ceased  to  observe  its  rules,  either  for  or  among 


34  WORD   STUDIES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

themselves.  As  compared  with  men,  in  conduct  they  are  gen- 
erally characterized  by  superior  force  and  intellect,  but  by  infe- 
rior  morality." 

In  its  peculiar  application  to  the  dead,  there  is  indicated  the 
despair  of  earthly  happiness  underlying  the  thought  of  even 
the  cheerful  and  mercurial  Greek.  Hence  the  word  was  used 
as  synonymous  with  dead.  Only  the  dead  could  be  called  truly 
blessed.     Thus  Sophocles  ("  (Edipus  Tyrannus  ") : 

"  From  hence  the  lesson  learn  ye 
To  reckon  no  man  happy  till  ye  witness 
The  closing  day  ;  until  he  pass  the  border 
Which  severs  life  from  death,  unscathed  by  sorrow." 

And  again  ("  CEdipus  at  Colonus  ") : 

"  Happiest  beyond  compare, 
Never  to  taste  of  life  : 
Happiest  in  order  next, 
Being  born,  witli  quickest  speed 
Thither  again  to  turn 
From  whence  we  came." 

Nevertheless,  even  in  its  pagan  use,  the  word  was  not  alto- 
gether without  a  moral  background.  The  Greeks  recognized  a 
prosperity  which  waited  on  the  observance  of  the  laws  of  natu- 
ral morality,  and  an  avenging  Fate  which  pursued  and  punished 
their  violation.  This  conception  appears  often  in  the  works  of 
the  tragedians  ;  for  instance,  in  the  "  OEdipus  Tyrannus  "  of 
Sophocles,  where  the  main  motive  is  the  judgment  which  waits 
upon  even  unwitting  violations  of  natural  ties.  Still,  this 
prosperity  is  external,  consisting  either  in  wealth,  or  power,  or 
exemption  from  calamity. 

With  the  philosophers  a  moral  element  comes  definitely  into 
the  word.  The  conception  rises  from  outward  propriety  to  in- 
ward correctness  as  the  essence  of  happiness.  But  in  all  of 
them,  from  Socrates  onward,  virtue  depends  primarily  upon 
knowledge  ;  so  that  to  be  happy  is,  first  of  all,  to  know.  It  is 
thus  apparent  that  the  Greek  philosophy  had  no  conception  of 
sin  in  the  Bible  sense.  As  virtue  depended  on  knowledge,  sin 
was  the  outcome  of  ignorance,  and  virtue  and  its  consequent 


Ch.  v.]  MATTHEW.  35 

happiuess  were  therefore  the  prerogative  of  the  few  and  the 
learned. 

The  biblical  use  of  the  word  lifted  it  into  the  region  of  the 
spiritual,  as  distinguished  from  the  merely  intellectual,  and  be- 
sides, intrusted  to  it  alone  the  task  of  representing  this  higher 
conception.  The  pagan  word  for  happiness  {evBaifiovia,  under 
the  jprotection  of  a  good  genius  or  daemon)  nowhere  occurs  in 
the  New  Testament  nor  in  the  Scriptures,  having  fallen  into 
disrepute  because  the  word  daemon^  which  originally  meant  a 
deity,  good  or  evil,  had  acquired  among  the  Jews  the  bad  sense 
which  we  attach  to  demon.  Happiness,  or  better,  ilessedness, 
was  therefore  represented  both  in  the  Old  and  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment by  this  word  /jbaKapw;.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  idea 
involves  more  of  outward  prosperity  than  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, yet  it  almost  universally  occurs  in  connections  which 
emphasize,  as  its  principal  element,  a  sense  of  God's  approval 
founded  in  righteousness  which  rests  ultimately  on  love  to  God. 

Thus  the  word  passed  up  into  the  higher  region  of  Christian 
thought,  and  was  stamped  with  the  gospel  signet,  and  laden 
with  all  the  rich  significance  of  gospel  blessedness.  It  now 
takes  on  a  group  of  ideas  strange  to  the  best  pagan  morality, 
and  contradictory  of  its  fundamental  positions.  Shaking  itself 
loose  from  all  thoughts  of  outward  good,  it  becomes  the  express 
symbol  of  a  happiness  identified  with  pure  character.  Behind  it 
lies  the  clear  cognition  of  sin  as  the  fountain-head  of  all  misery, 
and  of  holiness  as  the  final  and  effectual  cure  for  every  woe. 
For  knowledge  as  the  basis  of  virtue,  and  therefore  of  happi- 
ness, it  substitutes  faith  and  love.  For  the  aristocracy  of  the 
learned  virtuous,  it  introduces  the  truth  of  the  Fatherhood  of 
God  and  the  corollary  of  the  family  of  believers.  While  the 
pagan  word  carries  the  isolation  of  the  virtuous  and  the  con- 
traction of  human  sympathy,  the  Gospel  pushes  these  out  with 
an  ideal  of  a  world-wide  sympathy  and  of  a  happiness  realized 
in  ministry.  The  vague  outlines  of  an  abstract  good  vanish 
from  it,  and  give  place  to  the  pure  heart's  vision  of  God,  and 
its  personal  communion  with  the  Father  in  heaven.  Where  it 
told  of  the  Stoic's  self-sufficiency,  it  now  tells  of  the  Christian's 
poverty  of  spirit  and  meekness.     Where  it  hinted  at  the  Stoic's 


36    '  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

self-repression  and  strangling  of  emotion,  it  now  throbs  with  a 
holy  sensitiveness,  and  with  a  monition  to  rejoice  with  them 
that  rejoice,  and  to  weep  with  them  that  weep.  From  the 
pagan  word  the  flavor  of  immortality  is  absent.  No  vision  of 
abiding  rest  imparts  patience  and  courage  amid  the  bitterness 
and  struggle  of  life ;  no  menace  of  the  destiny  of  evil  imposes 
a  check  on  human  lusts.  The  Christian  word  hlessed  is  full  of 
the  light  of  heaven.  It  sternly  throws  away  from  itself  every 
hint  of  the  Stoic's  asserted  right  of  suicide  as  a  refuge  from 
human  ills,  and  emphasizes  something  which  thrives  on  trial 
and  persecution,  which  glories  in  tribulation,  which  not  only 
endures  but  conquers  the  world,  and  expects  its  crown  in  heaven. 

The  poor  {oi  tttcoxoI).  Three  words  expressing povertj/  are 
found  in  the  New  Testament.  Two  of  them,  ■Trevrj'i  and  "Trevi- 
Xpo'i,  are  kindred  terms,  the  latter  being  merely  a  poetic  form 
of  the  other,  and'  neither  of  these  occurs  more  than  once  (Luke 
xxi.  2  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  9).  The  word  used  in  this  verse  is  therefore 
the  current  word  iorj)oor,  occurring  thirty-four  times,  and  cov- 
ering every  gradation  of  want ;  so  that  it  is  evident  that  the 
New  Testament  writers  did  not  recognize  any  nice  distinctions 
of  meaning  which  called  for  the  use  of  other  terms.  Luke,  for 
instance  (xxi.  2,  3),  calls  the  widow  who  bestowed  her  two 
mites  both  irevixpciv  and  Trrm^^.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  dis- 
tinction, recognized  by  both  classical  and  ecclesiastical  writers. 
While  o  Trei'ij?  is  one  of  narrow  means,  one  who  "  earns  a  scanty 
pittance,"  tttcbjijo?  is  allied  to  the  verb  Trrcocra-eiv,  to  crouch,  or 
cringe,  and  therefore  conveys  the  idea  of  utter  destitution, 
which  abjectly  solicits  and  lives  by  alms.  Hence  it  is  applied 
to  Lazarus  (Luke  xvi.  20,  22),  and  rendered  beggo/r.  Thus  dis- 
tinguished, it  is  very  graphic  and  appropriate  here,  as  denoting 
the  utter  spirituMl  destitution,  the  consciousness  of  which  pre- 
cedes the  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  which  cannot 
be  relieved  by  one's  own  efforts,  but  only  by  the  free  mercy  of 
God.     (See  on  2  Cor.  vi.  10  ;  viii.  9.) 

4.  They  that  mourn  (■n-Ev^oOi'Te?).  Signifying  grief  mani- 
fested;  too  deep  for  concealment.  Hence  it  is  often  joined  with 
KkaUiv,  to  weep  omdMy  (Mark  xvi.  10  ;  James  iv.  9). 


Ch.  v.]  MATTHEW.  37 

Shall  be  comforted.     See  on  John  xiv.  16. 

5.  The  meek  (otVpaew).  Another  word  which,  though  never 
used  in  a  bad  sense,  Christianity  has  lifted  to  a  higher  plane, 
and  made  the  symbol  of  a  higher  good.  Its  primary  meaning 
is  mild,  gentle.  It  was  applied  to  inanimate  things,  as  light, 
wind,  sound,  sickness.     It  was  used  of  a  horse  ;  gentle. 

As  a  human  attribute,  Aristotle  defines  it  as  the  mean  ietween 
stubiorn  a/nger  and  that  negativeness  of  oharacter  which  is  in- 
capable of  even  righteous  indignation :  according  to  which  it  is 
tantamount  to  equanim,ity.  Plato  opposes  it  to  fierceness  or 
cruelty,  and  uses  it  of  humanity  to  the  condemned  ;  but  also  of 
the  conciliatory  demeanor  of  a  demagogue  seeking  popularity 
and  power.  Pindar  applies  it  to  a  king,  mild  or  hind  to  the 
citizens,  and  Herodotus  uses  it  as  opposed  to  anger. 

These  pre-Christian  meanings  of  the  word  exhibit  two  general 
characteristics.  1.  They  express  outward  conduct  merely.  2. 
They  contemplate  relations  to  m,en  only.  The  Christian  word, 
on  the  contrary,  describes  an  inward  quality,  and  that  as  re- 
lated primarily  to  God.  The  equanimity,  mildmsss,  Jcindness, 
represented  by  the  classical  word,  are  founded  in  self-control  or 
in  natural  disposition.  The  Christian  nueehness  is  based  on 
hutnility,  which  is  not  a  natural  quality  but  an  outgrowth  of  a 
renewed  nature.  To  the  pagan  the  word  often  implied  conde- 
scension, to  the  Christian  it  implies  submission.  The  Chris- 
tian quality,  in  its  manifestation,  reveals  all  that  was  best  in  the 
heathen  virtue — mildness,  gentleness,  equanimity — but  these 
manifestations  toward  men  ai-e  emphasized  as  outgrowths  of  a 
spiritual  relation  to  God.  The  mildness  or  Jcindness  of  Plato 
or  Pindar  imply  no  sense  of  inferiority  in  those  who  exhibit 
them ;  sometimes  the  contrary.  Plato's  demagogue  is  kindly 
from  self-interest  and  as  a  means  to  tyranny.  Pindar's  king  is 
condescendingly  kind.  The  meekness  of  the  Christian  springs 
from  a  sense  of  the  inferiority  of  the  creature  to  the  Creator, 
and  especially  of  the  sinful  creature  to  the  holy  God.  "While, 
therefore,  the  pagan  quality  is  redolent  of  self-assertion,  the 
Christian  quality  carries  the  flavor  of  self  abasement.  As  to- 
ward God,  therefore,  meekness  accepts  his  dealings  without 


38  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

murmur  or  resistance  as  absolutely  good  and  wise.  As  toward 
man,  it  accepts  opposition,  insult,  and  provocation,  as  God's  per- 
mitted ministers  of  a  chastening  demanded  by  the  infirmity  and 
corruption  of  sin  ;  while,  under  this  sense  of  his  own  sinfulness, 
the  meek  bears  patiently  "  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
himself,"  forgiving  and  restoring  the  erring  in  a  spirit  of  meek- 
ness, considering  himself,  lest  he  also  be  tempted  (see  Gal.  vi. 
1-5).  The  ideas  of  forgiveness  and  restoration  nowhere  attach 
to  the  classical  word.  They  belong  exclusively  to  Christian 
meekness,  which  thus  shows  itself  allied  to  love.  As  ascribed 
by  our  Lord  to  himself,  see  on  Matt.  xi.  29,  Wye.  renders 
"  Blessed  be  mild  men." 

6.  Shall  be  filled  {')(ppra(T^(TovTai).  A  very  strong  and 
graphic  word,  originally  applied  to  the  feeding  and  fattening 
of  animals  in  a  stall.  In  Apoc.  xix.  21,  it  is  used  of  the  filling 
of  the  birds  with  the  flesh  of  God's  enemies.  Also  of  the  mul- 
titudes fed  with  the  loaves  and  fishes  (Matt.  xiv.  20  ;  Mark  viii. 
8  ;  Luke  ix.  17).  It  is  manifestly  appropriate  here  as  express- 
ing the  co-nvplete  satisfaction  of  spiritual  hunger  and  thirst. 
Hence  Wycliffe's  rendering,  fulfilled,  is  strictly  true  to  the  orig- 
inal. 

7.  The  merciful.     See  on  Luke  i.  50. 

9.  The  peacemakers  {ol  elprjvoTroioi).  Should  be  held  to 
its  literal  meaning,  peace-mafers  ;  not  as  Wye,.,  peaceable  men. 
The  founders  and  j>romoters  of  peace  are  meant ;  who  not  only 
Tceep  the  peace,  but  seek  to  bring  men  into  harmony  with  each 
other.     Tynd.  renders,  the  maintainers  of  peace. 

13.  Have  lost  his  savour  {fiapav^).     The  kindred  noun 

{jMoypo's)  means  dull,  sluggish ;  applied  to  the  mind,  stupid  or 
silly ;  applied  to  the  taste,  insipid,  fiat.  The  verb  here  used 
of  salt,  to  hecome  insipid,  also  means  to  play  the  fool.  Our 
Lord  refers  here  to  the  familiar  fact  of  salt  losing  its  pungency 
and  becoming  useless.  Dr.  Thompson  ("The  Land  and  the 
Book  ")  cites  the  following  case :  "  A  merchant  of  Sidon,  having 


Cn.  v.]  MATTHEW.  39 

farmed  o£  the  government  the  revenue  from  the  importation  of 
salt,  brought  over  a  great  quantity  from  the  marshes  of  Cyprus 
■ — enough,  in  fact,  to  supply  the  whole  province  for  many  years. 
This  he  had  transferred  to  the  mountains,  to  cheat  the  govern- 
ment out  of  some  small  percentage  of  duty.  Sixty-five  houses 
were  rented  and  filled  with  salt.  Such  houses  have  merely 
earthen  floors,  and  the  salt  next  the  ground  was  in  a  few  years 
entirely  spoiled.  I  saw  large  quantities  of  it  literally  thrown 
into  the  road  to  he  trodden  under  foot  of  men  and  beasts.  It 
was  '  good  for  nothing.'  " 

15.  A  bushel  (t6v  /moScov).  Eev.,  rightly,  "t/ie  bushel;" 
since  the  definite  article  is  designed  to  indicate  a  familiar  ob- 
ject— the  grain-measure  which  is  found  in  every  house. 

A  candlestick  (TrjvXvxyiav).  Key.,  the  siand.  Also  a  part 
of  the  furniture  of  every  house,  and  commonly  but  one  in  the 
house :  hence  the  article.  The  word,  which  occurs  four  times 
in  the  Gospels  and  eight  times  elsewhere,  means,  in  every  case, 
not  a  candlestick,  but  a  lamp-stand.  In  Heb.  ix.  2,  the  golden 
"  candlestick "  of  the  tabernacle  is  called  Xvxvia. ;  but  in  the 
description  of  this  article  (Exod.  xxv.  31,  39),  we  read,  "Thou 
shalt  make  the  seven  lamps  ihereoi ;  "  and  in  Zecli.  iv.  2,  where 
the  imagery  is  drawn  from  the  sanctuary,  we  have  a  "  candle- 
stick "  with  a  bowl  on  the  top  of  it,  "  and  his  seven  lamps  there- 
on, and  seven  pipes  (for  the  oil)  to  the  lamps  which  are  upon 
the  top  thereof." 

16.  So  shine  (ovtoo?).  Often  misconceived,  as  if  the  mean- 
ing were,  "  Let  your  light  shine  in  such  a  way  that  men  may 
see,"  etc.  Standing  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,  it  points 
back  to  the  illustration  just  used.  "  So,''  even  as  that  lamp  just 
mentioned,  let  your  light  shine.  Wycliffe  has  apparently 
caught  this  correct  sense:  So  shine  yov/r  light  before  men. 

17.  To  destroy  {KaraXva-ai).  JAi.,  to  loosen  down,  dissolve ; 
Wye,  undo. 


40  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca  V. 

18.  Jot,  tittle  {ISiTa,  Kepaia).  J'ot  is  for  jod,  the  smallest  let- 
ter in  the  Hebrew  alphabet.  Tittle  is  the  little  bend  or  point 
which  serves  to  distinguish  certain  Hebrew  letters  of  similar 
appearance.  Jewish  tradition  mentions  the  letter  j?W  as  being 
irremovable ;  adding  that,  if  all  men  in  the  world  were  gathered 
to  abolish  the  least  letter  in  the  law,  they  would  not  succeed. 
The  guilt  of  changing  those  little  hooks  which  distinguish  be- 
tween certain  Hebrew  letters  is  declared  to  be  so  great  that,  if 
such  a  thing  were  done,  the  world  would  be  destroyed. 

22.  He\\-^\re  {t7iv  jeevvav  rod  TTvpoi).  Ee v.,  more  accurately, 
the  hell  of  fire.  The  word  Gehenna,  rendered  hell,  occurs  out- 
side of  the  Gospels  only  at  James  iii.  6.  It  is  the  Greek  repre- 
sentative of  the  Hebrew  Ge-Hinnom,  or  Yalley  of  Hinnom,  a 
deep,  narrow  glen  to  the  south  of  Jerusalem,  where,  after  the 
introduction  of  the  worship  of  the  fire-gods  by  Ahaz,  the  idola- 
trous Jews  sacrificed  their  children  to  Molech.  Josiah  formally 
desecrated  it,  "  that  no  man  might  make  his  son  or  his  daugh- 
ter pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech  "  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10).  After 
this  it  became  the  common  refuse-place  of  the  city,  into  which 
the  bodies  of  criminals,  carcasses  of  animals,  and  all  sorts  of 
filth  were  cast.  From  its  depth  and  narrowness,  and  its  fire 
and  ascending  smoke,  it  became  the  symbol  of  the  place  of  the 
future  pimishment  of  the  wicked.     So  Milton ; 

"The  pleasant  valley  of  Hinnom,  Topliet  thence 
And  black  Gehenna  called,  the  type  of  hell." 

As  fire  was  the  characteristic  of  the  place,  it  was  caUed  the 
Gehenna  of  fire.  It  should  be  carefully  distinguished  from 
Hades  (aSjy?),  which  is  never  used  for  the  place  of  punishment, 
but  for  the  place  of  departed  spirits,  without  reference  to  their 
moral  condition.  This  distinction,  ignored  by  the  A.  V.,  is 
made  in  the  Eev. 

25.  Agree  with  (l'o-^4  ewowj/).  JAt.,le  well-minded  towards; 
inclined  to  satisfy  by  paying  or  compromising.  Wye,  Be  thou 
consenting  to. 


Ch.  v.]  MATTHEW.  41 

Officer  {vTT'npirr)).  Denoting  a  subordinate  official,  as  a 
herald  or  an  orderly,  and  in  this  sense  applied  to  Mark  as  the 
"minister"  or  attendant  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts  xiii.  5). 
It  furnishes  an  interesting  instance  of  the  expansion  of  a  word 
from  a  limited  and  special  meaning  into  a  more  general  one ; 
and  also  of  the  influence  of  the  Gospel  in  lifting  words  into 
higher  and  purer  associations.  Formed  with  the  verb  epeaaa, 
to  row,  it  originally  signified  a  rower,  as  distinguished  from  a 
soldier,  in  a  War-galley.  This  word  for  a  galley-slime  comes  at 
last,  in  the  hands  of  Luke  and  Paul,  to  stand  for  the  noblest  of 
all  offices,  that  of  a  minister  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (Luke  i.  2 ; 
Acts  xxvi.  16  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1). 

29.  Offend, (o-zcavSaXi'^et).  The  word  offend  carries  to  the 
English  reader  the  sense  of  giving  offence,  jprovoTcvng.  Hence 
the  Kev.,  by  restoring  the  picture  in  the  word,  restores  its  true 
meaning,  causeth  to  stumble.  The  kindred  noun  is  aKcivhdkov, 
a  later  form  of  a-KavSd\.7]$pov,  the  stick  in  a  trap  on  which  the 
bait  is  placed,  and  which  springs  up  and  shuts  the  trap  at  the 
touch  of  an  animal.  Hence,  generally,  a  snare,  a  stumhUng-hlock. 
Christ's  meaning  here  is :  "  If  your  eye  or  j'our  hand  serve  as 
an  obstacle  or  trap  to  ensnare  or  make  you  fall  in  your  moral 
walk."  How  the  eye  might  do  this  may  be  seen  in  the  pre- 
vious verse.  Bengel  observes:  "He  who,  when  his  eye  proves 
a  stumbling-block,  takes  care  not  to  see,  does  in  reality  blind 
himself."  The  words  scandal  and  slanden  are  both  derived 
from  a-KuvSaXov ;  and  Wye.  renders,  "  If  thy  right  eye  slander 
thee."     Compare  JEschylus,  "  Choephori,"  301,  372. 

40.  Coat,  cloke  (xtrava,  Ifidnov).  The  former,  the  shirt- 
like under-garment  or  tunic;  the  latter,  the  mantle,  or  ampler 
over-garment,  which  served  as  a  covering  for  the  night,  and 
therefore  was  forbidden  by  the  Levitical  law  to  be  retained  in 
pledge  over  night  (Exod.  xxii.  26,  27).  To  yield  up  this  with- 
out resistance  therefore  implies  a  higher  degree  of  concession. 

41.  Shall  compel  thee  to  go  {ayyapeva-ei).  This  word 
throws  the  whole  injunction  into  a  picture  which  is  entirely  lost 


42  WORD  STQDIBS  IN    THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

to  the  English  reader.  A  man  is  travelling,  and  about  to  pass 
a  post-station,  where  horses  and  messengers  are  kept  in  order 
to  forward  royal  missives  as  quickly  as  possible.  An  oflBcial 
rushes  out,  seizes  him,  and  forces  him  to  go  back  and  carry 
a  letter  to  the  next  station,  perhaps  to  the  great  deti'iment  of 
liis  business.  The  word  is  of  Persian  origin,  and  denotes  the 
im^essment  into  service,  which  officials  were  empowered  to 
make  of  any  available  persons  or  beasts  on  the  great  lines  of 
road  where  the  royal  mails  were  carried  by  relays  of  riders. 

42.  Borrow  {Savia-aa-^ai,).     Properly,  to  borrow  at  interest. 

43.  Neighbor  {top  TrXrjo-lov).  Another  word  to  which  the 
Gospel  has  imparted  a  broader  and  deeper  sense.  Literally  it 
means  the  one  near  {so  the  Eng.,  neighbor  =  nigh-hor),  indicat- 
ing a  mere  outward  nearness,  proximity.  Thus  a  neighbor 
might  be  an  enemy.  Socrates  (Plato,  "  Republic,"  ii.,  3Y3)  shows 
how  two  adjoining  states  might  come  to  want  each  a  piece  of 
its  neighbor's  {rSsv  irXTja-iov)  land,  so  that  there  would  arise  war 
between  them;  and  again  (Plato,  '' Theaetetus,"  174)  he  says 
that  a  philosopher  is  wholly  unacquainted  with  his  next-door 
neighbor,  and  does  not  know  whether  he  is  a  man  or  an  animal. 
The  Old  Testament  expands  the  meaning  to  cover  national  or 
tribal  fellowship,  and  that  is  the  sense  in  our  Lord's  quotation 
liere.  The  Christian  sense  is  expounded  by  Jesus  in  the  para- 
ble of  the  Good  Samaritan  (Luke  x.  29  sqq.),  as  including  the 
whole  brotherhood  of  man,  and  as  founded  in  love  for  man,  as 
man,  everywhere. 


CHAPTER    YL 

1.  Of  your  Father  (irapa).  The  A.  V.  implies  the  source  of 
the  reward ;  but  the  preposition  means  with,  hy  the  side  of;  so 
that  the  true  sense  is,  reserved  for  you  and  awaitvag  you  hy 
the  side  of  your  Father.     Eev.,  rightly,  with. 

2.  Sound  a  trumpet  (o-aXTrt'o-T??).  There  seems  to  be  no 
trace  of  any  such  custom  on  the  part  of  almsgivers,  so  that  the 


Ch.  VI.]  MATTHEW.  43 

expression  must  be  taken  as  a  figurative  one  for  making  a  dis- 
play. It  is  just  possible  that  the  figure  may  have  been  sug- 
gested by  the  "trumpets"  of  the  temple  treasury — thirteen 
trumpet-shaped  chests  to  receive  the  contributions  of  worship- 
pers.    (See  on  Luke  xxi.  2.) 

Have  their  reward  {airexovvtv).  The  preposition  aTro  indi- 
cates receipt  in  full.  Eev.  renders  they  hawe  received,  so  that 
there  is  nothing  more  to  receive.  So  Wye,  They  have  received 
their  meed. 

6.  Closet  {rafiielov).     See  on  Luke  xii.  3. 

7.  Use  vain  repetitions  (/3aTTaXo7J?o-77T6).  A  word  formed 
in  imitation  of  the  sound,  iattalogein:  properly,  to  stammer  ; 
then  to  hahble  or  prate.,  to  repeat  the  same  formula  many  times, 
as  the  worshippers  of  Baal  and  of  Diana  of  Ephesus  (1  Kings 
xviii.  26 ;  Acts  xix.  34)  and  the  Komanists  with  their  pater- 
nosters and  aves. 

12.  Debts  (o^eiX'^fiaTo).  So,  rightly,  A.  Y.,  and  Eev. 
(compare  Luke  xi.  4).  Sin  is  pictured  as  a  debt,  and  the  sinner 
as  a  debtor  (compare  Matt,  xviii.  28, 30).  Accordingly  the  word 
represents  sin  both  as  a  wrong  and  as  requiring  satisfaction. 
In  contrast  with  the  prayer,  "  Forgive  us  our  debts,"  Tholnck 
("  Sermon  on  the  Mount ")  qnotes  the  prayer  of  ApoUonius  of 
Tyana,  "  O  ye  gods,  give  me  the  things  which  are  owing  to  me." 

Forgive  (a^riKafiev).  Lit.,  to  send  away,  or  dismAss.  The 
Eev.  rightly  gives  the  force  of  the  past  tense,  we  home  for- 
given; since  Christ  assumes  that  he  who  prays  for  the  remis- 
sion of  his  own  debts  has  already  forgiven  those  indebted  to 
him.* 

13.  Temptation  {Trevpaa-fiov).  It  is  a  mistake  to  define  this 
word  as  only  solicitation  to  evil.     It  means  trial  of  any  kind, 

*  The  tense  is  the  aorist,  denoting  completed  action  at  an  indefinite  past 
time,  and  so,  strictly,  forgave;  but  where  any  effect  of  the  action  expressed  by 
the  aorist  remains,  we  are  justified  in  rendering  it  by  a  perfect ;  and  so  Rev. 


44  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Yl 

without  reference  to  its  moral  quality.  Thus,  Gen.  xxii.  1 
(Sept.),  "  God  did  tempt  Abraham ;  "  "  This  he  said  to  jyrove 
him  "  (John  vi.  6) ;  Paul  and  Timothy  assayed  to  go  to  Bithynia 
(Acts  xvi.  7) ;  "  Eeamine  yourselves  "  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  Here, 
generally  of  all  situations  and  circumstances  which  furnish  an 
occasion  for  sin.  We  cannot  pray  God  not  to  tempt  us  to  sin, 
"  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any 
man  "  (James  i.  13). 

14.  Trespasses  {jrapairTmfiaTa).  The  Lord  here  uses  an- 
other word  for  sins,  and  still  another  {d//,apTia<;)  appears  in 
Luke's  version  of  the  prayer,  though  he  also  says,  "  every  one 
that  is  indebted  to  us."  There  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that 
Christ,  contemplating  sins  in  general,  should  represent  them  by 
different  terms  expressive  of  different  aspects  of  wrong-doing 
(see  on  Matt.  i.  21).  This  word  is  derived  from  TrapaTriTrrco,  to 
yall  or  throw  one^s  self  beside.  Thus  it  has  a  sense  somewhat 
akin  to  aiMaprta,  of  going  beside  a  mark,  missing.  In  classical 
Greek  the  verb  is  often  used  of  intentional  falling,  as  of  throwing 
one's  self  upon  an  enemy  ;  and  this  is  the  prevailing  sense  in 
biblical  Greek,  indicating  reckless  and  wilful  sin  (see  1  Chron. 
V.  25  ;  X.  13  ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  18  ;  xxix.  6,  19  ;  Ezek.  xiv.  13  ; 
xviii.  26).  It  does  not,  tlierefore,  imply  palliation  cir  excuse. 
It  is  a  conscious  violation  of  right,  involving  guilt,  and  occurs 
therefore,  in  connection  with  the  mention  of  forgiveness  (Eom. 
iv.  25  ;  V.  16;  Co],  ii.  13;  Eph.  ii.  1,  5).  Unlike  'rrapdfiaa-K 
(transgression),  which  contemplates  merely  the  objective  viola- 
tion of  law,  it  carries  the  thought  of  sin  as  affecting  the  sinner, 
and  hence  is  found  associated  with  expressions  which  indicate 
the  consequences  and  the  remedy  of  sin  (Eom.  iv.  25 ;  v.  15, 
17  ;  Eph.  ii.  1). 

16.  Ye  fast  {vTjaTevTjTe).  Observe  the  force  of  the  present 
tense  as  indicating  action  in  progress :  Whenever  ye  may  he 
fasting. 

Of  a  sad  countenance  [aKv^panrol).  An  uncommon  word 
in  the  New  Testament,  occurring  only  here  and  at  Luke  xxiv.  17. 


Ch.  VI.]  MATTHEW.  45 

Trench  ("Studies  in  the  Gospels")  explains  it  by  the  older 
sense  of  the  English  dreary,  as  expressing  the  downcast  look  of 
settled  grief,  pain,  or  displeasure.  In  classical  Greek  it  also 
signifies  sullenness  and  affected  gravity.  Luther  renders,  Look 
not  sov/r. 

Disfigure  {dijjavi^ova-iv).  The  idea  is  rather  conceal  than 
disfigure.  There  is  a  play  upon  this  word  and  (j>ava)at,v  {tkey 
may  Ofypear)  which  is  untranslatable  into  English  :  they  conceal 
or  mask  their  true  visage  that  they  may  aj>pear  unto  men.  The 
allusion  is  to  the  outward  signs  of  humiliation  which  often  ac- 
companied fasting,  such  as  being  unwashed  and  unshaven  and 
unanointed.  "Avoid,"  says  Christ,  "the  squalor  of  the  un- 
washed face  and  of  the  unkempt  hair  and  beard,  and  the  rather 
anoint  thy  head  and  wash  thy  face,  so  as  to  appear  (cf)avfj<;) 
not  unto  men,  but  unto  God  as  fasting."  Wycliffe's  rendering 
is  peculiar  :  They  put  their  faces  out  of  kindly  terms. 

19.  Lay  not  up  treasures  {(ir)  S^a-avpl^ere).  Lit.,  treasure 
not  treasures.  So  Wye,  Do  not  treasure  to  you  treasures.  The 
beautiful  legend  of  St.  Thomas  and  Gondoforus  is  told  by  Mrs. 
Jameson  ("  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art") :  "  When  St.  Thomas 
was  at  Caesarea,  our  Lord  appeared  to  him  and  said,  '  The  king 
of  the  Indies,  Gondoforus,  hath  sent  his  provost,  Abanes,  to  seek 
for  workmen  well  versed  in  the  science  of  architecture,  who 
shall  build  for  him  a  palace  finer  than  that  of  the  Emperor  of 
Home.  Behold,  now  I  will  send  thee  to  him.'  And  Thomas 
went,  and  Gondoforus  commanded  him  to  build  for  him  a  mag- 
nificent palace,  and  gave  him  much  gold  and  silver  for  the  pur- 
pose. The  king  went  into  a  distant  country  and  was  absent  for 
two  years ;  and  St.  Thomas,  meanwhile  instead  of  building  a 
palace,  distributed  all  the  treasures  among  the  poor  and  sick  ; 
and  when  the  king  returned  he  was  full  of  wrath,  and  he  com- 
manded that  St.  Thomas  should  be  seized  and  cast  into  prison, 
and  he  meditated  for  him  a  horrible  death.  Meantime  the 
brother  of  the  king  died,  and  the  king  resolved  to  erect  for 
him  a  most  magnificent  tomb  ;  but  the  dead  man,  after  that  he 
had  been  dead  four  days,  suddenly  arose  and  sat  upright,  and 


46  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VL 

said  to  the  king,  '  Tlie  man  whom  thou  wouldst  torture  is  a  ser- 
vant of  God  ;  behold,  I  have  been  in  Paradise,  and  the  angels 
showed  to  me  a  wondrous  palace  of  gold  and  silver  and  pre- 
cious stones ;  and  they  said,  '  This  is  the  palace  that  Thomas,  the 
architect,  hath  built  for  thy  brother.  King  Gondof orus.'  And 
when  the  king  heard  these  words,  he  ran  to  the  prison,  and  de- 
livered the  apostle ;  and  Thomas  said  to  him,  '  Knowest  thou 
not  that  those  who  would  possess  heavenly  things  have  little 
care  for  the  things  of  this  earth  ?  There  are  in  heaven  rich 
palaces  without  number,  which  were  prepai'ed  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world  for  those  who  would  purchase  the  possession 
through  faith  and  charity.  Thy  riches,  O  king,  may  prepare 
the  way  for  thee  to  such  a  palace,  but  they  cannot  follow  thee 
thither.' " 


Rust  (ySpcocrt?).  That  which  eats;  from  the  verb  ^i^pwa-Koa, 
to  eat.     Compare  corrode,  from  the  Latin  rodo,  to  gnaw. 

Doth  corrupt  {d<f)avL^ei,).  Rev.,  consume.  The  same  word 
which  is  used  above  of  the  hypocrites  conceali/ng  their  faces. 
The  rust  consumes,  and  therefore  causes  to  disap^pear.  So  Wye, 
destroyeth. 

Break  through  {Siopva-a-ova-iv).  \M.,  dig  through,  as  a  thief 
might  easily  penetrate  the  wall  of  a  common  oriental  house  of 
mud  or  clay.  The  Greek  name  for  a  burglar  is  Toi'xcopvxo';,  a 
wall-digger.  Compare  Job  xxiv.  16,  "In  the  dark  they  dig 
through  houses."    Also  Ezek.  xii.  5.  Wye,  Thimes  delve  out. 

22.  Single  {cnfKov<i).  The  picture  underlying  this  adjective 
is  that  of  a  piece  of  cloth  or  other  material,  neatly  folded  once, 
and  without  a  variety  of  complicated  folds.  Hence  the  idea  of 
simplicity  or  singleness  (compare  simplicity  from  the  Latin  sim- 
plex ;  semel,  once  ;  flica/re,  to  fold).  So,  in  a  moral  sense,  art- 
less, plain,  pure.  Here  sound,  as  opposed  to  evil  or  diseased. 
Possibly  with  reference  to  the  double-mindedness  and  indeci- 
sion condemned  in  ver.  24. 


Ch.  VI.]  MATTHEW.  47 

Full  of  light  {(pcoreivov).  Bengel  says,  "As  if  it  were  all 
eye." 

23.  In  thee — darkness.  Seneca,  in  one  of  his  letters,  tells 
of  an  idiot  slave  in  his  house,  who  had  suddenly  become  blind. 
"  Now,  incredible  as  the  story  seems,  it  is  really  true  that  she  is 
unconscious  of  her  blindness,  and  consequently  begs  her  attend- 
ant to  go  elsewhere  because  the  house  is  dark.  But  you  may 
be  sure  that  this,  at  which  we  laugh  in  her,  happens  to  us  all ; 
no  one  understands  that  he  is  avaricious  or  covetous.  The  blind 
seek  for  a  guide  ;  we  wander  about  without  a  guide." 

"  Seeing  falsely  is  worse  than  blindness.  A  man  who  is  too 
dim-sighted  to  discern  the  road  from  the  ditch,  may  feel  which 
is  which  ;  but  if  the  ditch  appears  manifestly  to  him  to  be  the 
road,  and  the  road  to  be  the  ditch,  what  shall  become  of  him  ? 
False  seeing  is  unseeing,  on  the  negative  side  of  blindness" 
(Euskin,  "  Modern  Painters  "). 

24.  The  other  {erepov).  Implying  distinction  in  quality 
rather  than  numerical  distinction  {aXKoi^).  For  example,  "  who- 
ever suiiteth  thee  on  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  {ttjv 
dWrjv) ;  i.e.,  the  other  one  of  the  two  (Matt.  v.  39).  At  Pen- 
tecost, the  disciples  began  to  speak  with  other  {eTepai<;)  tongues ; 
i.e.,  different  from  their  native  tongues.  Here  the  word  gives 
the  idea  of  two  masters  of  distinct  or  opposite  character  and  in- 
terests, like  God  and  Mammon. 

Hold  to  (dv^e^erat).  The  preposition  di'Tt,  ap'(MJW^,  indicates 
holding  to  the  one  master  as  against  the  other.  He  who  is  for 
God  must  be  against  Mammon. 

25.  Take  no  thought  {jiij  fiepcfivare).  The  cognate  noun 
is  fiepip-va,  care,,  which  was  formerly  derived  from  /iept?,  apart  / 
fiepi^eo,  to  divide ;  and  was  explained  accordingly  as  a  dividing 
care,  distracting  the  heart  from  the  true  object  of  life.  This 
has  been  abandoned,  however,  and  the  word  is  placed  in  a  group 
which  carries  the  common  notion  of  ea/rnest  thoughtfulness.  It 
may  include  the  ideas  of  worry  and  cmxiety,  and  may  empha- 


48  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VIL 

size  these,  but  not  necessarily.  See,  for  example,  "  oareth  for 
the  things  of  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  32).  "  That  the  members 
should  have  the  same  care  one  for  another "  (1  Cor.  xii.  25). 
"Who  will  care  for  your  state  ? "  (Phil.  ii.  20).  In  all  these  the 
sense  of  worry  would  be  entirely  out  of  place.  In  other  cases 
that  idea  is  prominent,  as,  "the  care  of  this  world,"  which 
chokes  the  good  seed  (Matt.  xiii.  22 ;  compare  Luke  viii.  14). 
Of  Martha  ;  "  Thou  art  careful "  (Luke  x.  41).  Take  thought, 
in  this  passage,  was  a  truthful  rendering  when  the  A.  V.  was 
made,  since  thought  was  then  used  as  equivalent  to  cmxiety  or 
solicitude.     So  Shakspeare  ("  Hamlet ") : 

' '  The  native  hue  of  resolution 
Is  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of  fhovghV 

And  Eacon  (Henry  YII.) :  "  Hawis,  an  alderman  of  London, 
was  put  in  trouble,  and  died  with  thought  and  anguish." 
Somers'  "  Tracts"  (in  Queen  Elizabeth's  reign) :  "Queen  Cath- 
erine  Parr  died  rather  of  thought." 

The  word  has  entirely  lost  this  meaning.  Bishop  Lightfoot 
("  On  a  Fresh  Revision  of  the  New  Testament ")  says :  "  I  have 
heard  of  a  political  economist  alleging  this  passage  as  an  objec- 
tion to  the  moral  teaching  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  on  the 
ground  that  it  encouraged,  nay,  commanded,  a  reckless  neglect 
of  the  future."  It  is  uneasiness  and  worry  about  the  future 
which  our  Lord  condemns  here,  and  therefore  Rev.  rightly 
translates  he  not  a/nxious.  This  phase  of  the  word  is  forcibly 
brought  out  in  1  Peter,  v.  Y,  where  the  A.  Y.  ignores  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  two  kinds  of  care.  ' '  Casting[all  your  ca/re 
(jiepifjivav,  Rev.,  omxiety)  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  {avrw  fii\ei) 
for  you,"  with  a  fatherly,  tender,  and  provident  care." 


CHAPTER    VII. 

3.  Beholdest  (/3\67r6i9).     Staring  &i  from  without,  &&  one 
who  does  not  see  clearly. 

Considerest  (/caraj/oe??).     A  stronger  word,  appreihendest 
from  withm,  what  is  already  there. 


Ch.  VII.  1  MATTHEW.  49 

Mote  (Kap^oi).  A.  V.  and  Kev.  The  word  mote,  however, 
suggests  dust  j  whereas  the  figure  is  that  of  a  minute  chip  or 
splinter,  of  the  same  material  with  the  beam.  "Wye.  renders 
festu,  with  the  explanation,  a  little  mote.  In  explaining  the 
passage  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  obstruction  to  sight  is 
of  the  same  material  in  both  cases.  The  man  with  a  great 
beam  in  his  eye,  who  therefore  can  see  nothing  accurately,  pro- 
poses to  remove  the  little  splinter  from  his  brother's  eye,  a 
delicate  operation,  requiring  clear  sight.  The  figure  of  a  splin- 
ter to  represent  something  painful  or  annoying  is  a  common 
oriental  one.  Tholuck  ("  Sermon  on  the  Mount ")  quotes  from 
the  Arabic  several  passages  in  point,  and  one  which  is  literally, 
our  Lord's  saying :  "  How  seest  thou  the  splinter  in  thy  broth- 
er's eye,  and  seest  not  the  cross-beam  in  thine  eye  ? " 


Beam 


{SoKov).    A  log,  Joist,  rafter ;  indicating  a  great  fault. 

5.  See  clearly  (8ta/3Xe-\|ret9).  The  preposition  Std,  through, 
giving  the  sense  of  thoroughness.  Compare  the  simple  verb 
/SXeTret?  (heholdest),  ver.  3.  With  the  beam  in  thine  eye  thou 
starest  at  thy  brother's  little  failing.  Pull  out  the  beam  ;  then 
thou  shalt  see  clearly,  not  only  the  fault  itself,  but  how  to  help 
thy  brother  get  rid  of  it. 

To  cast  out  {eK^aXelv).  The  Lord's  words  assume  that  the 
object  of  scrutiny  is  not  only  nor  mainly  detection,  but  correc- 
tion. Hence  thou  shalt  see  clearly,  not  the  mote,  but  to  cast 
out  the  mote. 

6.  That  which  is  holy  (to  a^iov).  The  holy  thing,  as  of  some- 
thing commonly  recognized  as  sacred.  The  reference  is  to  the 
meat  offered  in  sacrifice.  The  picture  is  that  of  a  priest  throw- 
ing a  piece  of  flesh  from  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  to  one  of 
the  numerous  dogs  which  infest  the  streets  of  Eastern  cities. 

Pearls  before    swine  (jiapyapira<i  efiirpoaS-ev  t&v  xoi-paav). 
Another  picture  of  a  rich  man  wantonly  throwing  handfuls  of 
small  pearls  to  swine.     Swine  in  Palestine  were  at  best  but 
4 


50  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VIL 

half-tamed,  the  hog  being  an  unclean  lanimal.  The  wild  boar 
haunts  the  Jordan  valley  to  this  day.  Small  pearls,  called  by 
jewellers  seed-pearls,  would  resemble  the  pease  or  maize  on 
which  the  swine  feed.  They  would  rush  upon  them  when 
scattered,  and,  discovering  the  cheat,  would  trample  upon  them 
and  turn  their  tusks  upon  the  man  who  scattered  them. 

Turn  (aTpa<f>ivTe^).  The  Rev.  properly  omits  again.  The 
word  graphically  pictures  the  quick,  sharp  turn  of  the  boar. 

Rend  {prj^aaiv).     Lit.,  hreak ;  and  well  chosen  to  express 
^  the  peculiar  character  of  the  wound  made  by  the  boar's  tusk, 
which  is  not  a  cut,  but  a  long  tear  or  rip. 

9.  Bread,  a  stone  {aprov,  Xi^ov).  Eev.  for  Iread  reads  loaf, 
which  is  better.  On  the  resemblance  of  certain  stones  to  cakes 
of  bread,  see  on  Matt.  iv.  3. 

13.  Strait  gate  (a-Ten?)?  ttuXt;?).  Rev.,  narrow.  A  remark- 
■  able  parallel  to  this  passage  occurs  in  the  "  Pinax  "  or  "  Tablet " 
of  Cebes,  a  writer  contemporary  with  Socrates.  In  this,  human 
life,  with  its  dangers  and  temptations,  is  symbolically  repre- 
sented as  on  a  tablet.  The  passage  is  as  follows  ;  "  Seest  thou 
not,  then,  a  little  door,  and  a  way  before  the  door,  which  is  not 
much  crowded,  but  very  few  travel  it  ?  This  is  the  way  which 
leadeth  into  true  culture." 

Leadeth  {airas^ovaa).  Lit.,  leadeth  away,  from  death,  or, 
perhaps,  from  the  broad  road.  Note  that  the  gate  is  not  at  the 
end,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  road. 

16.  Ye  shall  know  {eiri^vaxrecr^e).  The  compound  verb  in- 
dicates/w^^  knowledge.  Character  is  satisfactorily  tested  by 
its  fruits. 

22.  Have  we  not  {oi)  That  form  of  the  negative  is  used 
which  expects  an  affirmative  answer.  It  therefore  pictures 
both  the  self-conceit  and  the  self-deception  of  these  persons. 
"  Surely  we  have  prophesied,"  etc. 


Ch.  VII.]  MATTHEW.  51 

23.  Profess  {6/i6\oyria-a)).  The  word,  which  is  used  elsewhere 
of  open  confession  of  Christ  before  men  (Matt.  x.  32  ;  Rom.  x. 
9) ;  of  John's  public  declaration  that  he  was  not  the  Christ 
(John  i.  20) ;  of  Herod's  promise  to  Salome  in  the  presence  of 
his  guests  (Matt.  xiv.  7).  Here,  therefore,  of  Christ's  open, 
j)ublic  declaration  as  Judge  of  the  world.  "There  is  great 
authority  in  this  saying,"  remarks  Bengel. 

24  sqq.  I  will  liken  him,  etc.  The  picture  is  not  of  two 
men  deliberately  selecting  foundations,  but  it  contrasts  one  who 
carefully  chooses  and  prepares  his  foundation  with  one  who 
builds  at  hap-hazard.  This  is  more  strongly  brought  out  by 
Luke  (vi.  48):  "Who  digged  and  went  deep,  and  laid  a  founda- 
tion upon  the  rock  "  (Rev.).  Kitto  ("  Pictorial  Bible  ")  says : 
"At  this  very  day  the  mode  of  building  in  Christ's  own  town 
of  Nazareth  suggests  the  source  of  this  image.  Dr.  Robinson 
was  entertained  in  the  house  of  a  Greek  Arab.  The  house  had 
just  been  built,  and  was  not  yet  finished.  In  order  to  lay  the 
foundations  he  had  dug  down  to  the  solid  rock,  as  is  usual 
throughout  the  country  here,  to  the  depth  of  thirty  feet,  and 
then  built  up  arches."  The  abrupt  style  of  ver.  25  pictures  the 
sudden  coming  of  the  storm  which  sweeps  away  the  house  on 
the  sand  :  "  Descended  the  rain,  and  came  the  floods,  and  blew 
the  winds." 

27.  G  reat  was  the  fal  I  of  it.  The  conclusion  of  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount.  "  Thus,"  remarks  Bengel,  "  it  is  not  necessary 
for  every  sermon  to  end  with  consolation." 

28.  Were  astonished  (i^e'TrXrjo-a-ovTo).  From  e«,  out  of, 
and  ttXijo-o-co,  to  strike.  Often  to  drive  one  out  of  his  senses  by 
a  sudden  shock,  and  therefore  here  of  amasement.  They  were 
astounded.  We  have  a  similar  expression,  though  not  so  strong : 
"  I  was  struck  with  this  or  that  remarkable  thing." 

29.  He  taught  (flv  BiBda-Kav).  He  was  teaohmg.  This 
union  of  the  verb  and  participle  emphasizes  the  idea  of  dura- 
tion or  Jiahit  more  thau  the  simple  tense. 


62  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  VIII. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

6.  Tormented  (^affavi^o/ievo^).  See  on  torments,  Matt, 
iv.  24. 

7.  Hea\  (Sepafreva-eo).  So  A.  V.  and  Rev.  The  word,  how- 
ever, originally  means  to  attend,  and  to  treat  medically.  The 
centurion  uses  another  and  stronger  word,  shall  he  healed 
{la^aerai).  Luke,  who  as  a  physician  is  precise  in  the  use  of 
medical  terms,  uses  both  words  in  one  verse  (ix.  11).  Jesus 
healed  {Iolto)  all  who  had  need  of  treatment  (Sepairelas:).  Still, 
Luke  himself  does  not  always  observe  the  distinction.  See  on 
Luke  V.  15. 

9.  Also  {Kal).  Omitted  in  A.  V.,  but  very  important.  "I 
also  am  a  man  under  authority,"  as  well  as  thou.  (Tynd., 
I  also  myself ).  The  centurion  compares  the  Lord's  position 
with  his  own.  Christ  had  authority  over  disease.  The  centu- 
rion also  was  in  authority  over  soldiers.  As  the  centurion  had 
only  to  say  to  a  soldier  "  Go !  "  and  he  went,  so  Christ  had  only 
to  say  to  disease  "  Go !  "  and  it  would  obey  him. 

11.  Shall  sit  down  (ar/aKXt^croi'Tat).  \!\\,.,  recline.  Thepict- 
iire  is  that  of  a  banquet.  Jews  as  well  as  Romans  reclined  at 
table  on  couches. 

12.  The  outer  (to  i^mrepov).  The  Greek  order  of  words  is 
very  forcible.  "They  shall  be  cast  forth  into  the  darkness, 
the  outer  (darkness).  The  picture  is  of  an  illuminated  banquet- 
ing chamber,  outside  of  which  is  the  thick  darkness  of  night. 

13.  Was  healed  {la^\  Note  that  the  stronger  word  of  the 
centurion  (ver.  8)  is  used  here.    Where  Christ  tends,  he  heals. 

14.  Sick  of  a  fever  (irvpeaaova-av).  Derived  from  Trvp, 
fire.     Our  word  fever  comes  through  the  Gei-ma,nf euer. 


Ch.  VIII.]  MATTHEW.  53 

17.  Bare  {i^da-Taa-ev).  This  translation  is  correct.  The 
word  does  not  mean  "  he  took  away,"  but  "  he  bore,"  as  a  bur- 
den laid  upon  him.  This  passage  is  the  corner-stone  of  the 
faith-cure  theory,  which  claims  that  the  atonement  of  Christ 
includes  provision  for  iodily  no  less  than  for  spiritual  healing, 
and  therefore  insists  on  translating  "took  away."  Matthew 
may  be  presumed  to  have  understood  the  sense  of  the  passage 
he  was  citing  from  Isaiah,  and  he  could  have  used  no  word 
more  inadequate  to  express  his  meaning,  if  that  meaning  had 
been  that  Christ  took  away  infirmities. 

20.  Holes  ((^tuXeou?).  Wye.  has  ditches,  with  burrows  in  ex- 
planation. 

N  ests  {/caToiTKrjvaKrei^).  Only  here  and  in  the  parallel,  Luke 
ix.  58.  JVests  is  too  limited.  The  word,  derived  from  aKrjvrj, 
a  tent,  has  the  more  general  meaning  of  shelter  or  habitation. 
In  classical  Greek  it  is  used  of  an  encampment.  The  nest  is 
not  to  the  bird  what  the  hole  is  to  the  fox,  a  perma/nent  dwell- 
ing-place, since  the  bird  frequents  the  nest  only  during  incuba- 
tion. The  Rev.  retains  nests,  but  puts  lodging-places  in  the 
margin. 

24.  Tempest  (a-eia-fib^).  Lit.,  shaking.  Used  of  an  earth- 
quake. The  narrative  indicates  a  sudden  storm.  Dr.  Thom- 
son ("  Land  and  Book  ")  says :  "  Such  winds  are  not  only 
violent,  but  they  come  down  suddenly,  and  often  when  the  sky 
is  perfectly  clear.  ...  To  understand  the  causes  of  these 
sudden  and  violent  tempests  we  must  remember  that  the  lake 
lies  low — six  hundred  and  eighty  feet  below  the  sea ;  that  the 
mountainous  plateau  of  the  Jaulan  rises  to  a  considerable 
height,  spreading  backward  to  the  wilds  of  the  Hauran,  and 
upward  to  snowy  Ilermon ;  that  the  water-courses  have  worn 
or  washed  out  profound  ravines  and  wild  gorges,  converging  to 
the  head  of  this  lake ;  and  that  these  act  like  great  funnels  to 
draw  down  the  cold  winds  from  the  mountains." 

28.  The  tombs  (jivrj/ieimv).  Chambers  excavated  in  the 
mountain,   which  would   afford  a   shelter  to  the  demoniac. 


54  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        LCh.  VIII 

Chandler  ("Travels  in  Asia  Minor")  describes  tombs  with  two 
square  rooms,  the  lower  containing  the  ashes,  while  in  the 
upper,  the  friends  performed  funeral  rites,  and  poured  libations 
through  a  hole  in  the  floor.  Dr.  Thomson  ("  Land  and  Book  ") 
thus  describes  the  rock-cut  tombs  in  the  region  between  Tyre 
and  Sidon :  "  They  are  nearly  all  of  the  same  form,  having  a 
small  chamber  in  front,  and  a  door  leading  from  that  into  the 
tomb,  which  is  about  six  feet  square,  with  niches  on  three  sides 
for  the  dead."  A  propensity  to  take  up  the  abode  in  the  tombs  is 
mentioned  by  ancient  physicians  as  a  characteristic  of  mad- 
men. The  Levitical  uncleanness  of  the  tombs  would  insure  the 
wretches  the  solitude  which  they  sought.  Trench  ("  Notes  on 
the  Miracles")  cites  the  following  incident  from  Warburton 
("The  Crescent  and  the  Cross"):  "  On  descending  from  these 
heights  I  found  myself  in  a  cemetery  whose  sculptured  turbans 
showed  me  that  the  neighboring  village  was  Moslem.  The 
silence  of  night  was  now  broken  by  fierce  yells  and  bowlings, 
which  I  discovered  proceeded  from  a  naked  maniac  who  was 
fighting  with  some  wild  dogs  for  a  bone.  The  moment  he  per- 
ceived me  he  left  his  canine  comrades,  and  bounding  along  with 
rapid  strides,  seized  my  horse's  bridle,  and  almost  forced  him 
backward  over  the  cliff." 

Fierce  (^aXcTrot).  Originally,  difficult,  hard.  Hence  hard 
to  manage ;  intractable. 

32.  A  steep  place  {tov  Kprjfivov).  Much  better  the  steep 
(Eev.).  Not  an  overhanging  precipice,  but  a  steep,  almost  per- 
pendicular declivity,  between  the  base  of  which  and  the  water 
was  a  narrow  margin  of  ground,  in  which  there  was  not  room 
for  the  swine  to  recover  from  their  headlong  rush.  Dr.  Thom- 
son ("  Land  and  Book ")  says :  "  Farther  south  the  plain  be- 
comes so  broad  that  the  herd  might  have  recovered  and  recoiled 
from  the  lake."  The  article  localizes  the  steep  as  in  the  vicin- 
ity of  the  pasture. 


Ch.  IX.]  MATTHEW.  55 


CHAPTER  IX. 

9.  Receipt  of  custom  (reXmi/tov).  Rqy.,  place  of  toll.  "Wye, 
iolhooth,  toll-booth,  or  toll-cabin,  which  is  an  excellent  word, 
though  obsolete.'  Sitting  at,  is,  literally,  sitting  on:  the  ele- 
vated platform  or  bench  which  was  the  principal  feature  of  the 
toll-oflfice,  as  in  modern  custom- bazaars,  being  put  for  the  whole 
establishment.  This  customs-office  was  at  Capernaum,  the  land- 
ing-place for  the  many  ships  whicli  traversed  the  lake  or  coasted 
from  town  to  town ;  and  this  not  only  for  those  who  had  business 
in  Capernaum,  but  for  those  who  would  thei-e  strike  the  great 
road  of  eastern  commerce  from  Datnascus  to  the  harbors  of  the 
West.  Cicero,  in  his  oration  on  'tlie  Consular  Provinces,  ac- 
cuses Gabinius,  the  pro-consul  of  Syria,  of  i-elieving  the  Syrians 
and  Jews  of  some  of  their  legitimate  taxes,  and  of  ordering  the 
small  buildings  to  be  taken  down,  which  the  publicans  had 
erected  at  the  approaches  to  bridges,  or  at  the  termination  of 
roads,  or  in  the  harbors,  for  the  convenience  of  their  slaves 
and  collectors. 

16.  New  (wyvd^ov).  From  a,  not,  and  'yvatTTO),  to  cont'd  or 
comb  wool ;  hence  to  dress  or  full  cloth.  Therefore  Eev. 
renders  more  correctly  undressed  cloth,  which  would  shrink 
when  wet,  and  tear  loose  from  the  old  piece.  Wye.  renders 
rude.  Jesus  thus  pictures  the  combination  of  the  old  forms  of 
piety  peculiar  to  John  and  his  disciples  with  the  new  religious 
life  emanating  from  himself,  as  the  patching  of  an  old  garment 
with  a  piece  of  unfulled  cloth,  which  would  stretch  and  tear 
loose  from  the  old  fabric  and  make  a  worse  rent  than  before. 

17.  Bottles  (oo-/coi)?).  Rev.,  rightly,  wine-shvns,  though  our 
word  lotlde  originally  carried  the  true  meaning,  being  a  bottle 
of  leather.  In  Spanish,  lota  means  a  leather  lottle,  a  loot,  and  a 
hutt.  In  Spain  wine  is  still  brought  to  market  in  pig-skins.  In 
the  East,  goat-skins  are  commonly  used,  with  the  rough  side 
inward.  When  old,  they  break  under  the  fermentation  of  the 
wine. 


56  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Oh.  IX 

18.  Is  even  now  dead  {apri,  ereXevTrja-ev).  The  literal  force 
of  the  aorist  tense  is  more  graphic.     Jusi  now  died. 

20.  Hem  (KpaairiSov).  Kev.,  iorder.  The  fringe  worn  on 
the  border  of  the  outer  garment,  according  to  the  command  in 
Num.  XV.  38.  Dr.  Edersheim  ("  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus ") 
says  that,  according  to  tradition,  each  of  the  white  fringes  was 
to  consist  of  eight  threads,  one  of  them  wound  round  the  others ; 
first  seven  times,  with  a  double  knot ;  then  eight  times  with  a 
double  knot ;  then  eleven  times  with  a  double  knot ;  and, 
lastly,  thirteen  times.  The  Hebrew  characters  representing 
these  numbers  formed  the  words  Jehovah  One. 

23.  Minstrels  (avXT^ra?).  More  correctly,  as  Kev.,  fiute- 
players,  hired  or  volunteering  as  mourners. 

Making  a  noise  {^opvlBovfievov).  Eev.,  tumult.  Repre- 
senting the  loud  screaming  and  wailing  by  the  women.  It  is 
the  word  used  in  Acts  xvii.  6  :  "  Set  the  city  in  an  ujproar.^'' 

32.  Dumb  {kw^ov).  The  word  is  also  used  of  deafness  (Matt, 
xi.  5  ;  Mark  vii.  32  ;  Luke  vii.  22).  It  means  dull  or  hlunted. 
Thus  Homer  applies  it  to  the  earth ;  the  dull,  senseless  earth 
("  IHad,"  xxiv.,  25).  Also  to  a  hlunted  dart  ("  Iliad,"  xi.,  390). 
The  classical  writers  use  it  of  speech,  hearing,  sight,  and  mental 
perception.  In  the  New  Testament,  only  of  hearing  and  speech, 
the  meaning  in  each  case  being  determined  by  the  context. 

36.  ¥dL\nteA  {rjaav  iaKvKfievoC).  ^eY.,hettev,  were  distressed. 
Note  the  verb  with  the  participle,  denoting  their  habitual  con- 
dition. The  word  orginally  means  to  ftay,  rend,  or  mangle. 
^schylus  uses  it  of  the  tearing  of  dead  bodies  by  fish  ("  Persae," 
677).  As  appropriate  to  the  figure  of  sheep,  it  might  be  ren- 
dered heve  fleeced.     Wye,  they  were  travailed. 

Scattered  {ippififjievoi).  So  A.  V.  and  Rev.  The  word  is 
the  perfect  participle  passive  of  pIttto).  to  throw  or  oast,  and 
menus  throivn  doian,  p7'ostrated.     So  Wye,  lying.     It  is  not  the 


Ch.  X.J  MATTHEW.  57 

dispersion  one  from  another,  but  their  j?ros^a^o?i  in  themselves 
that  is  meant.  They  have  cast  themselves  down  for  very  wear- 
iness. 

38.  Send  forth  {iK^dXri).  So  A.  Y.  and  Eev.  But  the 
word  is  stronger ;  thrust  out,  force  them  out,  as  from  urgent 
necessity. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  The  disciples  (tow  /ia^ras).  The  or  his,  referring  to 
them  as  already  chosen,  though  he  nowhere  relates  their  choos- 
ing.   See  Mark  iii.  14  ;  Luke  vi.  13. 

2.  Apostles  {airoa-ToXav).  Compare  discijples,  ver.  i.  Apos- 
tles is  the  official  term,  used  here  for  the  first  time.  They  were 
merely  lea/rners  {disdjples,  fMa^ral)  until  Christ  gave  them 
authority.  From  airoo-TeXka,  to  send  away.  An  apostle  is  one 
sent  forth.  Compare  John  xiii.  16  and  Rev.,  one  that  is  sent. 
Cremer  ("  Biblico-Theological  Lexicon  ")  suggests  that  it  was 
the  rare  occurrence  of  the  word  in  profane  Greek  that  made  it 
all  the  more  appropriate  as  the  distinctive  appellation  of  the 
twelve.  Compare  Luke  vi.  13  ;  Acts  i.  2.  Also,  John  xvii.  18, 
I  home  sent.  The  word  is  once  used  of  Christ  (Heb.  iii.  1),  and 
in  a  very  general  sense  to  denote  any  one  sent  (2  Cor.  viii.  23  ; 
PhHip.  ii.  25). 

4.  The  Canaanite  (o  Kavavaioi).  Rev.,  Cananaean.  The 
word  has  nothing  to  do  with  Canaan.  In  Luke  vi.  15  ;  Acts  i. 
13,  the  same  apostle  is  called  Zelote-s.  Both  terms  indicate  his 
connection  with  the  Galilaean  Zealot  party,  a  sect  which  stood 
for  the  recovery  of  Jewish  freedom  and  the  maintenance  of 
distinctive  Jewish  institutions.  Erom  the  Hebrew  7cam,nd,  zeal- 
ous ;  compare  the  Chaldee  handn,  by  which  this  sect  was  de- 
noted. 

5.  Judas  Iscariot  (d'Io-A;a/3t(BT7;s).  The  article  distinguishes 
him  from  others  of  the  name  of  Judas  (compare  John  xiv.  22). 


58  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

Iscariot  is  usually  explained  as  a  compound,  meaning  the  man 
ofKerioth,  with  reference  to  his  native  town,  which  is  given  m 
Joshua  (XV.  25)  as  one  of  the  uttermost  cities  of  Judah  toward 
the  coast  of  Edom  southward. 

In  the  four  catalogues  of  the  apostles  (here ;  Mark  iii.  16  ; 
Luke  vi.  14 ;  Acts  i.  13)  Simon  Peter  always  stands  first.  Here 
expressly  ;  "first  Simon."  Notice  that  Matthew  names  them 
inpairs,  and  compare  Mark  vi.  7,  "  sent  them  forth  two  and 
two.'"  The  arrangement  of  the  different  lists  varies;  but 
throughout,  Peter  is  the  leader  of  the  first  four,  Philip  of  the 
second,  and  James,  son  of  Alphaeus,  of  the  third. 

6.  The  lost  sheep  {Tairpo^aTaTacnroXcoXoTa).  The  Greek 
order  throws  the  emphasis  on  lost;  the  sheep,  t/ie  lost  ones. 
Bengel  observes  that  Jesus  says  lost  oftener  than  led  astray. 
Compare  xviii.  12,  14. 

9.  Brass  (xaX/cw).  Properly  eo^er.  A  decending  climax. 
Copper  would  be  as  unnecessary  as  gold. 

10.  Staves  (^aySSou?).  But  the  proper  reading  is  staff, 
{pd^hov.) 

The  workman  is  worthy,  etc.  Ver.  11,  There  abide,  etc. 
"  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,"  a  tract  discovered  in 
1873  in  the  library  of  the  monastery  of  the  Most  Holy  Sepul- 
chre at  Constantinople,  by  Bryennios,  Metropolitan  of  !Nicome- 
dia,  is  assigned  to  the  date  of  120  a.d.,  and  by  some  scholars  is 
placed  as  early  as  100  a.d.  It  is  addressed  to  Gentile  Christians, 
and  is  designed  to  give  them  practical  instruction  in  the  Chris- 
tian life,  according  to  the  teachings  of  the  twelve  apostles  and 
of  the  Lord  himself.  In  the  eleventh  chapter  we  read  as  fol- 
lows :  "  And  every  apostle  who  cometh  to  you,  let  him  be  re- 
ceived as  the  Lord  ;  but  he  shall  not  remain  except  for  one  day  ; 
if,  however,  there  be  need,  then  the  next  day  ;  but  if  he  remain 
thi-ee  days,  he  is  a  false  prophet.  But  when  the  apostle  de- 
parteth,  let  him  take  nothing  except  bread  enough  till  he  lodge 
again,  but  if  he  ask  money,  he  is  a  false  prophet."     And  again 


en.  X.]  MATTHEW.  59' 

(cli.  xiii.) :  "  Likewise  a  true  teacher,  he  also  is  woi-thy  like  the 
■workman,  of  his  support.  Every  first-fruit,  then,  of  the  products 
of  wine-press  and  threshing-floor,  of  oxen  and  sheep,  thou  shalt 
take  and  give  to  the  prophets,  for  they  are  your  high-priests. 
.  .  .  If  thou  makest  a  baking  of  bread,  take  the  first  of 
it  and  give  according  to  the  commandment.  In  like  manner, 
when  thou  openest  a  jar  of  wine  or  oil,  take  the  first  of  it  and 
give  to  the  prophets ;  and  of  money  and  clothing,  and  eveiy 
possession,  take  the  first,  as  may  seem  right  to  thee,  and  give 
according  to  the  commandment." 

12.  When  ye  come  into  {ela-epxofj^voi).  The  Greek  indi- 
cates more  distinctly  the  simultaneousness  of  the  entrance  and 
the  salutation :  as  ye  are  entering.  Eev.,  as  ye  enter.  So  of 
the  departure,  as  ye  are  going  forth  {i^epxa/j^epoi,  ver.  14). 

14.  Shake  off  {iKTivd^are).  "The  very  dust  of  a  heathen 
country  was  unclean,  and  it  defiled  by  contact.  It  was  re- 
garded like  a  grave,  or  like  the  putrescence  of  death.  If  a  spot 
of  heathen  dust  had  touched  an  offering,  it  must  at  once  be 
burnt.  More  than  that,  if  by  mischance  any  heathen  dust  had 
been  brought  into  Palestine,  it  did  not  and  could  not  mingle 
with  that  of  '  the  land,'  but  remained  to  the  end  what  it  had 
been — unclean,  defiled  and  defiling  everything  to  which  it  ad- 
hered." The  apostles,  therefore,  were  not  only  to  leave  the 
.house  or  city  which  should  refuse  to  receive  them,  "  but  it  was 
to  be  considered  and  treated  as  if  it  were  heathen,  just  as  in 
the  similar  case  mentioned  in  Matt,  xviii.  17.  All  contact  with 
such  must  be  avoided,  all  trace  of  it  shaken  off "  (Edersheim, 
"  Jewish  Social  Life  in  the  Days  of  Christ ").  The  symbolic 
act  indicated  that  the  apostles  and  their  Lord  regarded  them  not 
only  as  unclean,  but  as  entirely  responsible  for  their  unclean- 
ness.     See  Acts  xviii.  6. 

16.  I  send  you  forth  (iycb  am-oareXKa>).  Cognate  to  the 
word  a-!r6(TToXo<;  {apostle).  The  /  is  emphatic:  "It  is  /  that 
send  yon  forth." 


60  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

Wise  {<}>p6vi,fioi).    So  A.  Y.  and  Kev.     Denoting  prudence 

with  regard  to  their  own  safety.     Wye,  wary.  ^ 

Harmless  (aKepaioi).  Lit.,  unmixed,  mutdulUrated.  Used 
of  wine  without  water,  and  of  metal  without  alloy.  Hence 
guileless.  So  Luther,  without  falsity.  Compare  Rom.  xvi. 
19  •  Philip,  ii.  15.  They  were  to  imitate  the  serpent's  wariness, 
but  not  his  wiliness.  "  The  presence  of  the  wolves  demands 
that  ye  he  wary ;  the  fact  that  ye  are  my  apostles  (compare 
"/send  you")  demands  that  ye  be  guileless''^  (Dr.  Morison  on 
Matthew). 

17.  Of  men  {rmv  avBpw'jrmv).  Lit.,  "the  men,"  already  al- 
luded to  under  the  term  wolves. 

19.  Take  no  thought  (/x^  fiepbiJuvrja-riTe).  Eev.,  Be  not 
anxious.     See  on  vi.  25. 

In  that  hour  {iv  eKelvt)  t^  &pa).  Very  precise.  "In  that 
selfsame  hour."  Bengel  remarks :  "  Even  though  not  before. 
Many  feel  most  strongly  their  spiritual  power  when  the  hour 
comes  to  impart  it  to  others." 

25.  Beelzebub  (/3eeX?e/3oi)\,  BeelzebuT).  There  is  a  coarse 
witticism  in  the  application  of  the  word  to  Christ.  Jesus  calls 
himself  "  the  Master  of  the  house,"  and  the  Jews  apply  to  him 
the  corresponding  title  of  the  Devil,  Heb.,  Beelsebul,  Master 
of  the  dwelling.  (The  phrase  reappears  in  German,  where  the 
Devil  is  sometimes  called  Herr  vom  Homs.  See  Goethe, 
"Faust,"  sc.  xxi.).  Dr.  Edersheim's  explanation,  though  in- 
genious, seems  far-fetched.  He  says  that  szebuhl,  in  Rabbinic 
language,  means,  not  any  ordinary  dwelling,  but  specifically  the 
temple  ;  so  that  Beelzebul  would  be  Master  of  the  Tenyple,  an 
expression  having  reference  to  the  claims  of  Jesus  on  his  first 
purification  of  the  temple.  Pie  then  conceives  a  play  between 
this  word  and  Beelzibbul,  meaning  Lord  of  idolatrous  sacrifice, 
and  says :  "  The  Lord  of  the  temple  was  to  them  the  chief  of 
idolatrous  worship ;    the  representative  of  God,  that  of  the 


Ch.  X.]  MATTHEW.  61 

worst  of  demons.  Beelzehul  was  Beelzihhul.^  What,  then, 
might  his  household  expect  at  their  hands  ?  "  ("  Life  and  Times 
of  Jesus  "). 

27.  Preach  {Krjpv^are).  Better  Eev.,  proclaim.  See  on 
Matt.  iv.  IT. 

29.  Sparrows  (a-TpovS-ia).  The  word  is  a  diminutive,  little 
sparrows,  and  carries  with  it  a  touch  of  tenderness.  At  the 
present  day,  in  the  markets  of  Jerusalem  and  Jaffa,  long 
strings  of  little  birds,  sparrows  and  larks,  are  offered  for  sale, 
trussed  on  long  wooden  skewers.  Edersheim  thinks  that  Jesus 
may  have  had  reference  to  the  two  sparrows  which,  according 
to  the  Kabbins,  were  used  in  the  ceremonial  of  purification 
from  leprosy  (Lev.  xiv.  49-54). 

Shall  not  fall.  A  Kabbinic  legend  relates  how  a  certain 
Rabbi  had  been  for  thirteen  years  hiding  from  his  persecutors 
in  a  cave,  where  he  was  miraculously  fed  ;  when  he  observed 
that  when  the  bird-catcher  laid  his  snare,  the  bird  escaped  or 
was  caught,  according  as  a  voice  from  heaven  proclaimed 
"  Mercy  "  or  "  Destruction."  Arguing  that  if  even  a  sparrow 
cannot  be  caught  without  heaven's  bidding,  how  much  more 
safe  was  the  life  of  a  son  of  man,  he  came  forth. 

32.  Confess  me  {6fio\ojija-ei  iv  ifiol).  A  peculiar  but  very 
significant  expression.  Lit.,  "  Confess  in  me."  The  idea  is 
that  of  confessing  Christ  out  of  a  state  of  oneness  with  him. 
"  Abide  in  me,  and  being  in  me,  confess  me."  It  implies  iden- 
tification of  the  confessor  with  the  confessed,  and  thus  takes 
confession  out  of  the  category  of  mere  formal  or  verbal  acknowl- 
edgment. "  Not  every  one  that  saitk  unto  me, '  Lord !  Lord  ! ' 
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  true  confessor 
of  Christ  is  one  whose  faith  rests  in  him.  Observe  that  this 
gives  great  force  to  the  corresponding  clause,  in  which  Christ 
places  himself  in  a  similar  relation  with  those  whom  he  con- 
fesses. "  I  will  confess  in  him."  It  shall  be  as  if  I  spoke 
abiding  in  him.     '•  I  in  them  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be 


62  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X 

perfected  into  one,  and  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast 
sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them  as  thou  hast  loved  me  "  (John 
xvii.  23). 

34.  To  send  (JSaXeiv).  Lit.,  to  throw  or  cast.  By  this  word 
the  expectancy  of  the  disciples  is  dramatically  pictured,  as  if  he 
represented  them  as  eagerly  looking  up  for  peace  as  something 
to  be  flung  down  upon  the  earth  from  heaven.  Dr.  Morison 
gives  the  picture  thus:  "All  are  on  tiptoe  of  expectation. 
What  is  it  that  is  about  to  happen  ?  Is  it  the  reign  of  peace 
that  is  just  about  to  be  inaugurated  and  consummated  ?  Is  there 
henceforth  to  be  only  unity  and  amity  ?  As  they  muse  and  de- 
bate, lo  !  a  sword  is  flung  into  the  midst." 

35.  Set  at  variance  (Bixao-ai)-  Lit.,  jpart  asunder.  "Wye, 
to  depart  —  part. 

Daughter-in-law  (w/a^t;!').  So  A.  Y.  and  Rev.;  but  the 
full  force  is  lost  in  this  rendering.  The  word  means  hride, 
and  though  sometimes  used  in  classical  Greek  of  any  married 
woman,  it  carries  a  notion  of  comparative  youth.  Thus  in 
Homer,  "  Odyssey,"  iv.,  743,  the  aged  nurse,  Euryclea,  addresses 
Penelope  (certainly  not  a  bride)  as  vv/jLipa  (piXrj  (dear  bride),  of 
course  as  a  term  of  affection  or  petting.  Compare  "  Iliad,"  iii., 
130,  where  Iris  addresses  Helen  in  the  same  way.  The  radical 
and  bitter  character  of  the  division  brought  into  households  by 
the  Gospel  is  shown  by  the  fact  of  its  affecting  domestic  rela- 
tions in  their  very  freshness.  The  newly-married  wife  shall  be 
set  at  variance  with  her  mother-in-law.  Wycliffe's  rendering 
is  peculiar :  And  the  son's  wife  against  the  wif^s  or  husbamd^s 
mother. 

38.  His  cross  {tov  aravpbv  ainov).  This  was  no  Jewish 
proverb,  crucifixion  not  being  a  Jewish  piinishment ;  so  that 
Jesus  uses  the  phrase  anticipatively,  in  view  of  the  death  which 
he  himself  was  to  die.  This  was  one  of  those  sayings  described 
in  John  xii.  16,  which  the  disciples  understood  not  at  the  first, 
but  the  meaning  of  which  was  revealed  in  the  light  of  later 


Ch.  XL]  MATTHEW.  63 

events.  The  figure  itself  was  borrowed  from  the  practice  which 
compelled  criminals  to  bear  their  own  cross  to  the  place  of 
execution.  His  cross:  his  own.  All  are  not  alike.  There 
are  different  crosses  for  different  disciples.  The  English  pro- 
verb runs :  "  Every  cross  hath  its  inscription  " — the  name  of 
him  for  whom  it  is  shaped. 

39.  Findeth  {evpmv).  The  word  is  really  a  past  participle, 
found.  Our  Lord  looked  back  in  thought  to  each  man's  past, 
and  forward  to  its  appropriate  consummation  in  the  future. 
Similarly,  he  who  lost  (aTroXkawi).  Plato  seems  to  have  fore- 
shadowed this  wonderful  thought.  "  O  my  friend !  I  want  you 
to  see  that  the  noble  and  the  good  may  possibly  be  something 
different  from  saving  and  being  saved,  and  that  he  who  is  truly 
a  man  ought  not  to  care  about  living  a  certain  time :  he  knows, 
as  women  say,  that  we  must  all  die,  and  therefore  he  is  not  fond 
of  life  ;  he  leaves  all  that  with  God,  and  considers  in  what  way 
he  can  best  spend  his  appointed  term"  ("  Gorgias,"  512).  Still 
more  to  the  point,  Euripides  : 

"  Who  knows  if  life  be  not  death,  and  death  life  ?  " 


GRAF  TEE  XL 

1.  Commanding  {hiarcuTcrav).     The  preposition  Sta  has  a 
distributive  force :  giving  to  each  his  appropriate  charge. 

Their  cities  {avrSiv).     The  towns  of  those  to  whom  he  came 
— the  Galilaeans.     Compare  iv.  23. 

2.  Two  of  his  disciples  (8vo).     But  the  correct  reading  is 
hid,  hy.     He  sent  by  his  disciples.     So  Rev. 

3.  Thou.      Emphatic.     Art  thou  "the  Coming  One?"— a 
current  phrase  for  the  Messiah. 


64  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XL 

5.  The  lame  walk.    Tynd.,  The  halt  go. 

6.  Be  offended  (a-KavBaXia-STJ).     See  on  ch.  v.  29.     Kev., 

shall  find  none  occasion  of  stumbling.     Compare  Wye,  shall 
not  ie  slandered. 

7.  As  they  departed  (tovtcov  Be  ■iropevofj.evmv).  'Rev.,  more 
literal  and  better,  as  these  went  their  way  ;  or  while  they,  John's 
disciples,  were  departing  :  thus  giving  the  simultaneousness  of 
Jesus'  words  with  the  act  of  departure. 

To  see  {^edcracrBaC) .  Kev.,  toiehold.  ^eaaB-ai,  like  Secopeiv, 
expresses  the  calm,  continuous  contemplation  of  an  object  which 
remains  before  the  spectator.  Compare  John  i.  14.  Another  verb 
is  used  in  Christ's  repetition  of  the  question,  vv.  8,  9 ;  IBeiv  in 
the  ordinary  sense  of  seeing.  The  more  earnest  expression 
suits  the  first  question. 

12.  Suffereth  violence  {^id^erai).  Lit.,  is  forced,  over- 
powered, taken  ht/  storm.  Christ  thus  graphically  portrays  the 
intense  excitement  which  followed  John's  ministry  ;  the  eager 
waiting,  striving,  and  struggling  of  the  multitude  for  the  prom- 
ised king. 

The  violent  take  it  by  force  {^laa-Tol  dpTrd^ovcnv  avrrjv). 
This  was  proved  by  the  multitudes  who  followed  Christ  and 
thronged  the  doors  where  he  was,  and  would  have  tahen  him  hy 
force  (the  same  word)  and  made  him  a  king  (John  vi.  15).  The 
word  tahe  hy  force  means  literally  to  snatch  away,  carry  off.  It 
is  often  used  in  the  classics  of  plundering.  Meyer  renders, 
Those  who  use  molent  efforts,  drag  it  to  themselves.  So  Tynd., 
They  that  make  violence  pull  it  unto  them.  Christ  speaks  of 
believers.  They  seize  upon  the  kingdom  and  make  it  their 
own.  The  Eev.,  men  of  violence,  is  too  strong,  since  it  de- 
scribes a  class  of  habitually  and  characteristically  violent  men  ; 
whereas  the  violence  in  this  case  is  the  result  of  a  special  and 
exceptional  impulse.  The  passage  recalls  the  old  Greek  proverb 
quoted  by  Plato  against  the  Sophists,  who  had  corrupted  the 


Ch.  XL]  MATTHEW.  65 

Athenian  youth  by  promising  the  easy  attainment  of  wisdom  : 
Good  things  are  hard.     Dante  has  seized  the  idea : 

"  Regnvm  coelorum,  (the  kingdom  of  heaven)  sufEereth  violence 
From  fervent  love,  and  from  that  living  hope 
That  overoometh  the  divine  volition ; 
Not  in  the  guise  that  man  o'ercometh  man, 
But  conquers  it  because  it  will  be  conquered, 
And  conquered,  conquers  by  benignity." 

Farad.,  xx., 94^99. 

14.  If  ye  will  {elMXere).  More  correctly,  Eev.,  If  ye  are 
wilUng  or  disposed.  For  there  would  naturally  be  an  unwill- 
ingness to  receive  the  statement  about  John's  high  place,  in 
view  of  John's  imprisonment. 

16.  Children  (TratStbt?).  Diminutive,  little  children.  The 
Eev.  Donald  Fraser  gives  the  picture  simply  and  vividly :  "  He 
pictured  a  group  of  little  children  playing  at  make-believe  mar- 
riages and  funerals.  First  they  acted  a  marriage  procession ;  some 
of  them  piping  as  on  instruments  of  music,  while  the  rest  were 
expected  to  leap  and  dance.  In  a  perverse  mood,  however,  these 
last  did  not  respond,  but  stood  still  and  looked  discontented. 
So  the  little  pipers  changed  their  game  and  proposed  a  funeral. 
They  began  to  imitate  the  loud  wailing  of  eastern  mourners. 
But  again  they  were  thwarted,  for  their  companions  refused 
to  chime  in  with  the  mournful  cry  and  to  beat  their  breasts. 
.  .  .  So  the  disappointed  children  complained  :  '  "We  piped 
unto  you  and  ye  did  not  dance ;  we  wailed,  and  ye  did  not 
mourn.  Nothing  pleases  you.  If  you  don't  want  to  dance, 
why.  don't  you  mourn  ?  ...  It  is  plain  that  you  are  in 
bad  humor,  and  determined  not  to  be  pleased ' "  ("  Metaphors  in 
the  Gospels  ").  The  issue  is  between  the  Jews  {this  generation) 
and  the  children  of  wisdom,  v.  9. 

Market-places  (070/304?).    'Fvova  ar^eLpw,  to  assemhle.    Wye, 

renders  cheepynge,'  compare  cheapside,  the  place  for  buying  and 

selling  /  for  the  word  cheap  had  originally  no  reference  to  small 

price,  but  meant  simply  harter  ov  price.     The  primary  concep- 

5 


66  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XL 

tioii  in  the  Greek  word  has  nothing  to  do  with  buying  and  sell- 
ing. ' A^opd  \a  an  assembly;  then  the  place  of  assembly.  The 
idea  of  a  place  of  trade  comes  in  afterward,  and  naturally, 
since  trade  plants  itself  where  people  habitually  gather.  Hence 
the  Eoman  Forum  was  devoted,  not  only  to  populaj-  and  judi- 
cial assemblies,  but  to  commercial  purposes,  especially  of  bank- 
ers. The  idea  of  trade  gradually  becomes  the  dominant  one  in 
the  word.  In  Eastern  cities  the  markets  are  held  in  bazaars  and 
streets,  rather  than  in  squares.  In  these  public  places  the  chil- 
dren would  be  found  playing.     Compare  Zech.  viii.  5. 

lY.  Mourn  {iKo-^aa^e).  Lit.,  beat  or  strike  (the  breast),  as 
in  oriental  funeral  lamentations. 

20.  Mighty  works  {BwdfieK;) .  The  supernatural  works  of 
Christ  and  his  apostles  are  denoted  by  six  different  words  in 
the  New  Testament,  exhibiting  these  works  under  different 
aspects  and  from  different  points  of  view.  These  will  be  con- 
sidered in  detail  as  thej  occur.  Generally,  a  miracle  may  be 
regarded  :  1.  As  a  portent  or  prodigy  (repa?)  ;  as  Acts  vii.  36, 
of  the  wonders  shown  by  Moses  in  Egypt.  2.  As  a  sign 
{ari^elov),  pointing  to  something  beyond  itself,  a  mark  of  the 
power  or  grace  of  the  doer  or  of  his  connection  with  the  super- 
natural world.  So  Matt.  xii.  38.  3.  As  an  exhibition  of  God's 
glory  {evZo^ov),  Luke  xiii.  17 ;  glorious  things.  4.  As  a  st/range 
thing  (TrapdSo^ov),  Luke  v.  26.  5.  As  a  wonderful  thing  {Savf^d- 
cnov),  Matt.  xxi.  15.  6.  As  a  power  {Bvva/j,t<;) ;  so  here :  a 
mighty  work. 

22.  But  {nT\r)v).  Better  Eev.,  howbeit,  or  as  Wye,  neverthe- 
less. Chorazin  and  Bethsaida  did  not  repent ;  therefore  a  woe 
lies  against  them;  nevertheless  they  shall  be  more  excusable 
than  you  who  have  seen  the  mighty  works  which  were  not 
done  among  them. 

25.  Answered.     In  reply  to  something  which  is  not  stated. 

I  thank  (i^o/ioXoyovfiai).  Compare  Matt.  iii.  6,  of  confessing 
sins.     Lit.,  /  confess.     I  recognize  the  justice  and  wisdom  of 


Cu.  XI.]  MATTHEW.  67 

thy  doings.  But  with  the  dative,  as  here  {a-oi,  to  thee),  it  means 
to  praise,  with  an  undercurrent  of  aoknowledgment ;  to  confess 
only  in  later  Greek,  and  with  an  accusative  of  the  object.  Eev. 
gWes  j)raise  in  the  margin  here,  and  at  Rom.  xiv.  11.  Tynd., 
Ijpraise. 

Prudent  {a-wermv).  Eev.,  understanding;  Wye,  wary. 
From  the  verb  a-wiTjfii,  to  iringr  together,  and  denoting  that 
peculiarity  of  mind  which  brings  the  simple  features  of  an  ob- 
ject into  a  whole.  Hence  coraprehension,  insight.  Compare 
on  Mark  xii.  33,  understanding  {aweaecos:).  Wise  (crotjiav)  and 
understanding  are  often  joined,  as  here.  The  general  distinc- 
tion is  between  productive  and  reflective  wisdom,  but  the  dis- 
tinction is  not  always  recognized  by  the  writer. 

27.  Are  delivered  {-n-apeSo^).  More  lit.,  were  delivered, 
as  of  a  single  act  at  a  given  time,  as  in  this  case,  where  the  Son 
was  sent  forth  by  the  Father,  and  clothed  with  authority.  Com- 
pare xxviii.  18.' 

Knoweth  (iTriyivcoa-Kei).  The  compound  indicating  full 
knowledge.  Others  behold  only  in  j)art,  "  through  a  glass, 
darkly." 

28.  Labor  and  are  heavy-laden  {/coTritovTe^  koI  '7re(f>opn(7fi€- 
vot).  The  first  an  active,  the  second  a  passive  participle,  ex- 
hibiting the  active  and  passive  sides  of  human  misery. 

Give  rest  {ava-rravam).  Originally  to  maJce  to  cease;  Tynd., 
ease  ;  Wye. ,  refresh.     The  radical  conception  is  that  of  relief. 

29.  Yoke  {^vyov).  "  These  words,  as  recorded  by  St.  Matthew, 
the  Evangelist  of  the  Jews,  must  have  sunk  the  deeper  into  the 
hearts  of  Christ's  Jewish  hearers,  that  they  came  in  their  own 
old,  familiar  form  of  speech,  yet  with  such  contrast  of  spirit. 
One  of  the  most  common  figurative  expressions  of  the  time 
was  that  of  the  yoke  for  submission  to  an  occupation  or  obliga- 
tion.    Very  instructive  for  the  understanding  of  the  figure  is 


68  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XX 

this  paraphrase  of  Cant.  i.  10 :  '  How  beautiful  is  their  neck  for 
bearing  the  yoke  of  thy  statutes ;  and  it  shall  be  upon  them 
like  the  yoke  on  the  neck  of  the  ox  that  plougheth  in  the  field 
and  provideth  food  for  himself  and  his  master.' 

"  The  public  worship  of  the  ancient  synagogue  commenced 
with  a  benediction,  followed  by  the  sliema  {Hewr,  0  Israel)  or 
creed,  composed  of  three  passages  of  scripture :  Deut.  vi.  4-9 ;  xi. 
13-21 ;  Num.  xv.  37-41.  The  section  Deut.  vi.  -4^9, was  said  to 
precede  xi.  13-21,  so  that  we  might  take  upon  ourselves  the  yoke 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  only  after  that  the  yoke  of  the 
commandments.  The  Saviour's  words  must  have  had  a  special 
significance  to  those  who  remembered  this  lesson ;  and  they 
would  now  understand  how,  by  coming  to  the  Saviour,  they 
would  first  take  on  them  the  yoke  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  then  that  of  the  commandments,  finding  this  yoke  easy  and 
the  burden  light "  (Edersheim,  "  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus,"  and 
"  Jewish  Social  Life  "). 

Meek  {wpaxi^).     See  on  Matt.  v.  5. 

Lowly  (raTretvo?).  The  word  has  a  history.  In  the  classics 
it  is  used  commonly  in  a  bad  and  degrading  sense,  of  meanness 
of  condition,  lowness  of  rank,  and  cringing  abjectness  and  base- 
ness of  character.  Still,  even  in  classical  Greek,  this  is  not  its 
universal  usage.  It  is  occasionally  employed  in  a  way  which 
foreshadows  its  higher  sense.  Plato,  for  instance,  says,  "  To  that 
law  (of  God)  he  would  be  happy  who  holds  fast,  and  follows  it 
in  all  humility  and  order  ;  but  he  who  is  lifted  up  with  pride, 
or  money,  or  honor,  or  beauty,  who  has  a  soul  hot  with  folly, 
and  youth,  and  insolence,  and  thinks  that  he  has  no  need  of  a 
guide  or  ruler,  but  is  able  himself  to  be  the  guide  of  others,  he, 
I  say,  is  left  deserted  of  God  "  ("  Laws,"  716).  And  Aristotle 
says :  "  He  who  is  worthy  of  small  things,  and  deems  himself  so, 
is  wise  "  ("  Mch.  Ethics,"  iv. ,  3).  At  best,  however,  the  classical 
conception  is  only  m,odesty,  absence  of  assumption.  It  is  an  ele- 
ment of  wisdom  and  in  no  way  opposed  to  self -righteousness  (see 
Aristotle  above).  The  word  for  the  Christian  virtue  of  humil- 
ity {raTrewo^poa-vvq),  was  not  used  before  the  Christian  era,  and 


Ch.  XI.]  MATTHEW.  69 

is  distinctly  an  outgrowth  of  the  Gospel.  This  virtue  is  based 
upon  a  correct  estimate  of  our  actual  littleness,  and  is  linked 
with  a  sense  of  sinfulness.  True  greatness  is  holiness.  "We 
are  little  because  sinful.  Compare  Luke  xviii.  14.  It  is  asked 
how,  in  this  view  of  the  case,  the  word  can  be  applied  to  himself 
by  the  sinless  Lord  ?  "  The  answer  is,"  says  Archbishop  Trench, 
"  thatybr  the  sinner  humility  involves  the  confession  of  sin,  in- 
asmuch as  it  involves  the  confession  of  his  true  condition ; 
while  yet  for  the  unf alien  creature  the  grace  itself  as  truly  ex- 
ists, involving  for  such  the  acknowledgment,  not  of  sinfulness, 
which  would  be  untrue,  but  of  creatureliness,  of  absolute  de- 
pendence, of  having  nothing,  but  receiving  all  things  of  God. 
And  thus  the  grace  of  humility  belongs  to  the  highest  angel  be- 
fore the  throne,  being  as  he  is  a  creature,  yea,  even  to  the  Lord 
of  Glory  himself.  In  his  human  nature  he  must  be  the  pattern 
of  all  humility,  of  all  creaturely  dependence  ;  and  it  is  only  as 
a  man  that  Christ  thus  claims  to  be  lowly;  his  human  life  was 
a  constant  living  on  the  fulness  of  his  Father's  love ;  he  ever- 
more, as  man,  took  the  place  which  beseemed  the  creature  in 
the  presence  of  its  Creator  "  ("  Synonyms,"  p.  145).  The  Chris- 
tian virtue  regards  man  not  only  with  reference  to  God,  but  to 
his  fellow-man.  In  lowliness  of  mind  each  counting  other  ietter 
than  himsdf  (Philip,  ii.  3,  Eev.).  But  this  is  contrary  to  the 
Greek  conception  of  justice  or  righteousness,  which  was  simply 
"  his  own  to  each  one."  It  is  noteworthy  that  neither  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  the  Apocrypha,  nor  the, New  Testament  recognize  the 
ignoble  classical  sense  of  the  word. 

Ye  shall  find  {evp^a-ere).  Compare  /  will  gi/ve  you  and  ye 
shaUJmd.  The  rest  of  Christ  is  twoiold—gimen  and  found. 
It  is  given  in  pardon  and  reconciliation.  It  is  found  under  the 
yoke  and  the  burden ;  in  the  development  of  Christian  experi- 
ence, as  more  and  more  the  "  strain  passes  over  "  from  self  to 
Christ.  "  No  other  teacher,  since  the  world  began,  has  ever 
associated  learn  with  rest.  '  Learn  of  me,'  says  the  philosopher, 
'  and  you  shall  find  restlessness.'  '  Learn  of  me,'  says  Christ, 
'  and  you  shall  find  rest ' "  (Drummond,  "  Natural  Law  in  the 
Spiritual  World  "). 


01 


70  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE   NEW    TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XII 

30.  Easy  (x/jijo-to?).  Not  a  satisfactory  rendering.  Christ's 
yoke  is  not  easy  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  that  word.  The  word 
means  originally,  good,  sermcedble.  The  kindred  noun,  XP'^a- 
t6t7??,  occurring  only  in  Paul's  writings,  is  rendered  hindness  in 
2  Cor.  vi.  6 ;  Tit.  iii.  4 ;  Gal.  v.  22 ;  Eph.  ii.  Y  (Rev.),  and  good- 
ness, Rom.  ii.  4  (Rev.).  At  Luke  v.  39,  it  is  used  of  old  wine, 
where  the  true  reading,  instead  of  letter,  is  good  (x/377C7t6?),  mel- 
lowed with  age.  Plato  ("  Republic,"  424)  applies  the  word  to 
education.  "  Good  nurture  and  education  {rpo^  <^ap  koI  irai- 
Seuo-i?  xpri<^^h)  implant  good  {aya3a';)  constitutions  ;  and  these 
good  {xpv^TO'l)  constitutions  improve  more  and  more ; "  thus 
evidently  using  ;y;p??crT69  and  aya3-6<;  as  synonymous.  The  three 
meanings  combine  in  the  word,  though  it  is  impossible  to  find 
an  English  word  which  combines  them  all.  Christ's  yoke  is 
%oholesome,  serviceable,  kindly.  "  Christ's  yoke  is  like  feathers 
to  a  bird ;  not  loads,  but  helps  to  motion  "  (Jeremy  Taylor). 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  Time  (Kaipm).  Rev.,  season.  The  word  implies  &^ar- 
ticular  time  ;  as  related  to  some  event,  a  convenient,  a/ppropriate 
time  ;  absolutely,  a  particular  point  of  time,  or  a  particular  sea- 
son, like  spring  or  winter. 

Corn  {(TTTopipbajv).    From  aireipas,  to  sow.   Properly,  as  Rev., 

corn-fields. 

2.  What  is  not  lawful.  "On  any  ordinary  day  this  would 
have  been  lawful ;  but  on  the  Sabbath  it  involved,  according 
to  the  Rabbinic  statutes,  at  least  two  sins,  viz.,  plucking  the  ears, 
which  was  reaping,  and  rubbing  them  in  their  hands  (Luke  vi.  1), 
which  was  sifting,  grinding,  or  fanning.  The  Talmud  says  : 
'In  case  a  woman  rolls  wheat  to  remove  the  husks,  it  is  con- 
sidered as  sifting ;  if  she  rubs  the  heads  of  wheat,  it  is  regarded 
as  threshing ;  if  she  cleans  off  the  side-adherencies,  it  is  sifting 
out  fruit  ;  if  she  bi'uises  the  ears,  it  is  grinding ;  if  she  throws 
them  up  in  her  hand,  it  is  winnowing ' "  (Edersheira,  "  Life  and 
Times  of  Jesus  "). 


Ch.  XII.]  MATTHEW.  71 

6.  One  greater  (jiet^av).  The  correct  reading  makes  the 
adjective  neuter,  so  that  the  right  rendering  is  something  greater 
(Rev.,  in  margin).  The  reference  is,  of  course,  to  Christ  him- 
self (compare  vv.  41,  42,  where  the  neuter  TfKelov,  m,ore  (so 
Kev.,  in  margin),  is  used  in  the  same  way).  Compare,  also, 
John  ii.  19,  where  Christ  speaks  of  his  own  body  as  a  temple. 
The  indefiniteness  of  the  neuter  gives  a  more  solenm  and  impres- 
sive sense. 

10.  Is  it  lawful  ?  {el  e^ea-Tiv).  The  et  can  hardly  be  rendered 
into  English.  It  gives  an  indeterminate,  hesitating  character 
to  the  question  :  I  would  like  to  know  if,  etc. 

13.  Stretch  forth  thy  hand.     The  arm  was  not  withered. 

20.  Flax.  The  Hebrew  is,  literally,  a  dim,ly  hurning  wich 
he  shall  not  quench  (Isa.  xlii.  3).  The  quotation  stops  at  the 
end  of  the  third  verse  in  the  prophecy ;  but  the  succeeding 
verse  is  beautifully  suggestive  as  describing  the  Servant  of  Je- 
hovah by  the  same  figures  in  which  lie  pictures  his  suffering 
ones — a  wick  and  a  reed.  "  He  shall  not  burn  dimly,  neither 
shall  his  spirit  be  crushed."  He  himself,  partaking  of  the  na- 
ture of  our  frail  humanity,  is  both  a  lamp  and  a  reed,  humble, 
but  not  to  be  broken,  and  the  "  light  of  the  world."  Compare 
the  beautiful  passage  in  Dante,  where  Cato  directs  Virgil  to 
wash  away  the  stains  of  the  nether  world  from  Dante's  face, 
and  to  prepare  him  for  the  ascent  of  the  purgatorial  mount  by 
girding  him  with  a  rush,  the  emblem  of  humility  ; 

"  Go,  then,  and  see  thou  gird  this  one  about 
With  a  smooth  rush,  and  that  thou  wash  his  face, 
So  that  thou  cleanse  away  all  stain  therefrom. 
For  'twere  not  fitting  that  the  eye  o'eroast 
By  any  mist  should  go  before  the  first 
Angel,  who  is  of  those  of  Paradise. 
This  little  island,  round  about  its  base. 
Below  there,  yonder,  where  the  billow  beats  it, 
Doth  rushes  bear  upon  its  washy  ooze. 
No  other  plant  that  putteth  forth  the  leaf, 
Or  that  doth  indurate,  can  there  have  life, 
Because  it  yieldeth  not  unto  the  shocks. 


72  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ca  XO. 

There  he  hegirt  me  as  the  other  pleased  ; 
O  marvellous  1  for  even  as  he  culled 
The  humble  plant,  such  it  sprang  up  again 
Suddenly  there  where  he  uprooted  it." 

Purg.,  i.,  94-105,  133-137. 

26.  He  is  divided  {eiiepia^.  Lit.,  "he  was  divided."  If 
he  is  casting  himself  ont,  there  must  have  been  a  previous 
division. 

28.  Is  come  unto  you  (e^^ao-ev  e'^'  u/ta?).  The  verb  is 
used  in  the  simple  sense  to  a/rrvoe  at  (2  Cor.  x.  14  ;  Philip,  iii. 
16),  and  sometimes  to  anticipate  (1  Thess.  iv.  15).  Here  with 
a  suggestion  of  the  latter  sense,  which  is  also  conveyed  by  the 
Kev.,  "  come  upon.''''  It  has  come  upon  you  before  you  ex- 
pected it. 

29.  Of  a  strong  man  (toO  lo-xvpov).  Eev.  rightly  gives  the 
force  of  the  article,  the  strong  man.  Christ  is  not  citing  a  gen- 
eral illustration,  but  is  pointing  to  a  specific  enemy — Satan. 
How  can  I  despoil  Satan  without  first  having  conquered  him  ? 

Goods  {(j-Kevri).  The  word  originally  means  a  vessel,  and  so 
mostly  in  the  New  Testament.  See  Mark  xi.  16  ;  John  xix.  29. 
But  also  the  entire  equipment  of  a  house,  collectively :  chattels, 
house-gear.  Also  the  baggage  of  an  army.  Here  in  the  sense 
of  house-gear.  Compare  Luke  xvii.  31 ;  Acts  xxvii.  17,  of  the 
gear  or  tackling  of  the  ship.     Kev.,  lowered  the  gear. 

32.  The  Holy  Spirit  (toO  7rvevfiaTo<;  tov  ar/Cov).  The  Spirit 
— the  holy.  These  words  define  more  clearly  the  hlasphemy 
against  the  Spirit,  ver.  31. 

35.  Bringeth  forth  {iK^dWei).  But  the  translation  is  fee- 
ble. The  word  means  to  throw  or  fling  out.  The  good  or  evil 
things  come  forth  out  of  the  treasure  of  the  heart  (34).  "  Out 
of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  The  issues 
of  the  heart  are  thrown  out,  as  if  under  pressure  of  the  abun- 
dance within. 


Ch.  Xin.]  MATTHEW.  73 

36.  Idle  {apyov).  A  good  rendering.  The  word  is  com- 
pounded of  a,  not,  and  epyov,  work.  An  idle  word  is  a  non- 
working  word;  an  inoperative  word.  It  has  no  legitimate 
work,  no  office,  no  business,  but  is  morally  useless  and  unprofit- 
able. 

39.  Adulterous  (jioixaKh).  A  very  strong  and  graphic  ex- 
pression, founded  upon  the  familiar  Hebrew  representation  of 
the  relation  of  God's  people  to  him  under  the  figure  of  marriage. 
See  Ps.  Ixxiii.  2T ;  Isa.  Ivii.  3  sqq. ;  Ixii.  5 ;  Ezek.  xxiii.  27. 
Hence  idolatry  and  intercourse  with  Gentiles  were  described  as 
adultery  ;  and  so  here,  of  moral  unfaithfulness  to  God.  Com- 
pare James  iv.  4  ;  Apoc.  ii.  20  sqq.     Thus  Dante  : 

"Where  Michael  wrought 
Vengeance  upon  the  proud  adultery." 

Inf.,  vii.,13. 

40.  The  whale  {toO  k-^tov;).  A  general  term  for  a  sea-mon- 
ster. 

41.  Shall  rise  up  (avaa-rija-ovTai).  Rev.,  stand  up.  Come 
forward  as  witnesses.  Compare  Job  xvi.  9,  Sept. ;  Mark  xiv. 
57.  There  is  no  reference  to  rising  from  the  dead.  Similarly 
shall  rise  wp,  ver.  42.     Compare  Matthew  xi.  11 ;  xxiv.  11. 

A  greater  {jrXuov).     Lit.,  something  more.     See  on  ver.  6. 

49.  Disciples  {p.a^Ta<i).  Not  the  apostles  only,  but  all  who 
followed  him  in  the  character  of  learners.  The  Anglo-Saxon 
renders  lea/rnvng  knights. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

2.  Shore  (alyiahJbv).  Eev.,  heach,  that  over  which  the  sea 
(a\s)  rushes  [ah-aei).  The  word  for  shore,  dxri],  on  which  the 
sea  breaks  [dyvvfii),  is  never  used  in  the  New  Testament.  Wye, 
brink. 


74  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XHL 

3.  Parables  {irapa^o'kal'i).  From  irapa,  heside,  and  ^aXXco, 
to  throw.  A  parable  is  a  form  of  teaching  in  which  one  thing 
is  thrown  beside  another.  Hence  its  radical  idea  is  comparison. 
Sir  John  Cheke  renders  iiwo?-d,  and  the  same  idea  is  conveyed 
by  the  German  £eispiel,  a  pattern  or  eosample  ;  hei,  heside,  and 
the  old  high  German  spel,  discourse  or  narration. 

The  word  is  used  with  a  wide  range  in  scripture,  but  always 
involves  the  idea  of  comparison : 

1.  Of  Irief  sayings,  having  an  oracular  or  proverbial  char- 
acter. Thus  Peter  (Matt.  xv.  15),  referring  to  the  words  "  If 
the  blind  lead  the  blind,"  etc.,  says,  "  declare  unto  us  ihispar- 
abUr  Compare  Lake  vi.  39.  So  of  the  patched  garment 
(Luke  V.  36),  and  the  guest  who  assumes  the  highest  place  at 
the  feast  (Luke  xiv.  7,  11).  Compare,  also.  Matt.  xxiv.  32 ; 
Mark  xiii.  28. 

2.  Of  a  proverb.  The  word  for  ^TOwrS  {irapoiixla)  has  the 
same  idea  at  the  root  as, parable.  It  is  Trapd,  heside,  ol/j,o%  a  way 
or  road.  Either  a  trite,  wayside  saying  (Trench),  or  a  path  hy 
the  side  of  the  high  road  (Godet).  See  Luke  iv.  23  ;  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  13. 

3.  Of  a  song  or  poem,  in  which  an  example  is  set  up  by  way 
of  comparison.     See  Micah  ii.  4  ;  Hab.  ii.  6. 

4.  Of  a  word  or  discourse  which  is  enigm,atieal  or  obscure 
until  the  meaning  is  developed  by  application  or  comparison. 
It  occurs  along  with  the  words  aiviyfj^a,  enigma,  and  irpo^rj/jua, 
a  problem,,  something  put  forth  or  proposed  {irpo,  in  front, 
ySaXXo),  to  throw).  See  Ps.  xlix.  (Sept.  xlviii.)4;  Ixxviii.  (Sept. 
Ixxvii.)  2;  Prov.  i.  6,  where  we  have  7rapal3o\r)v,  parable/ 
(TKOTeivov  Xoyov,  dark  saying/  and  alvCyfiara,  enigmas.  Used 
also  of  the  saj-ings  of  Balaam  (Num.  xxiii.  7,  18  ;  xxiv.  3, 15). 

In  this  sense  Christ  uses  parables  symbolically  to  expound 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  as  utterances  which  con- 
ceal from  one  class  what  they  reveal  to  another  (Matt.  xiii. 
11-17),  and  in  which  familiar  facts  of  the  earthly  life  are  used 
figuratively  to  expound  truths  of  the  higher  life.  The  un- 
spiritual  do  not  link  these  facts  of  the  natural  life  with  those 
of  the  supernatural,  which  are  not  discerned  by  them  (1  Cor.  ii. 
14),  and  therefore  they  need  an  intei-preter  of  the  relation  be- 


Ch.  Xni.]  MATTHEW.  75 

tween  the  two.  Such  symbols  assume  the  existence  of  a  law 
common  to  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds  under  which  the 
symbol  and  the  thing  symbolized  alike  woi-k ;  so  that  the  one 
does  not  merely  resemble  the  other  superficially,  but  stands  in 
actual  coherence  and  hai-mony  with  it.  Christ  formulates  such 
a  law  in  connection  with  the  parables  of  the  Talents  and  the 
Sower.  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given.  From  him  that  hath 
not  shall  be  taken  away."  That  is  a  law  of  morals  and  religion, 
as  of  business  and  agriculture.  One  must  have  in  order  to 
make.  Interest  requires  capital.  Fruit  requires  not  only  seed 
but  soil.  Spiritual  fruitfulness  requires  an  honest  and  good 
heart.  Similarly,  the  law  of  growth  as  set  forth  in  the  parable 
of  the  Mustard  Seed,  is  a  law  common  to  nature  and  to  the 
kingdom  of  God.  The  great  forces  in  both  kingdoms  are  ger- 
minal, enwrapped  in  small  seeds  which  unfold  from  within  by 
an  inherent  power  of  growth. 

5.  A  parable  is  also  an  example  or  type  /  furnishing  a  model 
or  a  learning ;  as  the  Good  Samaritan,  the  Rich  Fool,  the 
Pharisee  and  the  Publican.  The  element  of  comparison  enters 
here  as  between  the  particular  incident  imagined  or  recounted, 
and  all  cases  of  a  similar  kind. 

The  term  parable,  however,  as  employed  in  ordinary  Chris- 
tian phraseology,  is  limited  to  those  utterances  of  Christ  which 
are  marked  by  a  complete  figurative  history  or  narrative.  It  is 
thus  defined  by  Goebel  ("  Parables  of  Jesus  ").  "  A  narrative 
moving  within  the  sphere  of  physical  or  human  life,  not  pro- 
fessing to  describe  an  event  which  actually  took  place,  but 
expressly  imagined  for  the  purpose  of  representing,  in  pictorial 
figure,  a  truth  belonging  to  the  sphere  of  religion,  and  therefore 
referring  to  the  relation  of  man  or  mankind  to  God." 

lafoT'm  the  JSTew  Testament  parables  I'esemble  \:he  fable.  The 
distinction  between  them  does  not  turn  on  the  respective  iise  of 
rational  and  irrational  beings  speaking  and  acting.  There  are 
fables  where  the  actors  are  human.  ISTor  does  the  fable  always 
deal  with  the  impossible,  since  there  are  fables  in  which  an 
animal,  for  instance,  does  nothing  contrary  to  its  nature.  The 
distinction  lies  in  the  religious  character  of  the  ISTew  Testament 
parable  as  contrasted  with  the  secular  character  of  the  fable. 


76  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XHI. 

While  the  parable  exhibits  the  relations  of  man  to  God,  the 
fable  teaches  lessons  of  worldly  policy  or  natural  morality  and 
utility.  "  The  parable  is  predominantly  symbolic ;  the  fable, 
for  the  most  part,  typical,  and  therefore  presents  its  teaching 
only  in  the  form  of  example,  for  which  reason  it  chooses  ani- 
mals by  preference,  not  as  symbolic,  but  as  typical  figures ; 
never  symbolic  in  the  sense  in  which  the  parable  mostly  is,  be- 
cause the  higher  invisible  world,  of  which  the  parable  sees  and 
exhibits  the  symbol  in  the  visible  world  of  nature  and  man,  lies 
far  from  it.  Hence  the  parable  can  never  work  with  fantastic 
figures  like  speaking  animals,  trees,"  etc.  (Goebel,  condensed). 

The  parable  differs  from  the  allegory  in  that  there  is  in  the 
latter  "an  interpenetration  of  the  thing  signified  and  the  thing 
signifying ;  the  qualities  and  properties  of  the  first  being  at- 
tributed to  the  last,"  and  the  two  being  thus  blended  instead  of 
being  kept  distinct  and  parallel.  See,  for  example,  the  allegory 
of  the  Vine  and  the  Branches  (John  xv.)  where  Christ  at  once 
identifies  himself  with  the  figure:  "I  am  the  true  vine."  Thus 
the  allegory,  unlike  the  parable,  carries  its  own  interpretation 
with  it. 

Parable  and  proverb  are  often  used  interchangeably  in  the 
New  Testament ;  the  fundamental  conception  being,  as  we 
have  seen,  the  same  in  both,  the  same  Hebrew  word  represent- 
ing both,  and  both  being  enigmatical.  They  differ  rather  in  ex- 
tent than  in  essence ;  the  parable  being  a  proverb  expanded  and 
carried  into  detail,  and  being  necessarily  figurative,  which  the 
proverb  is  not ;  though  the  range  of  the  proverb  is  wider,  since 
the  parable  expands  only  one  particular  case  of  a  proverb.  (See 
Trench,  "  Notes  on  the  Parables,"   Introd.) 

3.  A  sower  (6  aireiprnv).  KeV.,  the  sower.  Generic,  as  rep- 
resenting a  class. 

To  sow  {tov  aveipeiv).  "According  to  Jewish  authorities, 
there  was  twofold  sowing,  as  the  seed  was  either  cast  by  the 
hand  or  by  means  of  cattle.  In  the  latter  case,  a  sack  with  holes 
was  filled  with  corn  and  laid  on  the  back  of  the  animal,  so  that, 


Ch.  XIII.]  MATTHEW.  ^  77 

as  it  moved  onward,  the  seed  was  thickly  scattered "  (Eder- 
sheim,  "  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  "). 

4.  By  the  wayside.     Dean  Stanley,  approaching  the  plain 
'of  Gennesareth,  says:    "A  slight  recess  in  the  hillside,  close 

upon  the  plain,, disclosed  at  once,  in  detail  and  with  a  conjunc- 
tion which  I  remember  nowhere  else  iij  Palestine,  every  feature 
of  the  great  parable.  There  was  the  undulating  cornfield  de- 
scending to  the  water's  edge.  There  was  the  trodden  pathway 
running  through  the  midst  of  it,  with  no  fence  or  hedge  to  pre- 
vent the  seed  from  falling  here  and  there  on  either  side  of  it  or 
upon  it ;  itself  hard  with  the  constant  tramp  of  horse  and  mule 
and  human  feet.  There  was  the  '  good '  rich  soil  which  dis- 
tinguishes the  whole  of  that  plain  and  its  neighborhood  from 
the  bare  hills  elsewhere  descending  into  the  lake,  and  which, 
where  there  is  no  interruption,  produces  one  vast  mass  of  corn. 
There  was  the  rocky  ground  of  the  hillside  protruding  here  and 
there  through  the  cornfields,  as  elsewhere  through  the  grassy 
slopes.  There  were  the  large  bushes  of  thorn — the  nabTc,  that 
kind  of  which  tradition  says  that  the  crown  of  thorns  was  woven 
— springing  up,  like  the  fruit-trees  of  the  more  inland  parts,  in 
the  very  midst  of  the  waving  wheat "  ("  Sinai  and  Palestine  "). 

5.  Stony  places,  l^ot  ground  covered  with  loose  stones,  but 
a  hard,  rocky  surface,  covered  with  a  thin  layer  of  soil. 

7.  Sprang  up.  The  seed,  therefore,  fell,  not  among  stand- 
ing thorns,  but  among  those  beneath  the  surface,  ready  to  spring 
up. 

Trench  ("  Parables  ")  cites  a  striking  parallel  from  Ovid,  de- 
scribing the  obstacles  to  the  growth  of  the  grain  : 

"  Now  the  too  ardent  sun,  now  furious  showers. 
With  baleful  stars  and  bitter  winds  combine 
The  crop  to  ravage ;  while  the  greedy  fowl 
Snatch  the  strown  seeds  ;  and  grass  with  stubborn  roots, 
And  thorn  and  darnel  plague  the  ripening  grain." 

"       ,  v.,  486. 


78  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIU. 

8.  A  hundred-fold.  Mentioned  as  something  extraordinary. 
Compare  Gen.  xxvi.  12.  Herodotus  (i.,  93)  says  of  Babylonia, 
"  In  grain  it  is  so  fruitful  as  to  yield  commonly  two-hundred- 
fold ;  and  when  the  production  is  the  greatest,  even  three-hun- 
dred-fold." 

11.  Mysteries  (jivcrTripui).  From  fivco,  to  close  or  shut.  In 
classical  Greek,  applied  to  certain  religious  celebrations  to  which 
persons  were  admitted  by  formal  initiation,  and  the  precise 
character  of  which  is  unknown.  Some  suppose  them  to  have 
been  revelations  of  religious  secrets  ;  others  of  secret  politico- 
religious  doctrines ;  others,  again,  scenic  representations  of 
mythical  legends.  In  this  latter  sense  the  term  was  used  in  the 
Middle  Ages  of  miracle-plays — rude  dramas  representing  scenes 
from  scripture  and  from  the  apocryphal  gospels.  Such  plays 
are  still  enacted  among  the  Basque  mountaineers.  (See  Vincent, 
"  In  the  Shadow  of  the  Pyrenees.") 

A  mystery  does  not  denote  an  unknowable  thing,  but  one 
which  is  withdrawn  from  knowledge  or  manifestation,  and 
which  cannot  be  known  without  special  manifestation  of  it. 
Hence  appropriate  to  the  things  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
which  could  be  known  only  by  revelation.  Paul  (Philip,  iv.  12) 
says,  "  I  am  instructed  (fiefivrj/Mai)  both  to  be  full  and  to  be 
hungry,"  etc.  But  Eev.  gives  more  correctly  the  force  of  in- 
structed, by  rendering  I  have  learned  the  secret :  the  verb  being 
fjuveco  (from  the  same  root  as  fivartjpva)  to  initiate  into  the  mys- 
teries. 

14.  Is  fulfilled  (ava-TrXripovTai).  Rather  of  something  in 
progress  :  is  leing  fulfilled  or  in  process  of  fulfilment. 

15.  Is  waxed  gross  (e7ra;)^w^).  lAt.,  was  made  fat.  Wye, 
enfatted. 

Are  dull  of  hearing  {toI<;  mah  ffapeox}  IjKovaav).    Lit.,  They 

heard  heavily  with  their  ea/rs. 

They  have  closed  (iKa/iiMva-av),  KUTa,  down,  /Mva,  to  close, 
as  in  fj.va-T'^pia  above.      Our  idiom  shuts  up  the  eyes.     The 


Ch.  XIII.  J  MATTHEW.  79 

Greek  shuts  them  down.  The  Hebrew,  in  Isa.  vi.  10,  is  besmear. 
This  insensibility  is  described  as  a  punishment.  Compare  Isa. 
xxix.  10  ;  xliv.  18  ;  in  both  of  which  the  closing  of  the  eyes  is 
described  as  a  judgment  of  God.  Sealing  up  the  eyes  was  an 
oriental  punishment.  Cheyne  ("  Isaiah  ")  cites  the  case  of  a  son 
of  the  Great  Mogul,  who  had  his  eyes  sealed  up  three  years  by 
his  father  as  a  punishment.  Dante  pictures  the  envious,  on 
the  second  cornice  of  Purgatory,  with  their  eyes  sewed  up : 

"  For  all  their  lids  an  iron  wire  transpierces, 
And  sews  them  up,  as  to  a  sparhawk  wild 
Is  done,  because  it  will  not  quiet  stay." 

Purg.,  xiii.,  70-72. 

Be  converted  {iiriarpk^^cocnv).  Eev.,  turn  again;  eiri,  to  or 
towa/rd,  a-rpetfxo,  to  turn  /  with  the  idea  of  their  turning/rom 
their  evil  toward  God. 

19.  When  any  one  heareth.  The  rendering  would  be  made 
even  more  graphic  by  preserving  the  continuous  force  of  the 
present  tense,  as  exhibiting  action  in  progress,  and  the  simul- 
taneousness  of  Satan's  work  with  that  of  the  gospel  instructor. 
"  While  any  one  is  Tiea/riMg,  the  evil  one  is  coming  and  snatch- 
ing a/may,  just  as  the  birds  do  not  wait  for  the  sower  to  be  out 
of  the  way,  but  are  at  work  while  he  is  sowing. 

He  which  received  seed  (o  a-Trapek).  Lit.,  and  much  bet- 
ter, Rev.,  JETe  that  was  sown;  identifying  the  seed  of  the  figure 
with  the  man  signified. 

21.  Dureth  for  a  while  {Trp6(7Kaip6<s ia-nv ).  Rev.,  endwreth. 
Lit.,  is  temporary :  thus  bringing  out  the  quality  of  the  hearer. 
He  is  a  creature  of  circumstances,  changing  as  they  change. 
Wye,  is  ternporal,  with  explanation,  lasteth  but  a  little  t/ime. 

For  (Se).  Rev.  better,  a/nd,  for  the  following  clause  does  not 
give  a  reason  for  the  temporariness,  but  adds  something  to  the 
description  of  the  hearer. 


80  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Cn.  XHI 

Tribulation  (S^XiyJremi).  9\i/3co,  to  press  or  squeeze.  Tribu- 
lation is  perhaps  as  accurate  a  rendering  as  is  possible,  being  de- 
rived from  tribulum,  the  threshing-roller  of  the  Komans.  In 
both  the  idea  oi pressure  is  dominant,  though  3-\iyfrii  does  not 
convey  the  idea  of  separation  (as  of  corn  from  husk)  which  is 
implied  in  tribulatio.  Trench  cites,  in  illustration  of  '^Xi-\jn<;, 
pressure,  the  provision  of  the  old  English  law,  by  which  those 
who  wilfully  refused  to  plead  had  heavy  weights  placed  on 
their  breasts,  and  so  were  pressed  and  crushed  to  death  ("  Syn- 
onyms of  the  New  Testament "). 

23.  Understandetii  (o-wte??).  See  on  xi.  25,  prudent.  The 
three  evangelists  give  three  characteristics  of  the  good  hearer. 
Matthew,  ke  understandeth  the  word  ;  Mark,  he  receiveth  it  / 
Luke,  he  Jceepeth  it. 

24.  Put  he  forth  {irape^Kev).  But  this  would  be  rather 
the  translation  of  Trpo^aXKai,  from  which  'irp6jS\r)fjba,  a  problem, 
is  derived,  while  the  word  here  used  means  rather  to  set  hefore 
or  offer.  Often  used  of  meals,  to  serve  up.  Hence,  better, 
Kev.,  set  he  before  them.     See  on  Luke  ix.  16. 

25.  Sowed  {iTrecnreipev).  The  preposition  eTrt,  upon,  indi- 
cates sowing  over  what  was  previously  sown.  Eev.,  "  sowed 
also.^' 

33.  Leaven  {^6/j,r}).  Wye,  sour  dough,  a.B  German  Sauerteig. 
From  few,  to  boil  or  seethe,  as  in  fermentation.  The  English 
leaven  is  from  the  Latin  levare,  to  raise,  and  appears  in  the 
French  levain. 

35.  I  will  utter  {ipev^ofiai).  The  verb,  in  which  the  sound 
corresponds  to  the  sense  (ereuxomai),  means  originally  to  belch, 
to  disgorge.  Homer  uses  it  of  the  sea  surging  against  the  shore 
("  Iliad,"  xvii.,  265).  Pindar  of  the  eruption  of  Aetna  ("  Pyth.," 
i.,  40).  There  seems  to  lie  in  the  word  a  sense  oifull,  impas- 
sioned utterance,  as  of  a  prophet. 

From  the  foundation  {airo  Kara^oXfj-;).  « It  is  assumed  bv 
the  Psalmist  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  2)  that  there  was  a  hidden  meaning  in 


Ch.  Xin.]  MATTHEW. 


81 


God's  ancient  dealings  with  his  people.  A  typical,  archetypical, 
and  preflgnrative  element  ran  through  the  whole.  The  history 
of  the  dealings  is, one  long  Old  Testament  parable.  Things 
long  Tc&pt  secret,  and  that  were  hidden  indeed  in  the  depths  of 
the  divine  mind  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  were 
involved  in  these  dealings.  And  lience  the  evangelist  wisely 
sees,  in  the  parabolic  teaching  of  our  Lord,  a  real  culmination 
of  the  older  parabolic  teaching  of  the  Psalmist.  The  culmina- 
tion was  divinely  intended,  and  lience  the  expression  that  it 
might  he  fulfilled  "  (Morison  on  Matthew). 

43.  Shine  forth  {iKXdfj,-\lrov(Tiv).  The  compound  verb  with 
€«,  forth,  is  designedly  used  to  express  a  dissipating  of  dark- 
ness which  has  hidden  :  a  bursting  into  light.  The  righteous 
shall  shvne forth  as  the  sun  from  behind  a  cloud.  The  mixture 
of  evil  with  good  in  the  world  obscures  the  good,  and  veils  the 
true  glory  of  righteous  character.     Compare  Dan.  xii.  3. 

47.  Net  {acvyrjvr)).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  18.  The  only  occur- 
rence of  the  word  in  the  New  Testament.  A  long  dramj-net,  the 
ends  of  which  are  carried  out  and  drawn  together.  Through 
the  transcription  of  the  word  into  the  Latin  sagena  comes  seine. 
From  the  fact  of  its  making  a  great  sweep,  the  Greeks  formed 
a  verb  from  it,  awYrjvevai,  to  surround  and  take  with  a  drag-net. 
Thus  Herodotus  (iii.,  149)  says :  "  The  Persians  netted  Samos." 
And  again  (vi.,  31),  "  Whenever  they  became  masters  of  an 
island,  the  barbarians,  in  every  single  instance,  netted  the  in- 
habitants. IS'ow,  the  mode  in  which  they  practise  this  netting 
is  the  following :  Men  join  hands,  so  as  to  form  a  line  across 
from  the  north  coast  to  the  south,  and  then  march  through  the 
island  from  end  to  end,  and  hunt  out  the  inhabitants."  Compare 
Isa.  xix.  8  :  "  Those  who  spread  nets  on  the  face  of  the  waters 
shall  languish."  Also,  Hab.  i.  15-17,  where  the  Chaldaean  con- 
quests are  described  under  this  figure. 

Gathered  of  every  kind.  Compare  the  graphic  passage  in 
Homer  ("  Odyssey,"  xxii.,  384-389)  of  the  slain  suitors  in  the 
halls  of  Ulysses. 


83  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIV. 

"  He  saw  that  all  had  fallen  in  blood  and  dust, 
Many  as  fishes  on  the  shelving  beach, 
Drawn  from  the  hoary  deep  by  those  who  tend 
The  nets  with  myriad  meshes.     Poured  abroad 
Upon  the  sand,  while  panting  to  return 
To  the  salt  sea,  they  lie  till  the  hot  sun 
Takes  their  life  from  them. " 

48.  Sat  down.     Implying  deliberation  in  the  assortment. 

52.  Which  is  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Instructed  fiaBr/revS^el';.  Rev.,  wko  hath  been  made  a  discvple 
to  tlie  kingdofn,  etc.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  personified. 
The  disciples  of  Christ  are  disciples  of  that  kingdom  of  which 
he  is  the  representative. 

Which  {paTK).  The  pronoun  marks  the  householder  as  be- 
longing to  a  class  and  exhibiting  the  characteristic  of  the  class : 
a  householder — one  of  those  who  bring  forth,  etc. 

Bringeth  forth  (e'/c/SaXXet).     lAt.,  flingeth forth.     See  on  xii. 
35.     Indicating  his  zeal  in  communicating  instruction  and  the 
fulness  out  of  which  he  speaks. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  Tetrarch.  A  ruler  of  a  fourth  part.  Archelaus  had  ob- 
tained two-fourths  of  his  father's  dominions,  and  Antipas  (this 
Herod)  and  Philip  each  one-fourth. 

The  fame  (dKor/v).    Better  as  Eev.,  report.    Lit.,  hearing. 

3.  Put  him  in  prison  (eV  <f>vXaK^  aTreSero).  Lit.,  "put  him 
away  or  aside  "  (utto).  This  prison  was  the  fortress  of  Machae- 
rus  on  the  east  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  almost  on  a  line  with 
Bethlehem,  above  the  gorge  which  divided  the  Mountains  of 
Abarim  from  the  range  of  Pisgah.  Perched  on  ah  isolated 
cliff  at  the  end  of  a  narrow  ridge,  encompassed  with  deep  ra- 
vines, was  the  citadel.  At  the  other  end  of  this  ridge  Herod 
built  a  great  wall,  with  towers  two  hundred  feet  high  at  the 


Ch.  XIV.]  MATTHEW.  83 

corners ;  and  within  this  inclosure,  a  magnificent  palace,  with 
colonnades,  baths,  cisterns,  arsenals— every  provision,  in  short, 
for  luxury  and  for  defence  against  siege.  The  windows  com- 
manded a  wide  and  grand  prospect,  including  the  Dead  Sea,  the 
course  of  the  Jordan,  and  Jerusalem.  In  the  detached  citadel, 
probably  in  one  of  the  underground  dungeons,  remains  of  which 
may  still  be  seen,  was  the  prison  of  John.  "  We  return  through 
what  we  regard  as  the  ruins  of  the  magnijScent  castle-palace  of 
Herod,  to  the  highest  and  strongest  part  of  the  defences— the 
eastern  keep  or  the  citadel,  on  the  steep  slope,  one  hundred  and 
fifty  yards  up.  The  foundations  of  the  walls  all  around,  to  the 
height  of  a  yard  or  two  above  the  ground,  are  still  standing. 
As  we  clamber  over  them  to  examine  the  interior,  we  notice 
how  small  this  keep  is  :  exactly  one  hundred  yards  in  diameter. 
There  are  scarcely  any  remains  of  it  left.  A  well  of  great 
depth,  and  a  deep,  cemented  cistern,  with  the  vaulting  of  the 
roof  still  complete,  and — of  most  terrible  interest  to  us — two 
dungeons,  one  of  them  deep  down,  its  sides  scarcely  broken  in, 
'  with  small  holes  still  visible  in  the  masonry  where  staples  of 
wood  and  iron  had  once  been  fixed  ! '  As  we  look  down  into  its 
hot  darkness,  we  shudder  in  realizing  that  this  terrible  keep 
had,  for  nigh  ten  months,  been  the  prison  of  that  son  of  the 
free  wilderness,  the  bold  herald  of  the  coming  kingdom,  the 
humble,  earnest,  self-denying  John  the  Baptist "  (Edersheim, 
"  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  "). 

6.  Birthday  {^evealoK).  Though  some  explain  it  as  the 
anniversary  of  Herod's  accession.  The  custom  of  celebrating 
birthdays  by  festivities  was  not  approved  by  the  strict  Jews ; 
but  it  is  claimed  that  the  Herodian  princes  adopted  the  custom. 
The  Roman  satirist,  Persius,  alludes  to  a  festival  known  as 
"  Herod's  Day,"  and  pictures  a  banquet  on  that  occasion. 

"But  when 

Comes  Herod's  day,  and  on  the  steaming  panes 

The  ranged  lamps,  festooned  with  violets,  pour 

The  unctuous  cloud,  while  the  broad  tunny-tail 

Sprawled  o'er  the  red  dish  swims,  and  snowy  jars 

Swell  with  the  wine." 

Sat.  v.,  180-183. 


84  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIV. 

Before  {ev  rm  fieaip.)  Eev.,  in  the  midst.  Wye,  lewpedin 
the  middle. 

7.  He  promised  (miJ.oXo'yqaev.)  Lit.,  confessed,'  conveying 
the  idea  of  acknowledging  the  obligation  of  his  oath.  Salome 
had  degraded  herself  to  perform  the  part  of  an  almeh  or  com- 
mon dancer,  and  could  claim  her  reward. 

8.  Being  before  instructed  {irpo^i^aa^elaa).  Wye,  mo- 
nestid,  with  warned  in  explanation.  Both  wrong.  Kev.,  rightly, 
heing  put  forviard.  Compare  Acts  xix.  33,  where  the  right 
meaning  is,  they  pushed  Alexander  forward  ovX  of  the  crowd; 
and  not  as  A.  V.,  dreio  out.  The  correct  rendering  slightly 
relieves  Salome  of  the  charge  of  wanton  cruelty,  and  throws 
it  wholly  upon  Herodias. 

Here  (aiSe).  She  demanded  it  on  the  spot,  before  Herod 
should  have  had  time  to  reflect  and  relent ;  the  more  so,  as  she 
knew  his  respect  for  John  (compare  was  sorry,  ver.  9).  The 
circumstances  seem  to  point  to  Machaerus  itself  as  the  scene 
of  the  banquet ;  so  that  the  deed  could  be  quickly  done,  and 
the  head  of  the  Baptist  delivered  while  the  feast  was  still  in 
progress. 

in  a  charger  (eVt  nrlvaKi).  The  Revisers  cannot  be  defended 
in  their  retention  of  this  thoroughly  obsolete  word.  A  charge 
is  originally  a  5wrc?en/  and  a  cAar^er  something  Zoa^c?.  Hence, 
a  dish.     Wye,  dish.     Tynd. ,j)latter. 

9.  Tiie  oatli's  sal<e  (8ta  tov'?  opKov;).  But  the  A.  V.  puts 
the  apostrophe  in  the  wrong  place.  The  word  is  plural,  and 
the  Eev.  rightly  renders/or  the  sake  of  his  oaths.  It  is  implied 
that  Herod  in  his  mad  excitement  had  confirmed  his  promise 

with  repeated  oaths. 

11.  To  tiie  damsel  (toS  Kopacriai).  Diminutive,  the  little 
girl.     Luther  gives  mdgdlein,  little  maid. 


Ch.  XIV.]  MATTHEW.  85 

13.  On  foot  i'Tre^fj).  Eev.,  hy  land  in  margin,  which  is  bet- 
ter ;  for  the  contrast  is  between  Jesus'  journey  hy  skip  and 
that  of  the  multitude  by  land. 

15.  Desert  {eprjfio'i).  In  the  Greek  order  standing  first  as 
emphatic.  The  dominant  thought  of  the  disciples  is  remote- 
ness from  supplies  of  food.  The  first  meaning  of  the  word  is 
solitary  /  from  which  develops  the  idea  of  void,  hereft,  barren. 

Both  meanings  may  well  be  included  here.  Note  the  two 
points  of  emphasis.  The  disciples  say,  Ba/rren  is  the  place. 
Christ  answers,  No  need  home  they  to  go  away. 

Give  (Sore).  The  disciples  had  said,  "Send  them  away  to 
buy  for  themselves."     Christ  replies,  Oive  ye. 

19.  B  rake.  As  the  Jewish  loaves  were  thin  cakes,  a  thumb's 
breadth  in  thickness,  and  more  easily  broken  than  cut. 

20.  Were  filled  {ixopTda^Tja-av).     See  on  Matt.  v.  6. 

Baskets  {ko^Lvov;).  Wye,  coffins,  a  transcription  of  the 
Greek  word.  Juvenal,  the  Roman  satirist,  describes  the  grove 
of  Numa,  near  the  Capenian  gate  of  Rome,  as  being  "let  out  to 
the  Jews,  whose  furniture  is  a  basket  {cophinus)  and  some  hay  " 
{for  a  bed),  "Sat."  iii.,  14.  These  were  small  hand-baskets, 
specially  provided  for  the  Jews  to  carry  levitically  clean  food 
while  travelling  in  Samaria  or  other  heathen  districts.  The 
word  for  basTcet  used  in  relating  the  feeding  of  the  four  thou- 
sand (Matt.  XV.  37)  is  tnrvpk,  a  large  provision-basJcet  or  ham- 
per, of  the  kind  used  for  letting  Paul  down  over  the  wall  at 
Damascus  (Acts  ix.  25).  In  Matt.  xvi.  9, 10,  Christ,  in  alluding 
to  the  two  miracles,  observes  the  distinctive  term  in  each  narra- 
tive ;  using  ko^ivov:  in  the  case  of  the  five  thousand,  and 
a-irvp^ai  in  the  other.  Burgon  ("  Letters  from  Rome  ")  gives 
a  drawing  of  a  wicker  basket  used  by  the  masons  in  the  cathe- 
dral at  Sorrento,  and  called  coffano.  He  adds,  "  "Who  can 
doubt  that  the  basket  of  the  gospel  narrative  was  of  the  shape 
here  represented,  and  that  the  denomination  of  this  basket  ex- 


86  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

clusively  has  lingered  in  a  Greek  colony,  where  the  Jews  (who 
once  carried  the  ccyphinus  as  a  personal  equipment)  formerly 
lived  in  great  numbers  ?  " 

22.  Constrained.  Implying  the  disciples'  reluctance  to 
leave  him  behind. 

24.  Tossed  (^acravi^ofjLevov).  Rev.,  better,  distressed.  See 
on  Matt.  iv.  24. 

26.  A  spirit  ((^avTao-/ia).  Of  which  our  word  phcmtasm  is. 
a  transcription.  Rev.,  rather  stiffly,  o^or-^^ow.  Wjc,  phan- 
tom. 

29.  To  go  to  {e\3eiv  Trpos).  But  some  of  the  best  texts 
read  xal  ^'XSev  Tr/ao?,  and  went  toward. 

30.  He  was  afraid.  "Although,"  says  Bengel,  "a  fisher- 
man and  a  good  swimmer  "  (John  xxi.  7). 

32.  Ceased  {ixoTraaev).  A  beautiful  word.  JAi.,  grew  weary  ; 
sank  away  like  one  who  is  weary. 

36.  Were  made  perfectly  whole  {hieam^ffav).  The  prepo- 
sition hid,  through  or  thorough,  indicates  complete  restoration. 

The  Rev.  omits  perfectly,  because  whole,  in  itself,  imphes 
completeness. 


CHAPTER  XY. 

1.  Transgress  (^apa^aivovtriv).     Lit.,  to  step  on  one  side. 

2.  Wash  not  their  hands.  Washing  hefore  meals  wa& 
alone  regarded  as  a  commandment;  washing  after  meals  only 
as  a  duty.  By  and  by  the  more  rigorous  actually  washed 
between  the  courses,  although  this  was  declared  to  be  purely 
voluntary.     The  distinctive  designation  for  washing  after  meals- 


Ch.  XV.]  MATTHEW.  87 

was  the  lifting  of  the  hands ;  while  for  washing  before  meat  a 
term  was  used  which  meant,  literally,  to  rub.  If  "  holy,"  i.e., 
sacrificial  food  was  to  be  partaken  of,  a  complete  immersion  of 
the  hands,  and  not  a  mere  "uplifting"  was  prescribed.  As 
the  purifications  were  so  frequent,  and  care  had  to  be  taken 
that  the  water  had  not  been  used  for  other  purposes,  or  some- 
thing fallen  into  it  that  might  discolor  or  defile  it,  large  vessels 
or  jars  were  generally  kept  for  the  purpose  (see  John  ii.  6). 
It  was  the  practice  to  draw  water  out  of  these  with  a  kind  of 
ladle  or  bucket — very  often  of  glass — which  must  hold  at  least 
one  and  a  half  egg-shells  (compare  draw  out  now,  John  ii.  8). 
The  water  was  poured  on  both  hands,  which  must  be  free  of 
anything  covering  them,  such  as  gravel,  mortar,  etc.  The 
hands  were  lifted  up  so  as  to  make  the  water  run  to  the  wrist, 
in  order  to  insure  that  the  whole  hand  was  washed,  and  that 
the  water  polluted  by  the  hand  did  not  again  run  down  the 
fingers.  Similarly,  each  hand  was  rubbed  with  the  other  (the 
fist),  provided  the  hand  that  rubbed  had  been  affused;  other- 
wise, the  rubbing  might  be  done  against  the  head,  or  even 
against  a  wall.  But  there  was  one  point  on  which  special 
stress  was  laid.  In  the  "first  affusion,"  which  was  all  that 
originally  was  required  when  the  hands  were  not  levitically 
"  defiled,"  the  water  had  to  run  down  to  the  wrist.  If  the 
water  remained  short  of  the  wrist,  the  hands  were  not  clean . 
See  on  Mark  vii.  3  (Edersheim,  "  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus"). 

3.  Also  {icaX).  The  significance  of  this  little  word  must  not 
be  overlooked.  Christ  admits  that  the  disciples  had  trans- 
gressed a  human  injunction,  but  adds,  "  Ye  also  transgress,  and 
in  a  much  greater  way."  "  "Whether  the  disciples  transgress  or 
not,  you  are  the  greatest  transgressors "  (Bengel).  The  one 
question  is  met  with  the  other  in  the  same  style.  Luther  says, 
"  He  places  one  wedge  against  the  other,  and  therewith  drives 
the  first  back." 

4.  Die  the  death  {^avaTcp  TeXevrdra).  The  Hebrew  idiom 
is,  he  shall  certainly  he  executed.  The  Greek  is,  lit.,  let  him 
come  to  his  end  by  death. 


88  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

5.  It  is  a  gift  (Baipov).  Eev.,  gwen  to  God.  The  picture  is 
that  of  a  churlish  son  evading  tlie  duty  of  assisting  his  needy 
parents  by  uttering  the  formula,  Gorbcun,  it  is  a  gift  to  God. 
"  Whatever  that  may  be  by  which  you  might  be  helped  by  me, 
is  not  mine  to  give.  It  is  vowed  to  God."  The  man,  how- 
ever, was  not  bound  in  that  case  to  give  his  gift  to  the  temple- 
treasury,  while  he  was  bound  not  to  help  his  parent ;  because 
the  phrase  did  not  necessarily  dedicate  the  gift  to  the  temple. 
By  a  quibble  it  was  regarded  as  something  like  Corhan,  as  if  it 
were  laid  on  the  altar  and  put  entirely  out  of  reach.  It  was 
expressly  stated  that  such  a  vow  was  binding,  even  if  what  was 
vowed  involved  a  breach  of  the  law. 

6.  Have  made  of  none  effect  {rjKvpdaaaTe).  Eev.,  made 
void;  a,  not,  Kvpo<;,  authority.  Te  have  deprived  it  of  its 
authority. 

7.  Weil  {KokSn).     Admirably. 

8.  Is  far  (d7re%6t).     Lit.,  holds  off  from  me. 

19.  Out  of  til e  heart.  Compare  Plato.  "For  all  good 
and  evil,  whether  in  the  body  or  in  human  nature,  originates, 
as  he  declared,  in  the  soul,  and  overflows  from  thence,  as  from 
the  head  into  the  eyes ;  and  therefore,  if  the  head  and  body 
are  to  be  well,  you  must  begin  by  curing  the  soul.  That  is  the 
first  thing"  ("  Charmides,"  157). 

Thoughts  {BiaXoyoa-iMol).  Lit.,  reasonings  (compare  Mark 
ix.  33,  Kev.),  or  disputings  (Philip,  ii.  14),  like  the  captious 
questioning  of  the  Pharisees  about  washing  hands. 

21.  Coasts  (/iepi;).     Lit.,  and  better,  as  Eev.,  jjor-^s. 

22.  Out  of  the  same  coasts  (dTro  Twj/ dptWe/ceffi/wK).  Lit., 
as  Eev.,  from  those  borders;  i.e.,  she  crossed  from  Phcenicia 
into  Galilee. 


Ch.  XV.]  MATTHEW.  89 

Cried  {ixpavyaa-ev).  "With  a  loud,  importunate  cry  :  from 
behind.     Compare  afie?',  ver.  23. 

Me.     Making  her  daughter's  misery  her  own. 

Grievously  vexed  with  a  devil  (Ara/c&j?  Sat/xov/fferai).  Lit, 
is  hadly  demonised.     Sir  J.  Cheke,  very  evil  devilled. 

23.  Send  her  away.  With  her  request  granted;  for,  as 
Bengel  exquisitely  remarks,  "  Thus  Christ  was  accustomed  to 
send  away." 


26.  Children's  {t&v  reKvmv).  Bengel  observes  that  while 
Christ  spoke  severely  to  the  Jews,  he  spoke  honorably  of  them 
to  those  without.     Compare  John  iv.  22. 

Dogs  {Kwapioi<i).  Diminutive :  Utile  dogs.  In  ver.  27,  "Wye. 
renders  the  little  whelps,  and  Tynd.,  in  both  verses,  whelps. 
The  picture  is  of  a  family  meal,  with  the  pet  house-dogs  run- 
ning round  the  table. 

Their  masters.  The  children  are  the  masters  of  the  little 
dogs.     Compare  Mark  vii.  28,  "  the  children's  crumbs." 

30.  Cast  them  down  {eppf<^av).  Very  graphic.  Lit., 
flimg  them  down ;  not  carelessly,  but  in  haste,  because  so  many 
were  coming  on  the  same  errand. 

32.  I  will  not  (ou  ^eKm).  The  A.  V.  might  easily  be  mis- 
taken for  the  simple  future  of  the  verb  smd.  But  two  verbs 
are  used :  the  verb  I  will  expressing  Jesus'  feelmg  or  dis;posir 
tion.  The  Greek  order  is,  and  to  send  them  oAJoay  fasti/ng  lam 
not  willing.     Therefore  Bev.  is  better :  I  would  not. 

Faint  {kicKv^Sicrvv).    Lit.,  ieunslrung  or  relaxed. 


90  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XVI. 

34.  Little  fishes  (tx5-u8ta).  Diminutive.  The  disciples  make 
their  provision  seem  as  small  as  possible.  In  ver.  36  the 
diminutive  is  not  used. 

35.  On  the  ground  (eVl  rrjv  yTJv).  Compare  Mark  viii.  6. 
On  the  occasion  of  feeding  the  five  thousand,  the  multitude  sat 
down  on  the  grass  {iirl  tovi;  j(^6pTovi;),  Matt.  xiv.  19.  It  was 
then  the  month  of  flowers.  Compare  Mark  vi.  39,  the  green 
grass,  and  John  vi.  10,  much  grass.  On  the  present  occasion, 
several  weeks  later,  the  grass  would  be  burnt  up,  so  that  they 
would  sit  on  the  ground. 

Gave  thanks.  According  to  the  Jewish  ordinance,  the  head 
of  the  house  was  to  speak  the  blessing  only  if  he  himself  shared 
in  the  meal ;  yet  if  they  who  sat  down  to  it  were  not  merely 
guests,  but  his  children  or  his  household,  then  he  might  speak 
it,  even  if  he  himself  did  not  partake. 

3Y.  Baskets  (airvpiBaf).     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

2.  Fair  weather  (ev8ia).  Colloquial.  Looking  at  the  even- 
ing sky,  a  man  says  to  his  neighbor,  "  Fine  weather :  "  and  in 
the  morning  (ver.  3),  "  Storm  to-day  "  {arjiiepov  x^i-l^v). 

3.  Lowering  {(nv^vd\^(ov).  The  verb  means  to  home  a 
gloomy  hole.  Dr.  Morison  compares  the  Scotch  gloaming  or 
glooming.  Cranmer,  the  shy  is  glooming  red.  The  word  is 
used  only  here  and  at  Mark  x.  22,  of  the  young  ruler,  turning 
from  Christ  with  his  face  overshadowed  with  gloom.  A.  V., 
he  was  sad.     Rev.,  his  countenance  feU. 


Ch.  XVI.]  MATTHEW.  91 

9,  10.  Note  the  accurate  employment  of  the  two  words  for 
iaslcet.     See  on  xiv.  20. 


15.  Thou  art  the  Christ.  Compare  on  i.  1.  Note  the 
emphatic  and  definite  force  of  the  article  in  Peter's  confession, 
and  also  the  emphatic  position  of  the  pronoun  [av,  thou) :  "  Thou 
art  the  anointed,  the  Son  of  the  God,  the  living." 

17.  Blessed  (jjbaKapio'i).     See  on  ch.  v.  3. 

18.  Thou  art  Peter  (o-u  et  n.erpo'i).  Christ  responds  to 
Peter's  emphatic  thou  with  another,  equally  emphatic.  Peter 
says,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ."  Christ  replies,  "  Thou  art 
Peter."  IIeTpo<;  {Peter)  is  used  as  a  proper  name,  but  without 
losing  its  meaning  as  a  common  noun.  The  name  was  bestowed 
on  Simon  at  his  first  interview  with  Jesus  (John  i.  42)  under  the 
form  of  its  Aramaic  equivalent,  Cephas.  In  this  passage  atten- 
tion is  called,  not  to  the  giving  of  the  name,  but  to  its  meaning. 
In  classical  Greek  the  word  means  &  piece  of  rock,  as  in  Homer, 
of  A j ax  throwing  a  stone  at  Hector  ("Iliad,"  vii.,  270),  or  of 
Patroclus  grasping  and  hiding  in  his  hand  a  jagged  stone  ("  Il- 
iad," xvi.,  734). 

On  this  rock  (eVi  ravTy  Ty  ireTpa).  The  word  is  feminine, 
and  means  a  rock,  as  distinguished  from  a  stone  or  a,  fragment  of 
roch  {ireTpo'i,  above).  Used  of  a  ledge  of  rocks  or  a  rocky  peak. 
In  Homer  ("  Odyssey,"  ix. ,  243),  the  rock  {Trerprjv)  which  Poly- 
phemus places  at  the  door  of  his  cavern,  is  a  mass  which  two-and- 
twenty  wagons  could  not  remove  ;  and  the  rock  which  he  hurled 
at  the  retreating  ships  of  Ulysses,  created  by  its  fall  a  wave  in 
the  sea  which  drove  the  ships  back  toward  the  land  ("  Odyssey," 
ix.,  484).  The  word  refers  neither  to  Christ  as  a  rock,  distin- 
guished from  Simon,  a  stone,  nor  to  Peter'' s  confession,  but  to 
Peter  himself,  in  a  sense  defined  by  his  previous  confession, 
and  as  enlightened  by  the  "  Father  in  Heaven." 

The  reference  of  ireTpa  to  Christ  is  forced  and  unnatural. 
The  obvious  reference  of  the  word  is  to  Peter.     The  emphatic 


92  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Oh.  XVL 

this  naturally  refers  to  the  nearest  antecedent;  and  besides, 
the  metaphor  is  thus  weakened,  since  Christ  appears  here,  not 
as  i\ie  foundation,  but  as  the  architect :  "  On  this  rock  will  I 
iuild."  Again,  Christ  is  the  great  foundation,  the  "chief 
corner-stone,"  but  the  New  Testament  writers  recognize  no 
impropriety  in  applying  to  the  members  of  Christ's  church 
certain  terms  which  are  applied  to  him.  For  instance,  Peter 
himself  (1  Pet.  ii.  4),  calls  Christ  a  Iwingr  stone,  and,  in  ver.  5, 
addresses  the  church  as  living  stones.  In  Apoo.  xxi.  14,  the 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  appear  in  the  twelve  foundation- 
stones  of  the  heavenly  city  ;  and  in  Eph.  ii.  20,  it  is  said, 
"  Ye  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets 
{i.e.,  laid  by  the  apostles  and  prophets),  Jesus  Christ  himself 
being  the  chief  corner-stone." 

Equally  untenable  is  the  explanation  which  refers  nrerpa  to 
Simon's  confession.  Both  the  play  upon  the  words  and  the 
natural  reading  of  the  passage  are  against  it,  and  besides,  it 
does  not  conform  to  the  fact,  since  the  church  is  built,  not  on 
confessions,  but  on  confessors — living  men. 

"  The  word  Trirpa,"  says  Edersheim,  "  was  used  in  the  same 
sense  in  Eabbinic  language.  According  to  the  Kabbins,  when 
God  was  about  to  build  his  world,  he  could  not  rear  it  on  the 
generation  of  Enos,  nor  on  that  of  the  flood,  who  brought 
destruction  upon  the  world ;  but  when  he  beheld  that  Abraham 
would  arise  in  the  future,  he  said :  '  Behold,  I  have  found  a 
rocis  to  build  on  it,  and  to  found  the  world,'  whence,  also, 
Abraham  is  called  a  rock,  as  it  is  said:  'Look  unto  the  rock 
whence  ye  are  hewn.'  The  parallel  between  Abraham  and 
Peter  might  be  carried  even  further.  If,  from  a  misunder- 
standing of  the  Lord's  promise  to  Peter,  later  Christian  legend 
represented  the  apostle  as  sitting  at  the  gate  of  heaven,  Jewish 
legend  represents  Abraham  as  sitting  at  the  gate  of  Gehenna, 
so  as  to  prevent  all  who, had  the  seal  of  circumcision  from 
falling  into  its  abyss  "  ("Life  and  Times  of  Jesus  "). 

The  reference  to  Simon  himself  is  confirmed  by  the  actual 
relation  of  Peter  to  the  early  church,  to  the  Jewish  portion 
of  which  he  was  a  foundation-stone.  See  Acts,  i.  15 ;  ii.  14, 
37;  iii.  12;  iv.  8;  v.  15,  29;  ix.  34,  40;  x.  25,  26;  Gal.  i.  18, 


Ch.  XVI.]  MATTHEW.  93 

Church  {iKK\7]aiav),  ek,  out,  KoXea,  to  call  or  summon.  This 
is  the  first  occurrence  of  this  word  in  the  New  Testament. 
Originally  an  assembly  of  citizens,  regularly  summoned.  So  in 
New  Testament,  Acts  xix.  39.  The  Septuagint  uses  the  word 
for  the  congregation  of  Israel,  either  as  summoned  for  a  defi- 
nite purpose  (1  Kings  viii.  65),  or  for  tlie  community  of  Israel 
collectively,  regarded  as  a  congregation  (Gen.  xxviii.  3),  where 
assembly  is  given  for  multitude  in  margin.  In  New  Testament, 
of  the  congregation  of  Israel  (Acts  vii.  38) ;  but  for  this  there 
is  more  commonly  employed  crvvarfayyri,  of  which  synagogue  is  a 
transcription ;  a-vv,  together,  ivyo),  to  bring  (Acts  xiii.  43).  In 
Christ's  words  to  Peter  the  word  eKKXTjcria  acquires  special  em- 
phasis from  the  opposition  implied  in  it  to  the  synagogue. 
The  Christian  community  in  the  midst  of  Israel  would  be  desig- 
nated as  eKKK'qcria,  without  being  confounded  with  the  avva- 
^ayyrj,  the  Jewish  community.  See  Acts  v.  11 ;  viii.  1 ;  xii.  1 ; 
xiv.  23,  27,  etc.  Nevertheless  avva'^ai'^ri  is  applied  to  a  Chris- 
tian assembly  in  James  ii.  2,  while  i-mcrvva/yai'yrj  [gatliering  or 
assembling  together)  is  found  in  2  Thess.  ii.  1 ;  Heb.  x.  25. 
Eoth  in  Hebrew  and  in  New  Testament  usage  iKKK7]<j[a  im- 
plies more  than  a  collective  or  national  unity;  rather  a  com- 
munity based  on  a  special  religious  idea  and  established  in  a 
special  way.  In  the  New  Testament  the  term  is  used  also  in 
the  narrower  sense  of  a  single  church,  or  a  church  confined  to 
a  particular  place.  So  of  the  church  in  the  house  of  Aquila 
and  Priscilla  (Eom.  xvi.  5) ;  the  church  at  Corinth,  the  churches 
in  Judea,  the  church  at  Jerusalem,  etc. 

Gates  of  hell  {irvXai  aSov).  'Rqy.,  Sixdes.  Hades  was  orig- 
inally the  name  of  the  god  who  presided  over  the  realm  of 
the  dead — Pluto  or  Dis.  Hence  the  phrase,  house  of  Hades. 
It  is  derived  from  a,  not,  and  IBeiv,  to  see  ;  and  signifies,  there- 
fore, the  imvisible  land,  the  realm  of  shadow.  It  is  the  place 
to  which  all  who  depart  this  life  descend,  without  reference  to 
their  moral  character. 

By  this  word  the  Septuagint  translated  the  Hebrew  Sheol, 
which  has  a  similar  general  meaning.  The  classical  Hades  em- 
braced both  good  and  bad  men,  though  divided  into  Mysium, 


94  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVX 

the  abode  of  the  virtuous,  and  TaHarus,  the  abode  of  the  wicked. 
In  these  particulars  it  corresponds  substantially  with  Sheol  ; 
both  the  godly  and  the  wicked  being  represented  as  gathered 
into  the  latter.  See  Gen.  xlii.  38 ;  Ps.  ix.  17;  cxxxix.  8 ;  Isa. 
xiv.  9 ;  Ivii.  2  ;  Ezek.  xxxii.  27 ;  Hos.  xiii.  14.  Hades  and 
Sheol  were  alike  conceived  as  a  definite  place,  lower  than  the 
world.  The  passage  of  both  good  and  bad  into  it  was  regarded 
as  a  descent.  The  Hebrew  conception  is  that  of  a  place  of 
darkness ;  a  cheerless  home  of  a  dull,  joyless,  shadowy  life. 
See  Ps.  vi.  5  ;  xciv.  17 ;  cxv.  17 ;  Ixxxviii.  5,  6,  10  ;  Job  x.  21 ; 
iii.  17-19 ;  xiv.  10, 11 ;  Eecl.  ix.  5.  Vagueness  is  its  character- 
istic. In  this  the  Hebrew's  faith  appears  bare  in  contrast  with 
that  of  the  Greek  and  Roman.  The  pagan  poets  gave  the 
popular  mind  definite  pictures  of  Tartarus  and  Elysium  ;  of 
Styx  and  Acheron  ;  of  happy  plains  where  dead  heroes  held 
high  discourse,  and  of  black  abysses  where  offenders  under- 
went sti-ange  and  ingenious  tortures. 

There  was,  indeed,  this  difference  between  the  Hebrew  and 
the  Pagan  conceptions  ;  that  to  the  Pagan,  Hades  was  the  final 
home  of  its  tenants,  while  Sheol  was  a  temporary  condition. 
Hence  the  patriarchs  are  described  (Heb.  xi.  16)  as  looking  for 
a  better,  heavenly  country ;  and  the  martyrs  as  enduring  in 
hope  of  "  a  better  resurrection."  Prophecy  declared  that  the 
dead  should  arise  and  sing,  when  Sheol  itself  should  be  de- 
sti'oyed  and  its  inmates  brought  forth,  some  to  everlasting  life, 
and  others  to  shame  and  contempt  (Isa.  xxvi.  19  ;  Hos.  xiii.  14  ; 
Dan.  xii.  2).  Paul  represents  this  promise  as  made  to  the 
fathers  by  God,  and  as  the  hope  of  his  countrymen  (Acts  xxvi. 
7).  God  was  the  God  of  the  dead  as  well  as  of  the  living ; 
present  in  the  dark  chambers  of  Sheol  as  well  as  in  heaven  (Ps. 
cxxxix.  8  ;  xvi.  10).  This  is  the  underlying  thought  of  that 
most  touching  and  pathetic  utterance  of  Job  (xiv.  13-15),  in 
which  he  breathes  the  wish  that  God  would  hide  him  with 
loving  care  in  Hades,  as  a  place  of  temporary  concealment, 
where  he  will  wait  patiently,  standing  like  a  sentinel  at  his 
post,  awaiting  the  divine  voice  calling  him  to  a  new  and  hap- 
pier life.  This,  too,  is  the  thought  of  the  familiar  and  much-dis- 
puted passage,  Job  xix.  23-27.    His  Redeemer,  vindicator,  men- 


Ch.  XVI.]  MATTHEW.  95 

ger,  shall  arise  after  he  shall  have  passed  through  the  shadowy 
realm  of  Sheol.  "  A  judgment  in  Ilades,  in  which  the  judge 
will  show  himself  his  friend,  in  which  all  the  tangled  skein  of 
his  life  will  be  unravelled  by  wise  and  kindly  hands,  and  the 
insoluble  problem  of  his  strange  and  self-contradicting  ex- 
perience will  at  last  be  solved — this  is  what  Job  still  looks  for 
on  that  happy  day  when  he  shall  see  God  for  himself,  and  find 
his  Gael  (vindicator)  in  that  Almighty  Deliverer  "  (Cox,  "  Com- 
mentary on  the  Book  of  Job  "). 

In  the  ISTew  Testament,  Hades  is  the  realm  of  the  dead.  It 
cannot  be  successfully  maintained  that  it  is,  in  particular,  the 
place  for  sitmers  (so  Cremer,  "  Biblico-Theological  Lexicon  "). 
The  words  about  Capernaum  (Matt.  xi.  23),  which  it  is  surpris-  * 
ing  to  find  Cremer  citing  in  support  of  this  position,  are  merely 
a  rhetorical  expression  of  a  fall  from  the  height  of  earthly 
glory  to  the  deepest  degradation,  and  have  no  more  bearing 
iipon  the  moral  character  of  Ilades  than  the  words  of  Zophar 
(Job  xi.  7,  8)  about  the  perfection  of  the  Almighty.  "  It  is 
high  as  heaven — deeper  than  Sheol."  Ilades  is  indeed  coupled 
with  Death  (Apoc.  i.  18 ;  vi.  8  ;  xx.  13,  14),  but  the  association 
is  natural,  and  indeed  inevitable,  apart  from  all  moral  distinc- 
tions. Death  would  naturally  be  followed  by  Ilades  in  any 
case.  In  Apoc.  xx.  13,  14,  the  general  judgment  is  predicted, 
and  not  only  Death  and  Hades,  but  the  sea  give  up  their  dead, 
and  only  those  who  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  are  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire  (ver.  15).  The  rich  man  was  in  Hades 
(Luke  xvi.  23),  and  in  torments,  but  Lazarus  was  also  in  Hades, 
"in  Abraham's  bosom."  The  details  of  this  story  "evidently 
represent  the  views  current  at  the  time  among  the  Jews.  Ac- 
cording to  them,  the  Garden  of  Eden  and  the  Tree  of  Life  were 
the  abode  of  the  blessed.  .  .  .  We  read  that  the  righteous 
in  Eden  see  the  wicked  in  Gehenna  and  rejoice ;  and  similarly, 
that  the  wicked  in  Gehenna  see  the  righteous  sitting  beatified 
in  Eden,  and  their  souls  are  troubled  (Edersheim,  "  Life  and 
Times  of  Jesus  ").  Christ  also  was  in  Hades  (Acts  ii.  27,  31). 
Moreover,  the  word  yeevva,  hell  (see  on  Matt.  v.  22),  is  specially 
used  to  denote  the  place  of  future  punishment. 

Hades,  then,  in  the  ISTew  Testament,  is  a  broad  and  general 


96  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVI. 

conception,  with  an  idea  of  locality  bound  vip  with  it.  It  is  the 
condition  following  death,  which  is  blessed  or  the  contrary,  ac- 
cording to  the  moral  character  of  the  dead,  and  is  therefore 
divided  into  different  realms,  represented  by  Paradise  or 
Abraham^s  hosom,  and  Gehenna. 

The  expression  Gates  of  Hades  is  an  orientalism  for  the  court, 
throne,  power,  and  dignity  of  the  infernal  kingdom.  Hades  is 
contemplated  as  a  mighty  city,  with  formidable,  frowning  por- 
tals. Some  expositors  introduce  also  the  idea  of  the  councils  oi 
the  Satanic  powers,  with  reference  to  the  Eastern  custom  of 
holding  such  deliberations  in  the  gates  of  cities.  Compare  the 
expression  Sublime  Porte,  applied  to  the  Ottoman  court.  The 
idea  of  a  building  is  maintained  in  both  membei's  of  the  com- 
parison. The  kingdom  or  city  of  Hades  confronts  and  assaults 
the  church  which  Christ  Will  build  upon  the  rock.  See  Job 
xxxviii.  17;  Ps.  ix.  13;  cvii.  18;  Isa.  xxxviii.  10. 

19.  Keys  (/cXeiSa?).  The  similitude  corresponding  to  build. 
The  church  or  kingdom  is  conceived  as  a  house,  of  which  Peter 
is  to  be  the  steward,  bearing  the  keys.  "Even  as  he  had 
been  the  first  to  utter  the  confession  of  the  church,  so  was  he 
also  privileged  to  be  the  first  to  open  its  hitherto  closed  gates 
to  the  Gentiles,  when  God  made  choice  of  him,  that,  through 
his  mouth,  the  Gentiles  should  first  hear  the  words  of  the  Gos- 
pel, and  at  his  bidding  first  be  baptized  "  (Edersheim,  "  Life 
and  Times  of  Jesus  "). 

Bind — loose  (SjJo-j^? — Xuo-j;?).  In  a  sense  common  among  the 
Jews,  oi  forbidding  or  allowing.  No  other  terms  were  in  more 
constant  use  in  Pabbinic  canon-law  than  those  of  binding  and 
loosing.  They  represented  the  legislatiAie  and  judicial  powers 
of  the  Rabbinic  office.  These  powers  Christ  now  transferred, 
and  that  not  in  their  pretension,  but  in  their  reality,  to  his 
apostles ;  the  first,  here,  to  Peter,  as  their  representative,  the 
second,  after  his  resurrection,  to  the  church  (John  xx.  23,  Eder- 
sheim). "  This  legislative  authority  conferred  upon  Peter  can 
only  wear  an  offensive  aspect  when  it  is  conceived  of  as  possess- 
ing an  arbitrary  character,  and  as  being  in  no  way  determined 


Ch.  XVI.]  MATTHEW.  97 

by  the  ethical  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  when  it  is  re- 
garded as  being  of  an  absolute  nature,  as  independent  of  any 
connection  with  the  rest  of  the  apostles.  Since  the  power  of 
binding  and  loosing,  which  is  here  conferred  upon  Peter,  is 
ascribed  (Matt,  xviii.  18)  to  the  apostles  generally,  the  power  con- 
ferred upon  the  former  is  set  in  its  proper  light,  and  shown  to 
be  of  necessity  a  power  of  a  collegiate  nature,  so  that  Peter  is 
not  to  be  regarded  as  exclusively  endowed  with  it,  either  in  whole 
or  in  part,  but  is  simply  to  be  looked  upon  as  first  among  his 
equals  "  (Meyer  on  Matt.  xvi.  19  ;  xviii.  18). 

21.  From  that  time  began  {airo  t6t6  ijp^aTo).  He  had  not 
shown  it  to  them  before. 

Must  (Set).  It  was  necessary  in  fulfilment  of  the  divine  pur- 
pose.    See  Matt.  xxvi.  54: ;  Heb.  viii.  3 ;  Luke  xxiv.  26. 

Suffer.  This  first  announcement  mentions  his  passion  and 
death  generally;  the  second  (xvii.  22,  23),  adds  his  betrayal  into 
tlie  hands  of  sinners  ;  the  third  (xx.  17-19),  at  length  expresses 
his  stripes,  cross,  etc. 

Elders  and  chief  priests  and  scribes.  A  circumstantial 
way  of  designating  the  Sanhedrim,  or  supreme  coimcil  of  the 
Jewish  nation. 

22.  Took  (Trpoo-Xa/So'/iez/os).  Not,  took  Mm  by  the  hand,  but 
took  him  apart  to  speaTc  with  him  ^primately.  Meyer  renders, 
correctly,  after  he  had  taken  hvm  to  himself.  "  As  if,"  says 
Bengel,  "  by  a  right  of  his  own.  He  acted  with  greater  famil- 
iarity after  the  token  of  acknowledgment  had  been  given. 
Jesus,  however,  reduces  him  to  his  level." 

Began.     For  Jesus  did  not  suffer  him  to  continue. 

Be  it  far  from  thee  (iXew?  aoi,.)  Eev.,in  margin,  Ood  home 
mercy  on  thee.  In  classical  usage,  of  the  gods  as  propitious, 
gracious  toward  men,  in  consideration  of  their  prayers  and  sac- 
rifices. ^  Th&  meaning  here  is,  may  Ood  he  gracious  to  thee. 

11 


98  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVI. 

Shall  not  be  {ov  /j,^  ea-Tai).  The  double  negative  is  very 
forcible  :  "  Shall  in  no  case  be."     Rev.  renders  it  by  never. 

23.  Turned  (o-r/aa^ek).  Not  iSowart?  Peter,  but  away  from 
him. 

Get  thee  behind  me.     See  iv.  10. 

Offence  (cricdvBaXov).  'Rev.,  better,  stumMing-Mock.  See 
on  V.  29.  Not,  thou  art  offensive,  but  thou  art  in  my  way. 
Dr.  Morison,  "  Thou  art  not,  as  before,  a  noble  block,  lying  in 
its  right  position  as  a  massive  foundation-stone.  On  the  con- 
trary, thou  art  like  a  stone  quite  out  of  its  proper  place,  and 
lying  right  across  the  road  in  which  I  must  go — lying  as  a  stone 
of  stumbling." 

Savourest  not  {oix^poveh).  Rev.,  hetter,  mindest  not.  Thy 
thoughts  and  intents  are  not  of  G-od,  but  of  men.  Savourest 
follows  the  Vulgate  sapis,  from  sapere,  which  means  1st,  to  have 
a  taste  or  flavor  of:  2d,  to  have  sense  or  discernment.  Hence 
used  here  as  the  rendering  of  <f>poveiv,  to  he  minded.  Thus 
"Wye,  1  Cor.  xiii.,  11,  "When  I  was  a  child  I  savoured  (e^po- 
vovv)  as  a  child."  The  idea  is,  strictly,  to  partahe  of  the  quality 
or  nature  of. 

26.  Gain — lose  (/KepS^trj; — ^rjfico)^^).  Note  that  both  words 
are  in  the  past  (aorist)  tense :  "  if  he  may  have  gained  or  lost. 
The  Lord  looks  back  to  the  details  of  each  life  as  the  factors  of 
the  final  sum  of  gain  or  loss.  For  lose,  Rev.  gives,  forfeit.  The 
verb  in  the  active  voice  means  to  cause  loss  or  damage.  Often 
in  the  classics,  of  fining  or  mulcting  in  a  sum  of  money. 
Compare  2  Cor.  vii.  9. 

Soul  {"^vxvv)  Rev.,  life,  with  soul  in  margin.  This  will  be 
specially  considered  in  the  discussion  of  the  psychological 
terms  in  the  Epistles. 

In  exchange  {avrdXKar/^a).     Lit.,  as  an  exchange. 


Ch.  XVn.]  MATTHEW.  99 


CHAPTER  XYII. 

1.  Taketh  {frapakaij.^dvei).  Eev.  gives  the  force  of  the 
preposition  Trapd,  taketh  with  him. 

Apart  (kkt'  ihiav).  Not  said  of  the  mountain,  as  isolated,  but 
of  the  (UsGvples ;  so  that  they  might  be  alone  with  him.  Com- 
pare Mark  ix.  2,  apart  ly  tliemseVoes  {kut''  IBiav  fj,6vov<s :  lit., 
a^art  alone). 

2.  He  was  transfigured  (jieTefiop^xoSTj),  fierd,  denoting 
change  or  transfer,  and  fJLopt^rj,  form.  This  latter  word  denotes 
i\iQ  form  regarded  as  the  distinctive  nature  and  character  of 
the  object,  and  is  distinguished  from  ayfifjia,  the  changeable, 
outvfB.vA  fashion :  in  a  man,  for  instance,  his  gestures,  clothes, 
words,  acts.  The  i^-op^  partakes  of  the  essence  of  a  thing ; 
the  (Tyf)iia  is  an  accident  which  may  change,  leaving  the  form 
unaffected.  Compare  Mark  xvi.  12 ;  Christ  "  appeared  in  another 
form''''  (fiopcf)^),  and  1  Cor.  vii.  31:  "the  fashion  (o-^^/^a)  of 
the  world  passeth  away."  The  distinction  passes  into  the  verbs 
compounded  with  these  two  nouns.  Thus,  Rom.  xii.  2,  "  Be 
not  conformed  to  this  world,"  is  firj  crva-'X7]fiaTl^e<T^s ;  i.e.,  be 
not  fashioned  according  to  the  Meeting  fashion  of  this  world. 
So  'Rev.,  fashioned.  See,  also,  2  Cor.  xi.  13,  14,  15,  where  the 
changes  described  are  changes  in  outward  semblance.  False 
apostles  appeared  in  the  outward  fashion  of  apostles  of  Christ ; 
Satan  takes  on  the  outward  appearance  of  an  angel.  All  these 
changes  are  in  the  accidents  of  the  life,  and  do  not  touch  its 
inner,  essential  quality.  On  the  other  hand,  a  change  in  the 
inner  life  is  described  as  a  change  of  fj^op^rj,  never  of  (r^yfuia. 
Hence,  Rom.  xii.  2,  "  Be  ye  1/ransformed-{fieTa(iop<^ov(7Be) ;  the 
change  taking  place  by  the  renewing  of  the  mind.  Com- 
pare Rom.  viii.  29  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  Philip,  iii.  21 ;  and  see,  fur- 
ther, on  Philip,  ii.  6,  7. 

Why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  is  a  compound  of  /ji.op4>v  em- 
ployed in  this  description  of  the  transfigured  Saviour,  since  the 
change  described  is  a  change  in  his  outward  appearance  ?    It 


100  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XVII. 

may  be  answered,  because  a  compound  o£  vyrnia,  expressing 
merely  a  change  in  the  aspect  of  Christ's  person  and  garments, 
would  not  express  the  deeper  truth  of  the  case,  which  is,  that 
the  visible  change  gets  its  real  character  and  meaning  from  that 
which  is  essential  in  our  Lord — ^his  divine  nature.  A  fore- 
shadowing or  prophecy  of  his  true  form — his  distinctive  char- 
acter— comes  out  in  his  transfiguration.  He  passes  over  into  a 
form  identified,  so  far  as  revealed,  with  the  divine  quality  of 
his  being,  and  prophetic  of  his  revelation  "  as  he  is  "  (1  John 
iii.  2),  in  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was  (John  xvii.  5).  In  truth,  there  is  a  deep  and  preg- 
nant hint  in  the  use  of  this  word,  which  easily  escapes  ob- 
servation, and  which  defies  accurate  definition.  The  profound 
and  overwhelming  impression  upon  the  three  disciples  was  due 
to  something  besides  the  shining  of  Christ's  face  and  garments, 
and  the  presence  of  Moses  and  Elijah ;  and  was  deeper  and 
subtler  than  the  effect  of  all  these  combined.  There  was  a 
fact  and  a  power  in  that  vision  which  mere  radiance  and  the 
appearance  of  the  dead  patriarchs  could  not  wholly  convey : 
a  revelation  of  Deity  breaking  out  in  that  glorified  face  and 
form,  which  appealed  to  something  deeper  than  sense,  and 
confirmed  the  words  from  heaven :   This  is  iny  iehved  Son. 

The  same  truth  is  illustrated  in  the  use  of  fiopcfnj  in  Mark 
xvi.  12,  where  it  is  said  that  Jesus  appeared  in  a  different  form, 
(hi  k-rkpa  fMop<f)y)  after  his  resurrection.  The  accidents  of  figure, 
face,  pierced  hands  and  feet,  were  the  same ;  but  an  indefin- 
able change  had  passed  upon  him,  the  characteristic  of  which 
was  that  it  prefigured  his  passing  into  the  condition  peculiar 
and  appropriate  to  his  essential  spiritual  and  divine  being. 

4.  Let  us  make  (TroMja-tayaev).  But  the  best  texts  read, 
TTowjo-ft),  I  will  make,' which,  is  more  characteristic  of  Peter.  He 
would  erect  the  booths  himself. 

Three  tabernacles  (<7«7?vo?).  Tents  or  booths,  out  of  the 
brushwood  lying  near.  Peter  realized  that  it  was  night,  and 
was  for  preparing  shelters  into  which  the  heavenly  visitants 
might  retire  after  their  interview. 


Ch.  XVII.]  MATTHEW.  101 

9.  Vision  (opafio).     The  spectacle. 

11.  Cometh.  Elijah  cometh  first.  An  abstract  statement 
expressing  the  fact  that  Elijah's  corning  precedes  in  time  the  com- 
ing of  the  Messiah.  It  is  a  point  of  Jewish  chronology ;  just 
as  a  teacher  of  history  might  say  to  his  pupils,  "  The  Saxons 
and  Danes  precede  the  Normans  in  England."  Elijah  had  al- 
ready come  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist. 

15.  Is  lunatic  {aeki^vidi^eraC).  Eev.,  epU&ptic.  The  A.  V. 
preserves  the  etymology  of  the  word  {creXr]vr},  the  moon),  but 
hmaUo  conveys  to  us  the  idea  of  demented ;  while  the  Eev. 
epileptic  gives  the  true  character  of  the  disease,  yet  does  not 
tell  us  the  fact  contained  in.  the  Greek  word,  that  epilepsy  was 
supposed  to  be  affected  by  the  changes  of  the  moon.  See  on 
Matt.  iv.  24. 

17.  Perverse  {Bi,ea-Tpa/j,fievTj).  Wye,  waywa/rd.  Tynd., 
crooked /  Bid,  throughout/  a-rpe^a),  to  twist.      Warped. 

20.  Unbelief  (aTTto-Ttaz/).  But  the  better  reading  ia  oXiyo- 
iria-Tlav,  liMeness  of  faith.  Hence  Eev.,  Because  of  your  little 
faith. 

24.  They  that  received  tribute-money  (ot  ra  SiSpaxf-a 
XafjL^dvovTe's).  Eev.,  They  that  received  the  half-shekel.  Every 
male  Israelite  of  age,  including  proselytes  and  manumitted 
Jews,  was  expected  to  pay  annually  for  the  temple-service  a 
half-shekel  or  didrachm,  about  thirty-five  cents.  This  must  be 
paid  in  the  ancient  money  of  Israel,  the  regular  half-shekel  of 
the  treasury ;  and  the  money-changers,  therefore,  were  in  de- 
mand to  change  the  current  into  the  temple  coin,  which  they 
did  at  a  rate  of  discount  fixed  by  law,  between  four  and  five 
cents  on  every  half-shekel.  The  annual  revenue  to  the  money- 
changers from  this  source  has  been  estimated  at  nearly  forty- 
five  thousand  dollars  ;  a  very  large  sum  in  a  country  where  a 
laborer  received  less  than  twentv  cents  for  a  day's  work,  and 
where  the  good  Samaritan  left  about  thirty-three  cents  at  the 


102  WORD  STUDIES  IS    THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVH 

inn  for  the  keeping  of  the  wounded  man.  Jesus  attacked  a 
very  powerful  interest  when  he  overthrew  the  tables  of  the 
money-changers. 

25.  Yes  {val).  Indicating  that  Jesus  had  paid  the  tax  on 
former  occasions. 

Prevented  {-irpoet^^aaev).  Rev.,  rather  awkwardly,  but  fol- 
lowing Tynd.,  Spake  first  to  Mm.  Prevent,  in  its  older  sense, 
to  anticipate,  get  'before,  was  a  correct  translation.  Compare 
Shakspeare ; 

' '  So  shall  my  anticipation  prevent  your  discovery. " 

Hamlet,  ii.,  1. 

Out  of  this  grew  the  secondary  meaning,  to  hinder.  By  getting 
before  another,  one  hinders  him  from  accomplishing  his  pur- 
pose. This  meaning  has  supplanted  the  other.  Wye.  renders 
came  before  him.  The  meaning  is  that  Jesus  did  not  wait  for 
Peter  to  tell  him  of  the  demand  of  the  collectors.  He  antici- 
pated him  in  speaking  about  it. 

Custom  or  tribute  (tcXt;  t)  ktjvo-ov).  Kev.  gives  toll  for 
custom.  Toll  is  duty  upon  goods ;  tribxi,te,  tax  upon  individ- 
uals. Kr}vcro<;,  tribute,  is  mei'ely  a  transcription  of  the  Latin 
census,  wliich  means,  first,  a  registration  with  a  view  to  taxa- 
tion, and  then  the  tax  itself. 

Strangers  (aWoTpicov).  Not  foreigners,  but  others  than 
those  of  their  own  families ;  their  subjects.  In  other  words, 
Does  a  king  tax  his  own  children  or  his  subjects  ? 

27.  Hook  {dyKia-rpov).  The  only  mention  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment of  fishing  with  a  hook.     A  single  fish  is  wanted. 

A  piece  of  money  {aTarijpa).  The  A.  V.  is  very  inade- 
quate, because  Christ  names  a  definite  sum,  the  stater,  which  is 
a  literal  transcription  of  the  Greek  word,  and  represents  two 
didrachmas,  or  a  shekel.     Hence  Eev.,  a  shekel. 


Ch.  XVin.]  MATTHEW.  103 


CHAPTER  XYIII. 

1.  The  Rev.  inserts  then  after  who,  thus  restoring  the  Greek 
apa,  which  the  A.  V.  overlooks.  Who  then  ?  Who,  as  things 
stand.  Since  one  of  our  number  has  been  doubly  honored  in 
being  called  "  the  rock,"  and  in  being  appointed  to  take  part  in 
a  special  miracle,  who  then  is  greatest  ? 

3.  Be  converted  {<TTpa(l)fjTe).  The  word  converted  has  ac- 
quired a  conventional  religious  sense  which  is  fundamentally 
truthful,  but  the  essential  quality  of  which  will  be  more  appa- 
rent if  we  render  literally,  as  Rev.,  except  ye  turn.  The  pict- 
ure is  that  of  turning  round  in  a  road  and  facing  the  other 
way. 

Shall  not  enter  (pv  ^^  ela-ixSTjre).  But  the  double  nega- 
tive is  very  foi'cible,  and  is  given  in  Rev.  in  nowise.  So  far 
from  being  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  ye  shall  not  so 
much  as  enter. 

4.  As  this  little  child.  Not,  as  this  little  child  humbles 
himself,  but,  shall  make  himself  humble  as  this  little  child  is 
lowly ;  shall  willingly  become  by  spiritual  process  what  the 
child  is  by  nature. 

5.  In  my  name  (eVt  too  wo/iart/xoy).  Lit.,  i<po«- my  name ; 
on  the  ground  of,  or  on  account  of ;  for  m/y  sahe. 

6.  A  millstone  (nvKos  o'vuko's).  Two  kinds  of  millstones 
were  in  use ;  the  one  turned  by  hand,  the  other,  and  larger,  by 
an  ass  {ovo<;).  Here  Jesus  says  an  ass-millstone;  or,  as  Rev., 
a  great  millstone  ;  Wye,  millstone  of  asses. 


104  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ca  XVnX 

12.  Leave  upon  the  mountains.  The  text  here  is  dis- 
puted. Both  A.  V.  and  Eev.  follow  a  text  which  reads: 
"  Doth  he  not,  leaving  the  ninety  and  nine,  go  into  the  moun- 
tains?" Kather  join  leave  with,  on  the  mountains,  and  read, 
"  Will  he  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  upon  (eVl,  scattered 
over)  the  mountains,  and  go,"  etc.  This  also  corresponds  with 
aj)ri<76i,,  learning,  lettmg  out,  or  letting  loose. 

13.  lfsobe(eai/  yevTjTat).  If  it  should  so  come  to  pass. 
God's  grace  is  not  irresistible. 

14.  The  will  of  your  Father  (BeKrifia  efiirpov^ev  rovirarpb'} 
vfi&v).  Though  some  read  my  Father  (jiov).  Lit.,  There  is  not 
a  will  lefore  your  (my)  Father.  So  Wye,  It  is  not  will  before 
your  Father.  Meyer  paraphrases,  There  is  not  before  thefoKie 
of  God  any  determination  having  as  its  object  that  one  of  these, 
etc. 

15.  Go  {tnra'ye).     Do  not  wait  for  him  to  come  to  you. 

Tell  him  his  fault  (eXey^ov).  Rev.,  shew  him.  The  verb 
means,  first,  to  test,  try,  search  out  /  therefore,  to  cross-examine 
with  a  view  of  convincing  or  refuting;  thence  to  rebuke  or 
chide.  The  Rev.  shew  is  better  than  tell,  which  implies  merely 
naming  the  fault ;  whereas  the  injunction  is,  go  and  prove  to 
him  how  he  has  erred.   Wye,  reprove,  with  snub  as  explanation. 

16.  In  the  mouth  (eVt  a-rofjiaToi).     Better  Rev.,   "at  the 

mouth,"  or  on  the  testimony  of. 

19.  Shall  agree  {a-vfji,<f)a)v^(Tovcnv).  From  a-vv,  together,  and 
^toi'T?,  sound  or  voice.  Transcribed  in  our  word  symphony. 
It  has  so  far  lost  its  distinctive  character  as  a  concord  of  voices 
as  to  be  used  for  agreement  in  the  deeper  and  more  inward 

sense. 

Concerning  anything  that  they  shall  ask  {Trepl  Trarro? 
'n-pdyfiaTo<i  ov  iav  alTi]<;covTat).     The  literal  rendering  is,  if  any 


Ch.  XVIII.]  MATTHEW.  105 

thing,  stronger :  Everything,  wJiatemrit  he,  for  which  they  may 
have  asked.  Wye,  Shall  consent  of  everything  whatever  they 
shall  ash.  Tynd.,  8hall  agree  in  any  manner  thing  whatsoever 
they  shall  desire.  The  word  wpay/ui,  thing,  is  used  like  the 
Latin  res;  a  matter,  affair,  husiness,  with  the  meaning  at  bot- 
tom of  something  to  be  done,  since  it  is  cognate  to  the  verb  irpda- 
crtB,  to  do.  8haU  be  done,  however,  is  yevrjaeTai,  it  shall  come  to 
pass. 

20.  In  my  name  [ek  t6  i/xov  6vo/xa).  Lit.,  "into  my  name." 
"When  two  or  three  are  drawn  together  into  Christ  as  the  com- 
mon centre  of  their  desire  and  faith. 

22.  Seventy  times  seven  {e^SofiriKovTaKK  eTrra).*  It  was 
a  settled  rule  of  Kabbinism  that  forgiveness  should  not  be  ex- 
tended more  than  three  times.  Even  so,  the  practice  was  terri- 
bly different.  The  Talmud  relates,  without  blame,  the  conduct 
of  a  rabbi  )vho  would  not  forgive  a  very  small  slight  of  his  dig- 
nity, though  asked  by  the  offender  for  thirteen  successive  years, 
and  that  on  the  day  of  atonement ;  the  reason  being  that  the 
offended  rabbi  had  learned  by  a  dream  that  his  offending 
brother  would  attain  the  highest  dignity ;  whereupon  he  feigned 
himself  irreconcilable,  to  force  the  other  to  migrate  from  Pales- 
tine to  Babylon,  where,  unenvied  by  him,  he  might  occupy  the 
chief  place  (Edersheim).  It  must,  therefore,  have  seemed  to 
Peter  a  stretch  of  charity  to  extend  forgiveness  from  three  to 
seven  times.  Christ  is  not  specifying  a  number  of  times  greater 
than  the  limit  of  seven.  He  means  that  there  is  to  be  no  limit. 
"  Forgiveness  is  qualitative,  not  quantitative." 

*  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  means  four  hundred  and  ninety  times,  or 
seventy-seven  times.  Those  who  maintain  the  latter,  claim  that  the  expres- 
sion is  derived  from  the  Septuagint,  Gen.  iv.,  24.  Authorities,  however,  do 
not  agree  on  the  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  in  that  passage.  Meyer  says  it  can- 
not possibly  mean  anything  else  than  seventy-seven,  while  Bunsen  renders 
seven  times  seventy,  and  Giotiua  septuagies  et  id  ipsum  septies,  "  seventy  times 
and  that  seven  times  over."  The  point,  however,  is  unimportant,  for,  as  Dr. 
Morison  observes,  "So  far  as  the  spirit  of  our  Saviour's  answer  is  concerned, 
both  enumerations  are  right." 


106  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMJINT.     [Ca.  XVIH 

23.  A  certain  king  (Siv^pclyTrq, ^aaiXel).  Lit.,  a  man,  ^hmg. 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  humam.  king. 

Take  account  of  his  servants  {awapai  X6701;  /tera  t&v  hov- 
\a>v  airov).  The  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  is  loose  and  inadequate, 
and  might  be  taken  to  mean  to  reoTcon  the  number  of  hu  ser- 
vants. °Theverb  avvapaiis.  compounded  of  avv,  with,  and  aipo), 
to  tahe  wp,  and  means  literally  to  take  up  together,  i.e.,  cast  wp, 
as  an  aocount.  The  A.  V.  also  overlooks  the  force  oi  p^erk, 
with.  Therefore,  Kev.,  better,  make  a  reckoning  w%th  hu  ser- 
vants. 

24.  Wliich  owed  iiim  (o^etXeriy?).  Lit.,  a  debtor  of  ten 
thousand  talents. 

Ten  tfiousand  talents.  An  enormous  sum;  about  twelve 
millions  of  dollars. 

25.  To  be  sold.  According  to  the  law  of  Moses:  Ex.  xxii. 
3  ;  Lev.  xxv.  39,  47. 

28.  Found.  Either  went  in  search  of  him,  as  he  himself 
had  been  sought  out  by  his  lord,  or  came  upon  him  accidentally 
in  the  street. 

A  hundred  pence  [sKarov  Brjvdpia).  Less  than  a  millionth 
part  of  his  own  debt. 

Took  him  by  the  throat  {ai/rov  eTrvijev).  Lit.,  throttled. 
Wye,  strangled.  Compare  were  choked,  Mark  v.  13.  Credit- 
ors often  dragged  their  debtors  before  the  judge,  as  the  Roman 
law  allowed  them  to  do,  holding  them  by  the  throat.  Thus 
Livy  (iv.  63),  relates  how,  a  difficulty  having  arisen  between  the 
consul  Valerius  and  one  Menenius,  the  tribunes  put  an  end  to 
the  contest,  and  the  consul  ordered  into  prison  {coUum  torsisset, 
twisted  the  neck)  the  few  who  appealed.  And  Cicero  ("  Pro 
Cluentio,"  xxi.) :  "Lead  him  to  the  judgment-seat  with  twisted 
neck  {collo  obtorto)."     Compare  Cicero,  "  In  C.  Yerrem,"  iv.,  10. 


Ch.  XIX.]  MATTHEW.  107 

What  thou  owest  (et  n  o^etXet?).  Lit.,  ^  thou  owest  any- 
thing. Not  that  the  creditor  is  uncertain  about  the/aci!  of  the 
debt,  though  some  uncertainty  about  the  exact  amount  may  be 
implied.  This  would  agree  ^\\h  found,  in  the  sense  of  coming 
upon  accidentally.  Compare  Matt.  xiii.  44.  He  came  suddenly 
upon  him  and  recognized  him  as  a  debtor,  though  not  certain 
as  to  the  amount  of  his  debt.  Meyer  remarks,  "  The  if'\'&  sim- 
ply the  expression  of  a  pitiless  logic.  If  thou  owest  anything 
(as  thou  dost)  pay  !  "  The  word  pay  (d7r6So9)  is  emphatic  in 
position. 

29.  Besought  {TrapeKokei).  The  imperfect  has  the  force  of 
earnestly  besought. 

30.  Went  (aTreXSoiv).  Lit.  went  away  :  dragging  the  other 
with  him  to  judgment. 

31.  Told  (Biecrdffyria-av).  More  than  merely  narrated.  The 
verb  is  from  Sid,  throughout,  and  aajiico,  to  explavn.  They  ex- 
plained the  circumstances  throughout. 

Their  Lord  (to5  icvpUp  eavrcov).  Lit.,  "  their  own  Lord ;  "  as 
befitted  their  position,  and  as  a  mark  of  their  confidence  in 
him. 

34.  To  the  tormentors  (fiaa-avia-Tah).  Livy  pictures  an 
old  centurion  complaining  that  he  was  taken  by  his  creditor, 
not  into  servitude,  but  to  a  workhouse  and  torture,  and  show- 
ing his  back  scarred  with  fresh  wounds  (ii.,  23). 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  Coasts  (opia).  Better  Rev.,  borders  j  though  it  is  easy  to 
see  how  the  translation  coasts  arose,  coast  being  derived  from 
the  Latin  cosia,  a  side,  and  hence  a  border  generally,  though 
now  applied  to  the  sea-side  only. 

3.  Tempting.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  13. 


108  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIX 

For  every  cause.  The  temptaUon  turned  upon  the  dispute 
dividing  the  two  great  Rabbinical  schools,  the  one  of  which 
(that  of  Hillel)  held  that  a  man  might  divorce  his  wife  for  any 
reason  which  rendered  her  distasteful  to  him ;  and  the  other 
(that  of  Shammai)  that  divorce  was  allowable  only  in  case  of  un- 
chastity.  The  querists  would  be  anxious  to  know  which  side 
Jesus  espoused. 

5.  Shall  cleave  {KoXKij^aeraC).     Lit.,  shall  he  glued. 

Shall  be  one  flesh  {ea-ovrai  et?  crdpKa  /juiav).  Lit.,  "into 
one  flesh ; "  Wye,  two  in  one  flesh. 

6.  What  (o).  Not  those.  Christ  is  contemplating,  not  the 
individuals,  but  the  unity  which  God  cemented ;  and  so  Wye, 
that  thing  that  God  enjoined  /  i.e.,  knit  together.  The  aorist 
tense  (denoting  the  occurrence  of  an  event  at  some  past  time, 
considered  as  a  momentary  act)  seems  to  refer  to  the  original 
ordinance  of  Grod  at  the  creation  (ver.  4). 

7.  Writing  {^i^Xiov).  Eev.,  hill.  The  word  is  a  diminutive 
of  ^l^Xoif,  which  originally  means  the  inner  bark  of  the  papy- 
rus, used  for  writing,  then  a  book  or  roll  of  this  bark ;  hence 
z.  pamper,  hill. 

8.  Because  of  (tt/so?).    Eev.,ybr.'  having  regard  to. 

It  was  not  so  (ov  jiyovev  outws).  The  A.  Y.  is  commonly 
understood  to  mean,  it  was  not  so  in  t/i£  heginning.  But  that  is 
not  Christ's  meaning.  The  verb  is  in  the  perfect  tense  (denot- 
ing the  continuance  of  past  action  or  its  results  down  to  the 
present).  He  means :  Notwithstanding  Moses'  permission,  the 
case  has  not  heen  so  from  the  beginning  until  now.  The  origi- 
nal ordinance  has  never  been  abrogated  nor  superseded,  but  con- 
tinues in  force. 

9.  Except  for  fornication  (jir)  im  tropveia).  Lit,  not  on 
account  of  fornication. 


Ch.  XIX.]  MATTHEW.  109 

10.  The  case  {alrla).  Not  the  relation  of  the  man  to  his 
wife,  nor  the  circumstcmGes,  the  state  of  the  case.  Alria  refers  to 
cause  (ver.  3),  and  the  meaning  is,  if  the  matter  stands  thus 
with  reference  to  the  cause  which  the  man  must  have  for  put- 
ting away  his  wife. 

14.  Suffer  (at^exe).  Lit.,  lea/oe  alone.  Compare  Mark  xiv. 
6 ;  XV.  36 ;  Luke  xiii.  8.  Sir  J.  Cheke :  Let  these  children 
alone. 

17.  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?  (ti  /te  Xiyei<;  ayaSov). 
But  the  true  reading  is,  t/  fie  epa>T5,<i  irepl  tov  ayaSov ;  Why 
askest  thou  me  concerning  the  good? 

There  is  none  good  but  one,  that  is  God  (pvhii<i  aya^o'^  ei 
fir)  eh  0  0609).  But  the  reading  is,  eh  ia-rlv  6  aya&o'i,  One  there 
is  who  is  good.  The  saying  of  Christ  appears  especially  appro- 
priate in  the  light  of  the  Rabbinic  apothegm,  "  There  is  noth- 
ing else  that  is  good  but  the  law." 

24.  Camel — through  a  needle's  eye  {Kdfj,7]\ov  Sid 
TpvTr7jfiaro(;  pa^tSos).  See  on  Mark  x.  25  ;  Luke  xviii.  25. 
Compare  the  Jewish  proverb,  that  a  man  did  not  even  in  his 
dreams  see  an  elephant  pass  through  the  eye  of  a  needle. 
The  reason  why  the  camel  was  substituted  for  the  elephant 
was  because  the  proverb  was  from  the  Babylonian  Talmud, 
and  in  Babylon  the  elephant  was  common,  while  in  Palestine 
it  was  unknown.  The  Koran  has  the  same  figure:  "The  im- 
pious shall  find  the  gates  of  heaven  shut ;  nor  shall  he  enter 
there  till  a  camel  shall  pass  through  the  eye  of  a  needle."  Bo- 
chart,  in  his  history  of  the  animals  of  scripture,  cites  a  Talmu- 
dic  passage  :  "A  needle's  eye  is  not  too  narrow  for  two  friends, 
nor  is  the  world  wide  enough  for  two  enemies."  The  allusion 
is  not  to  be  explained  by  reference  to  a  narrow  gate  called  a 
needles  eye. 

26.  This  (toOto).  Not  the  salvation  of  rich  men,  but  salva- 
tion in  general.     It  is  in  answer  to  the  question,  wha  can  he 


110  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XX. 

smed?    Man  cannot  save  himself  nor  his  fellow.     God  only 
can  save  him. 

27.  We.     Emphatic,  in  contrast  with  the  young  ruler. 

28.  Have  followed.  "Peter  had  said  together  the  words 
ice  home  left,  we  have  followed.  Jesus  replies  to  them  sepa- 
rately ;  for  the  latter  was  peculiar  to  the  apostles,  the  former 
common  to  them  with  others"  (Bengel). 

In  the  regeneration.  The  final  restitution  of  all  things. 
To  be  construed  with  ye  shall  sit. 

Shall  sit  {Ka^Lo-Tj).  Or  shaU  have  taken  his  seat,  which 
brings  out  more  vividly  the  solemn  inauguration  of  Christ's 
judgment. 

29.  Every  one  (ttS?).  Compare  2  Tim.  iv.  8,  "to  all  them 
that  love  his  appearing."  "  Not  only  apostles,  nor  ought  Peter 
to  have  inquired  only  concerning  them  "  (Bengel).  The  promise 
hitherto  restricted  to  the  apostles  now  becomes  general. 

A  hundred-fold  {eKaTovraifKaalova).  But  many  very  high 
authorities  read  iroXKaifKacriova,  manifold.  So  Kev.  in  mar- 
gin. Compare  Mark  x.  30,  where  there  is  added  "  houses  and 
brethren,"  etc.  Also  the  Arabic  proverb :  "  Purchase  the  next 
world  with  this  ;  so  shalt  thou  win  both." 


CHAPTER  XX. 
1.  For  (7ap).     Explaining  and  confirming  xix.  30. 

Early  in  the  morning  (a/Aa  irpaX).  Along  with  the  dawn. 
"  Here  (at  Hamadan,  in  Persia),  we  observed  every  morning, 
before  the  sun  rose,  that  a  numerous  band  of  peasants  were 
collected,  with  spades  in  their  hands,  waiting  to  be  hired  for  the 
day  to  work  in  the  surrounding  fields.  This  custom  struck  me 
as  a  most  happy  illustration  of  our  Saviour's  parable,  particularly 


Ch.  XX.]  MATTHEW.  Ill 

when,  passing  by  the  same  place  late  in  the  day,  we  found 
others  standing  idle,  and  remembered  his  words,  '  Why  stand 
ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ? '  as  most  applicable  to  their  situation  ; 
for  on  putting  the  very  same  question  to  them,  they  answered 
us,  '  Because  no  man  hath  hired  us.'  "  (Morier,  "  Second  Jour- 
ney through  Persia,"  cited  by  Trench,  "  Parables.") 

2.  For  a  penny  (Sk  B^jvapiov).  A  denarius,  the  chiei  sil^ev 
coin  of  the  Romans  at  this  time,  and  of  the  value  of  about 
seventeen  cents.  We  must  remember  to  reckon  according  to 
the  rate  of  wages  in  that  day.  A  denarius  was  regarded  as 
good  pay  for  a  day's  work.  It  was  the  paj'  of  a  Roman  sol- 
dier in  Christ's  time.  In  almost  every  case  where  the  word 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  it  is  connected  with  the  idea  of  a 
liberal  or  large  amount.  Compare  Matt,  xviii.  28  ;  Mark  vi.  37; 
Luke  vii.  41 ;  John  xii.  5. 

For  a  penny  is,  literally,  out  of  or  on  the  strength  of  a  penny  ; 
the  payment  being  that  on  the  strength  of  which  the  agreement 
was  made.  The  agreement  arose  out  of  the  demand  on  the  one 
hand  and  the  promise  on  the  other. 

10.  Every  man  a  penny  {to  ava  Srivdpiov).  Lit.,  the  sum 
amounting  in  each  case  to  a  penny  ;  or  a  penny  apiece.  'Ava  is 
distributive.     Wye,  each  one  hy  himself  a  penny . 

12.  Heat  (/fauo-mva).  ^qy.,  the  scorching  heat:  The  word  is 
from  Kaito,  to  hum.  It  refers  to  the  dry,  scorching  heat  borne 
by  the  east  wind.  Compare  Job  xxvii.  21 ;  Hos.  xiii.  15.  The 
wind- blows  from  the  Arabian  desert,  parching,  dry,  exciting 
the  blood,  and  causing  restlessness  and  sleeplessness.  It  seldom 
brings  storms,, but  when  it  does,  they  are  doubly  destructive. 
During  harvest  the  corn  cannot  be  winnowed  if  the  east  wind 
blows,  for  it  would  carry  away  both  chaff  and  corn.  In 
Pharaoh's  dream  (Gen.  xli.  6)  the  ears  are  blasted  by  it: 
Jonah's  gourd  is  withered  by  it  (Jon.  iv.  8),  and  the  vine  in 
Ezekiel's  parable  of  the  Babylonian  captivity  is  blighted  by  it 
(Ezek.  xvii.  10). 

13.  One.    Representing  the  whole  body. 


112  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XX. 

Friend  {eratpe).    Lit.,  coimpanion,  corhrade. 

14.  Take  {apov).  Lit.,  as  Kev.,  take  ivp,  as  if  the  money  had 
been  laid  down  for  him  on  a  table  or  counter. 

I  will  give  peXft)  hovvai).  But,  as  in  other  cases  in  the  A. 
v.,  this  may  be  mistaken  for  the  simple  future  of  the  verb ; 
whereas  there  are  two  verbs.  Therefore,  Eev.,  rightly,  It  is 
my  will  to  giwe.     See  on  Matt.  xv.  32. 

21.  Grant  (etVe).  Lit.,  speah ;  *.e.,  with  authority.  Com- 
pare "  command  these  stones,"  Matt.  iv.  3  ;  "  lid  yoxx,"  Matt, 
xxiii.  3.     Eev.,  command, 

26.  Will  be  great  (^eXj;  dvaC).  See  on  ver.  14.  Eev.  would 
le. 

Minister  (Sta/coTO?).  Servant,  ver.  27 (SouXo?).  JoSXo?, per- 
haps from  hkos,  to  hind,  is  the  hondmom,  representing  the  per- 
manent 7'elation  of  servitude.  AiAkovo';,  probably  from  the 
same  root  as  Sicoko),  to  pursue,  represents  a  servant,  not  in  his 
relation,  but  in  his  activity.  The  term  covers  both  slaves  and 
hired  servants.  The  attendants  at  the  feast  at  Cana  (John  ii. 
5)  are  called  StaKovoc.  In  the  epistles  SidKovo<;  is  often  used 
specifically  for  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  (1  Cor.  iii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  iii. 
6  ;  Eph.  iii.  7).  The  word  deacon  is,  moreover,  almost  a  tran- 
scription of  it  (Philip,  i.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  8,  12).  It  is  applied  to 
Phoebe  (Eom.  xvi.  1). 


28.  A  ransom  for  many.   Compare  Sophocles,  "Oed.  Col.," 

488. 

•'  For  one  soul  working  in  the  strength,  of  love 
Is  mightier  than  ten  thousand  to  atone." 


30.  That  Jesus  passed  by  {oTi'Ir}a-ov<;  7rapdr/ei).  The  on  is 
equivalent  to  quotation  marks.  They  heard  the  crowd  cry 
Jesus  is  passing  ! 


Ch.  XXll  MATTHEW.  113 

CHAPTER  XXL 

1.  Bethphage.    House  of  figs. 

2.  A  colt  with  her.  The  Lord  does  not  separate  the  colt 
from  its  dam. 

3.  The  Lord  (o /evpto?).  From  Kvpo'^,  swpreme  power,  au- 
thority. Hence  Kvpi,o<;,  one  homing  OAithority,  lord,  owner,  ruler. 
In  classical  Greek,  used  of  the  gods,  and  in  inscriptions  applied 
to  different  gods,  as  Hermes,  Zeus,  etc. ;  also  of  the  head  of  the 
family,  who  is  lord  {icvpto^)  of  the  wife  and  children  (1  Sam.  i. 
8,  Sept.) ;  while  to  the  slaves  he  is  Seo-Trori??.  In  the  Pauline 
writings,  however,  the  master  of  slaves  is  called  both  Seo-Trori?? 
(1  Tim.  vi.  1,  2  ;  Tit.  ii.  9 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  18),  and  /evysw?  (Eph.  vi. 
9 ;  Col.  iv.  1). 

In  the  Septuagint  it  is  used  by  Sarah  of  her  husband  (Gen. 
xviii.  12  ;  compare  1  Pet.  iii.  6).  Joseph  is  called  lord  of  the 
country  (Gen.  xlii.  33),  and  is  addressed  by  his  brethren  as  my 
lord  (xlii.  10).  It  is  applied  to  God  (Gen.  xviii.  27 ;  Ex.  iv.  10). 
In  the  New  Testament  it  is  a  name  for  God  (Matt.  i.  20, 
22,  24  ;  ii.  16  ;  Acts  xi.  16 ;  xii.  11, 17 ;  Apoc.  i.  8).  As  applied 
to  Christ,  it  does  not  express  his  divine  nature  and  power. 
These  are  indicated  by  some  accompanying  word  or  phrase,  as 
my  God  (John  xx.  28) ;  of  all  (Acts  x.  36) ;  to  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father  (Philip,  ii.  11) ;  of  glory  (1  Cor.  ii.  8) ;  so  that,  as  a 
title  of  Christ,  Lord  is  used  in  the  sense  of  Master  or  Ruler, 
or  in  address.  Sir  (Matt.  xxii.  43,  45 ;  Luke  ii.  11 ;  vi.  46  ;  John 
xiii.  13,  14 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6).  'O  icvpio^,  the  Lord,  is  used  of 
Christ  by  Matthew  only  once  (xxi.  3)  until  after  the  resurrec- 
tion (xxviii.  6).  In  the  other  gospels  and  in  the  Acts  it  occurs 
far  of tener.  Nevertheless,  in  the  progress  of  Christian  thought 
in  the  New  Testament,  the  meaning  develops  toward  a  specific 
designation  of  the  divine  Saviour,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  phrases 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Our  Lord, 
Jesus  our  Lord. 
8 


n  4  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXL 

5.  Daughter  of  Sion.  Jerusalem.  Compare  dmighter  of 
Bahylon  for  the  city  of  Babylon  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  8  ;  Isa.  xlvii.  1) ; 
daughter  of  Tyre  for  the  city  or  people  of  Tyre  (Ps.  xlv.  12)  ; 
daughter  ofmypeojole  (Isa.  xxii.  4). 

Sitting  {i-Tn^e^Tji^ax;).  Lit.,  ha/ving  gone  upon,  or  mounted. 
Rev.,  riding. 

Foal  of  an  ass  {vlov  viro^vyiov).  Lit.,  son  ofaheast-ofburden. 
'T-TTo^vyiov,  from  vtto,  heneath,  ^V7o'?,  a  yoke.  "Wye,  son  of  a 
heast-under-yoke.  The  phrase  emphasizes  the  humble  state  of 
Jesus.  He  is  mounted,  not  on  a  stately  charger  with  embroid- 
ered and  jewelled  housings,  nor  even  on  an  ass  for  the  saddle, 
the  Eastern  ass  being  often  of  great  beauty  and  spirit,  and  in 
demand  for  this  purpose.  He  rides  on  a  common  beast-of-bur- 
den,  furnished  with  the  every-day  garments  of  his  disciples. 

Garments  {l/xdna).    Outer  garments.     See  on  Matt.  v.  40. 

7.  Set  him  thereon.  But  the  preferable  reading  is  eireKa- 
^Lcrev,  he  tooh  his  seat  upon. 

A  very  great  multitude  (o  TrXeto-ro?  o')(\o<i).  The  A.  V.  is 
wrong.  The  reference  is  not  to  the  size,  but  to  the  propor- 
tionate part  of  the  multitude  which  followed  him.  Hence  Rev., 
correctly.  The  most^'art  of  the  multitude. 

Their  garments  (eauTaJj/).  Lit.,  "  their  oww  garments."  The 
disciples  spread  their  garments  on  the  beasts ;  the  multitude 
strewed  their  own  garments  in  the  way.  Dr.  Edward  Robin- 
son, cited  by  Dr.  Morison,  speaking  of  the  inhabitants  of  Beth- 
lehem who  had  participated  in  the  rebellion  of  1834,  says:  "At 
that  time,  when  some  of  the  inhabitants  were  already  im- 
prisoned, and  all  were  in  deep  distress,  Mr.  Farrar,  then  Eng- 
lish consul  at  Damascus,  was  on  a  visit  to  Jerusalem,  and  had 
rode  out  with  Mr.  Nicolayson  to  Solomon's  Pools.  On  their 
return,  as  they  rose  the  ascent  to  enter  Bethlehem,  hundreds  of 
people,  male  and  female,  met  them,  imploring  the  consul  to  in- 


Ch.  XXL]  MATTHEW.  115 

terf ere  in  their  behalf,  and  afford  them  his  protection ;  and  all 
at  once,  by  a  sort  of  simultaneous  movement,  they  spread  their 
garments  in  the  way  before  the  horses." 

The  variation  of  tenses  is  not  preserved  in  the  English  ver- 
sions. Spread  their  garments,  aorist  tense,  denoting  one  defi- 
nite act.  Out  down^  spread  in  the  way,  imperfects,  denoting 
continued  action.  As  Jesus  advanced,  they  kept  cutting  branches 
and  spreading  them,  and  the  multitude  kept  crying. 

9.  Hosanna.     Osame! 

10.  Was  moved  (eo-eto-^T;).  J/(wec?  is  hardly  strong  enough. 
It  is  shaken  as  by  an  earthquake.  Rev.,  stirred.  As  Morison 
happily  observes,  "  a  profounder  ground-swell  of  feeling." 

12.  The  money-changers  {KoXKv^oaT&v).  From a:6\\u/3o?, 
the  rate  of  exchange.  These  changers  sat  in  the  temple,  in  the 
court  of  the  Gentiles,  to  change  the  foreign  coins  of  pilgrims 
into  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary  for  payment  of  the  annual 
tribute.     See  on  Matt.  xvii.  24. 

13.  Thieves  (Xj^o-T&ji').  Rev.,  correctly,  ro55era.  See  on  Matt, 
xxvi.  55 ;  Luke  x.  30. 

16.  Say  (Xe^ovo-fi').  The  Rev.  is  more  graphic,  are  saying. 
While  the  songs  and  shouts  are  rising,  the  priests  turn  angrily 
to  Christ  with  the  question,  "  Hearest  thou  what  these  are 
saying  ? " 

Thou  hast  perfected  {Karrjprla-ai).  The  same  word  as  at 
Matt.  iv.  21,  where  it  is  used  of  adjusting  or  mending  nets.  Its 
secondary  meaning  is  to  furnish  completely,  equip ;  hence  to 
perfect.  Thou  hast  provided  the  perfection  of  praise.  The  quo- 
tation from  Ps.  viii.  2,  follows  the  Septuagint,  and  not  the 
Hebrew,  which  is,  "  Thou  \i.2,%t  founded  strength." 

19.  A  fig-tree  {avnrfv  fiiav).  Lit.,  one  sim,gle  fig-tree.  Rev., 
in  margin. 


116  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXL 

Presently  {irapaxpnM)-  Presently,  in  popular  speech,  has 
acquired  something  of  a  future  force.  I  will  do  such  a  thing 
presently  means,  I  will  do  it,  not  immediately,  but  soon.  The 
rendering  here  was  correct  in  the  older  English  sense  of  m- 
stcmtly.     So  constantly  in  Shakspeare : 

",Pkospbbo.  Go,  bring  the  rabble, 

O'er  whom  I  gave  thee  pow'r,  here,  to  this  place. 
Akiel.  Presently  ? 
Pros.  Ay,  with  a  twink. 
As.  Before  you  can  say  'come,'  and  'go,' 

And  breathe  twice  ;  and  cry  '  so  so  ; ' 

Each  one  tripping  on  his  toe 

Will  be  here."  Tempest,  iv.,  1. 

Compare  ver.  20.    "  How  did  the  fig-tree  immediately  wither 
away  ? "  Eev. 

29.  Repented  (/tt6Ta/ie\77^ei?).  This  is  a  different  word  from 
that  in  Matt.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  17 ;  /MeTavoelre,  Rejpent  ye.  Though  it 
is  fairly  claimed  that  the  word  here  implies  all  that  is  implied 
in  the  other  word,  the  New  Testament  writers  evidently  recog- 
nize a  distinction,  since  the  noun  which  corresponds  to  the  verb 
in  this  passage  (^era/ieXeta)  is  not  used  at  all  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  the  verb  itself  only  five  times ;  and,  in  every  case  except 
the  two  in  this  passage  (see  ver.  32),  with  a  meaning  quite  foreign 
to  repentance  in  the  ordinary  gospel  sense.  Thus  it  is  used  of 
Judas,  when  he  brought  back  the  thirty  pieces  (Matt,  xxvii. 
3);  of  Paul's  not  regretting  his  letter  to  the  Corinthians  (2 
Cor.  vii.  8) ;  and  of  God  (Heb.  vii.  21).  On  the  other  hand, 
fieTavoem,  rejjent,  used  by  John  and  Jesus  in  their  sunnnons  to 
repentance  (Matt.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  17),  occurs  thirty-four  times,  and  the 
noun  /Merdvoia,  repentance  (Matt.  iii.  8,  11),  twenty-four  times, 
and  in  every  case  with  reference  to  that  change  of  heart  and  life 
wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  which  remission  of  sins  and 
salvation  are  promised.  It  is  not  impossible,  therefore,  that 
the  word  in  this  passage  may  have  been  intended  to  carry  a 
different  shade  of  meaning,  now  lost  to  us.  MerafiiXo/j^at,  as  its 
etymology  indicates  {/J-eTci,  after,  and  fji.i\Q),  to  he  an  object  of 
care),  implies  an  after-care,  as  contrasted  with  the  cTia/nge  of 


Ch.  XXI.]  MATTHEW.  117 

TTimd  denoted  by  fierdvoia.  Not  sorrow  for  moral  obliquity 
and  sin  against  God,  but  annoyance  at  the  consequences  of  an 
act  or  course  of  acts,  and  chagrin  at  not  having  known  better. 
"  It  may  be  simply  what  our  fathers  were  wont  to  call  hadivnst 
(had-I-wist,  or  known  better,  I  should  have  acted  otherwise) " 
(Trench).  MerafieXeia  refers  chiefly  to  single  acts ;  /ierdvoia  de- 
notes the  repentance  which  affects  the  whole  life.  Hence  the 
latter  is  often  found  in  the  imperative :  Repent  ye  (Matt.  iii.  2 ; 
iv.  17;  Acts  ii.  38;  iii.  19);  the  former  never.  Paul's  recog- 
nition of  the  distinction  (2  Cor.  vii.  10)  is  noteworthy.  "  Godly 
sorrow  worketli  repentcmce  (fieTcivoiav)  unto  salvation,"  a  salva- 
tion or  repentance  "which  bringeth  no  regret  on  thinking  of 
it  afterwards  "  (a/ierafieXriTov).  There  is  no  occasion  for  one  ever 
to  thmh  better  of  either  his  repentance  or  the  salvation  in  which 
it  issued. 

33.  Hedged  it  round  about  (<j)pajfiov  airw  irepiiBTjKev). 
Rev.,  more  literally,  set  a  hedge  about  it  /  possibly  of  the  thorny 
wild  aloe,  common  in  the  East. 

Digged  a  wine-press  {a>pv^ev  Xr/vov).  In  Isa.  v.  1,  2,  which 
this  parable  at  once  recalls,  the  Hebrew  word  rendered  by  the 
Septuagint  and  here  digged,  is  hewed  out,  i.e.,  from  the  solid 
rock.  "  Above  the  road  on  our  left  are  the  outlines  of  a  wine- 
fat,  one  of  the  most  complete  and  best  preserved  in  the  coun- 
try. Here  is  the  upper  basin  where  the  grapes  were  trodden 
and  pressed.  A  narrow  channel  cut  in  the  rock  conveyed  the 
juice  into  the  lower  basin,  where  it  was  allowed  to  settle ;  from 
there  it  was  drawn  off  into  a  third  and  smaller  basin.  There 
is  no  mistaking  the  purpose  for  which  those  basins  were  ex- 
cavated in  the  solid  rock "  (Thomson,  "Land  and  Book"). 

A  tower  {vvpyov).  For  watchmen.  Stanley  ("  Sinai  and 
Palestine")  describes  the  ruins  of  vineyards  in  Judea  as  en- 
closures of  loose  stones,  with  the  square  gray  tower  at  the 
corner  of  each.  Allusions  to  these  watching-places,  temporary 
and  permanent,  are  frequent  in  Scripture.  Thus,  "  a  booth  in 
a  vineyard"  (Isa.  i.  8).     "The  earth  moveth  to  and  fro  like  a 


118  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XXI. 

hammock  "  (so  Cheyne  on  Isa. ;  A.  Y.,  cottage  ;  Eev.,  huf),  a 
vineyard-watchman's  deserted  hammock  tossed  to  and  fro  by 
the  storm  (Isa.  xxiv.  20).  So  Job  speaks  of  a  hooth  which  the 
keeper  of  a  vineyard  runneth  np  (xxvii.  18),  a  hut  made  of 
sticks  and  hung  with  mats,  erected  only  for  the  liarvest  season 
on  the  field  or  vineyard,  for  the  watchman  who  spreads  hia 
rude  bed  upon  its  high  platform,  and  mounts  guard  against  the 
robber  and  the  beast.  In  Spain,  where,  especially  in  the  South, 
the  Orient  has  left  its  mark,  not  only  upon  architecture  but 
also  upon  agricultural  implements  and  methods,  Archbishop 
Trench  says  that  he  has  observed  similar  temporary  structures 
erected  for  watchmen  in  the  vineyards.  The  tower  alluded  to 
in  this  passage  would  seem  to  have  been  of  a  more  permanent 
character  (see  Stanley  above),  and  some  have  thought  that  it 
was  intended  not  only  for  watching,  but  as  a  storehouse  for  the 
wine  and  a  lodging  for  the  workmen. 

Let  it  out  (efeSero).  "  There  were  three  modes  of  dealing 
with  land.  According  to  one  of  these,  the  laborers  employed 
received  a  certain  portion  of  the  fruits,  say  a  third  or  a  fourth 
of  the  produce.  The  other  two  modes  were,  either  that  the 
tenant  paid  a  money-rent  to  the  proprietor,  or  else  that  he 
agreed  to  give  the  owner  a  definite  amount  of  the  produce, 
whether  the  harvest  had  been  good  or  bad.  Such  leases  were 
given  by  the  year  or  for  life ;  sometimes  the  lease  was  even 
hereditary,  passing  from  father  to  son.  There  can  scarcely  be 
a  doubt  that  it  is  the  latter  kind  of  lease  which  is  referred  to  in 
the  parable  :  the  lessees  being  bound  to  give  the  owner  a  certain 
amount  of  fruits  in  their  season "  (Edersheim,  "  Life  and 
Times  of  Jesus").  Compare  ver.  34,  and  Mark  xii.  2,  "  that  he 
might  receive  of  the  fruits  "  {airo  t&v  KapirSyv). 

37.  They  will  reverence  (ivrpa-Trrja-ovTai).  The  verb  liter- 
ally means  to  turn  toward;  hence  to  give  heed  to,  pay  respect  to. 

41.  He  will  miserably  destroy  those  wicked  men  («a«;oLi? 

/ca/cftj?  airoXea-ei  avroix;).  There  is  a  play  upon  the  words  which 
the  A.  V.  misses  an-d  the  Kev.  preserves  by  rendering  "  miser- 


Ch.  XXII.]  MATTHEW.  11& 

ahly  destroy  those  miserahle  men."  So  the  Kheiins  version  : 
"  The  naughty  men  will  he  bring  to  naught."  Tynd.,  "  He 
will  evil  destroy  those  evil  persons."  The  order  of  the  Greek 
words  is  also  striking  :  Miserable  men,  miserably  he  will  destroy 
them. 

Which  (oiTtj'6?).  The  compound  Greek  pronoim  marks  the 
character  of  the  new  husbandmen  more  distinctly  than  the 
simple  which  ;  husbandmen  of  such  a  character  that,  or  belong- 
ing to  that  class  of  honest  men  who  will  give  him  his  due. 

M.  Shall  be  broken  {a-vvS\,a(T^aeTai).  The  verb  is 
stronger:  broTcen  to  pieces  ;  so  Rev. 

Grind  him  to  powder  (^iKfjLrjcrec  avrov).  But  the  A.  Y. 
misses  the  picture  in  the  word,  which  is  that  of  the  winnowing- 
fan  that  separates  the  grain  from  the  chaff.  Literally  it  is, 
will  wvnnow  him.     Kev.,  scatter  him  as  daist. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

2.  Made  a  marriage  (iTrolrjaev  yd/jt^ovsi).  But  the  phrase 
refers  to  the  marriage-feast,  rather  than  to  the  marriage-cere- 
mony. In  Esther  ix.  22,  the  word  is  used  of  feasting  without 
any  reference  to  a  marriage.     Kev.,  a  marriagefeast. 

3.  To  call  them  that  were  bidden  {KuXia-ai  tov';  KeKkrj- 
(ievov<;).  Perhaps  an  unconscious  play  on  the  words,  lost  in  both 
A.  V.  and  Eev.,  to  call  the  called.  This  was  according  to  the 
Oriental  custom  of  sending  a  messenger,  after  the  invitations 
have  been  issued,  to  notify  the  invited  guests  that  the  enter- 
tainment is  prepared.  Thus  Esther  invites  Haman  to  a  ban- 
quet on  the  morrow,  and,  at  the  actual  time,  the  chamberlain 
comes  to  bring  him  to  the-feast  (Esth.  v.  8  ;  vi.  14). 

4.  Dinner  (apia-Tov).  Not  the  principal  meal  of  the  day, 
but  a  noon-breakfast ;  hincheon. 


120  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXn. 

Failings  {cnTia-To).  From  crtro?,  corn,  grain,  or  food  gener- 
rally.     Properly  animals  esTpeciaMj  fed  up  ox  fatted  for  a  feast. 

5.  IVJade  light  of  it  {dfieXTjcravTe<;).  Not  in  the  sense  of 
jeering.     They  simply  gave  it  no  heed. 

His  farm  (Ihcov  dr/pSv).  Kev.,  his  own  farm;  bringing  out 
the  contrast  between  his  selfish  interest  and  the  respect  due  to 
his  king.     Compare  2  Chron.  xxx.  10. 

7.  Armies  {aTpaTevfiara).  Not  in  our  grand  sense  of  ar- 
mies, but  troops,  soldiers.  Compare  Luke  xxiii.  11,  where  the 
word  is  rendered  men  of  war  ;  Eev.,  soldiers. 

9.  Highways  (Ste^oSou?).  Literally,  the  word  means  a  way 
out  through  ;  passage,  outlet,  thoroughfare.  The  idea  of  cross- 
ings grows  out  of  the  junction  of  the  smaller  cross- ways  with 
the  trunk  roads. 

10.  Was  furnished  (i-jfK-r^u'htf).  The  Greek  is  stronger; 
was  filled:  so  Kev. 

11.  To  see  {S^edaaa^at).  Eev.,  somewhat  stiffly,  iehold; 
but  the  idea  is  correct,  as  the  verb  denotes  careful  seeing,  look- 
ing intently,  inspection.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  7. 

12.  Not  having  {jxr)  e-)(a>v).  It  is  hardly  possible  to  convey 
the  subtle  sense  of  the  negative  particle  {firj)  to  the  English 
reader.  A  different  word  for  not  (ovk)  is  used  in  the  preceding 
verse,  expressing  an  outward,  ohjectvve  fact  which  attracted  the 
king's  notice.  The  man  had  not  (ovk)  a  wedding  garment. 
When  the  king  addresses  the  guest,  he  is  thinking  not  so  much 
of  the  outward  token  of  disrespect,  as  of  the  guest's  mental 
attitude  toward  the  proprieties  of  the  occasion.  It  is  as  if  he 
had  said,  "  What  were  you  thinking 'of,  where  was  your  respect 
for  me  and  for  my  guests,  when  you  allowed  yourself  to  come 
hither  not  (/^r;)  having  the  proper  garment,  as  you  knew  you 
ought  to  have? "     It  implies,  as  Dr.  Morison  observes,  that  the 


Ch.  XXIt.]  MATTHEW.  121 

man  was  conscious  of  the  omission  when  he  entered,  and  was 
intentionally  guilty  of  the  neglect.  This  distinction  between 
the  two  negative  particles  rests  on  the  law  of  the  Greek  lan- 
guage, according  to  which  ov  and  its  compounds  stand,  where 
something  is  to  be  denied  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  iir\  and  its 
compounds  when  something  is  to  be  denied  as  a  matter  of 
thought. 

He  was  speechless  {i^ifim^).  Lit.,  Ae  was  muzzled  or 
gagged.  It  is  used  of  muzzling  the  ox  (1  Tim.  v.  18),  and  is  ad- 
dressed by  Christ  to  the  demon  (Mark  i.  25),  and  to  the  raging 
sea  (Mark  iv.  39).  Peter  uses  it  of  putting  the  ignorant  and 
foolish  to  silence  (1  Pet.  ii.  15). 

The  outer  darkness.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  12. 

16.  Entangle  (TraytSevo-fflo-ti').  From  Tray/s,  a  ^ra^  or  snare. 
Better,  therefore,  Kev.,  ensna/re. 

19.  Tribute"money  (vo/itff/ia  TouKj^viTov).  Lit.,  the  current 
coin  of  tribute,  which  was  paid  not  in  Jewish  but  in  Roman 
money.     See  on  ch.  xvii.  25,  tribute. 

A  penny.    See  on  Matt.  xx.  2. 

20.  Image  and  superscription  {eiKwv icaXeTn'ypa^).  Im- 
ages on  coins  were  not  approved  by  the  Jews.  Out  of  respect 
to  this  prejudice  none  of  the  earlier  Herods  had  his  own  image 
impressed  on  them.  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  who  murdered  James 
and  imprisoned  Peter,  introduced  the  practice.  The  coin  shown 
to  Christ  must  either  have  been  struck  in  Rome,  or  else  was 
one  of  the  Tetrarch  Philip,  who  was  the  first  to  introduce  the 
image  of  Caesar  on  strictly  Jewish  coins. 

24.  Shall  marry  {eTri/yafi^pevaet).  From  jafi^poi,  a  word 
used  in  classical  Greek  to  denote  any  one  connected  by  marriage : 
a  brother-in-law,  father-in-law,  even  a  bridegroom.  The  word 
is  appropriate  here  because  it  refers  to  marriage  between  mar- 
riage-relatives. 


122  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XXIIL 

Si.  Put  to  silence  {i(f)[/j,wa-ev).  There  is  a  kind  of  grim 
humor  in  the  use  of  this  word  :  he  had  rmizzled  the  Sadducees. 
Compare  ver.  12. 

36.  Which  is  the  great  commandment  (nroia  evroKr)  /ie- 
jaKT)).  The  A.  V.  and  Rev.  alike  miss  the  point  of  this  question, 
which  is:  which  kind  of  command  is  great  in  the  law  f  That  is, 
what  kind  of  a  commandment  must  it  be  to  constitute  it  a  great 
one  ?  Not,  which  commandment  is  greatest  as  compared  with 
the  others  1  The  scribes  declared  that  there  were  248  affirma- 
tive precepts,  as  many  as  the  members  of  the  human  body  ; 
and  365  negative  precepts,  as  many  as  the  days  in  the  year ; 
the  total  being  613,  the  number  of  letters  in  the  Decalogue.  Of 
these  they  called  some  light  and  some  heavy.  Some  thought 
that  the  law  about  the  fringes  on  the  garments  was  the  greatest ; 
some  that  the  omission  of  washings  was  as  bad  as  homicide ; 
some  that  the  third  commandment  was  the  greatest.  It  was  in 
view  of  this  kind  of  distinction  that  the  scribe  asked  the  ques- 
tion ;  not  as  desiring  a  declaration  as  to  which  commandment 
was  greatest,  but  as  wanting  to  know  the  pnnciple  upon  which 
a  commandment  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  great  commandment. 

38.  The  great  and  first.     With  the  definite  article. 

39.  A  second.     The  article  omitted.     So  Rev. 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 

2.  Moses'  seat  {Ka^eSpa<;).  Or  chair,  as  Wye,  in  allusion  to 
the  practice  of  teachers  sitting. 

5.  To  be  seen  (tt/jos  to  SeaSrjvai).  See  vi.  1,  where  the 
same  word  occurs.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  deport  them- 
selves with  a  view  to  being  contemplated  as  actors  in  a  theatre  ; 
so  that  men  may  fix  their  gaze  upon  them  admiringly. 

Phylacteries— Borders  of  their  garments  {(jyvXaKTvpia— 
KpdaireSa).      Phylacteries,    called    by    the    Rabbis    tejihUlvn, 


Ch.  XXIII.]  MATTHEW.  123 

jprayer-fiUets,  were  worn  on  the  left  arm,  toward  the  heart,  and 
on  the  forehead.  They  were  capsules  containing  on  parchment 
these  four  passages  of  Scripture  :  Ex.  xiii.  1-10 ;  xiii.  11-16 ; 
Deut.  vi.  4-9  ;  xi.  13-21.  That  for  the  head  was  to  consist  of 
a  box  with  four  compartments,  each  containing  a  slip  of  parch- 
ment inscribed  with  one  of  the  four  passages.  Each  of  these 
slips  was  to  be  tied  up  with  well-washed  hair  from  a  calf 's 
tail ;  lest,  if  tied  with  wool  or  thread,  any  fungoid  growth 
should  ever  pollute  them.  The  phylactery  of  the  arm  was  to 
contain  a  single  slip,  with  the  same  four  passages  written  in  four 
columns  of  seven  lines  each.  The  black  leather  straps  by  which 
they  were  fastened  were  wound  seven  times  round  the  arm 
and  three  times  round  the  hand.  They  were  reverenced  by  the 
Rabbis  as  highly  as  the  scriptures,  and,  like  them,  might  be 
rescued  from  the  flames  on  a  Sabbath.  They  profanely  imag- 
ined that  Grod  wore  the  tephUlin. 

The  Greek  word  transcribed  phylacteries  in  our  versions  is 
from  (jivKda-a-ca,  to  watch  or  guard.  It  means  originally  a 
guarded  post,  a,  fort;  then,  generally,  &  safeguard  or  preserva- 
tn,ve,  and  therefore  an  amulet.  Sir  J.  Cheke  renders  guards. 
They  were  treated  as  such  by  the  Rabbis.  It  is  said,  for  in- 
stance, that  the  courtiers  of  a  certain  king,  intending  to  kill  a 
Rabbi,  were  deterred  by  seeing  that  the  straps  of  his  phylac- 
teries shone  like  bands  of  fire.  It  was  also  said  that  they  pre- 
vented all  hostile  demons  from  injuring  any  Israelite.  See  on 
Matt.  ix.  20,  for  hardens. 

6.  The  uppermost  rooms  (TrptBTo/cXto-iaj/).  Rev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, the  chief  place,  the  foremost  couch  or  uppermost  place  on 
the  divan. 

7.  Rabbi.  My  master.  In  addressing  Jesus,  SiSda-KaXo? 
{teacher)  answers  to  Babli.     Compare  John  i.  39  ;  Luke  ii.  46. 

9.  Father  {iraTepa).  Aimed  at  those  who  courted  the  title 
Abba,  or  Father.     Compare  the  title  Papa,— Pope. 

10.  Masters  {Kol^riTaL).     Lit.,  leaders. 


124  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXHI 

13.  Hypocrites  {v-rroicpnav).  From  viroKpivo),  to  separate 
gradually  ;  so  of  sepa/rating  the  truth  from  a  mass  of  falsehood, 
and  thence  to  subject  to  inquiry,  and,  as  a  result  of  this,  to  eoa- 
poundor  interpret  what  is  elicited.  Then,  to  reply  to  inquiry, 
and  so  to  answer  on  the  stage,  to  speaJc  in  dialogue,  to  act.  From 
this  the  transition  is  easy  to  assuming,  feigning,  playing  a 
part.     The  hypocrite  is,  therefore,  etymologically,  an  actor. 

Against  (efiTrpoa-^ev).  Yery  graphic.  The  preposition  means 
before,  or  m  the  face  of.     They  shut  the  door  in  men's  faces. 

18.  He  is  guilty  {oipeCKet).  In  the  rendering  of  this  word 
the  A.  Y.  seems  to  have  been  shaped  by  the  earlier  and  now 
obsolete  sense  of  guilt,  which  was  probably  a  Jine  ov payment. 
Compare  Anglo-Saxon  gyld,  a  recompense,  and  German  geld, 
money.  There  is  a  hint  of  this  sense  in  Shakspeare,  flenry 
lY.  (Second  Part),  Act  iv.,  Sc.  4 : 

"  England  shall  double  gild  his  treble  guilt," 

where  the  play  upon  the  words  hovers  between  the  sense  of  be- 
deck and  recompense.  Wye.  renders  oweth,  and  Tynd.,  he  is 
debtor.     Rev.,  he  is  a  debtor. 

23.  Ye  Tithe  {diroSeKaTovTe) .  wiro,  from,  BeKarocD,  to  take  a 
tenth.  Tithe  is  tenth  ;  also  in  older  English,  tethe,  as  tethe  hest, 
the  tenth  commandment.  A  tethvng  was  a  district  containing 
ten  families. 

Mint  (j^SuoCT/ioi/).  ri%v<i,  sweet,  OCT ii-q,  smell.  A  favorite  plant 
in  the  East,  with  which  the  floors  of  dwellings  and  synagogues 
were  sometimes  strewn. 

Anise — Cummin  {av7}^ov — kv/iivov).  Kev.  renders  anise, 
dill  in  margin.  Used  as  condiments.  The  tithe  of  these 
plants  would  be  very  small ;  but  to  exact  it  would  indicate 
scrupulous  conscientiousness.  The  Talmud  tells  of  the  ass  of  a 
certain  Eabbi  which  had  been  so  well  trained  as  to  refuse  corn 
of  which  the  tithes  had  not  been  taken. 


Ch.  XXIII]  MATTHEW.  125 

Faith  {iriffTiv).  Eather  faithfulness,  as  in  Eom.  iii.  3,  Eev. 
Gal.  V.  22,  Eev. 

24.  Strain  at  {8ivXl^ovTe<s).  Bid,  thorouglily  or  through,  and 
vXitjm,  io  filter  er  stram.  Strain  at  is  an  old  misprint  perpetu- 
ated. Hence  the  Eev.  correctly,  as  Tynd.,  straim,  out.  Insects 
were  ceremonially  unclean  (Lev.  xi.  20,  23,  41,  42),  so  that  the 
Jews  strained  their  wine  in  order  not  to  swallow  any  unclean 
animal.  Moreover,  there  were  certain  insects  which  bred  in 
wine.  Aristotle  uses  the  word  gnat  {/ccovcoTra)  of  a  worm  or 
larva  found  in  the  sediment  of  sour  wine.  "  In  a  ride  from 
Tangier  to  Tetuan  I  observed  that  a  Moorish  soldier  who  ac- 
companied me,  when  he  drank,  always  unfolded  the  end  of  his 
turban  and  placed  it  over  the  mouth  of  his  hota,  drinking 
through  the  muslin  to  strain  out  the  gnats,  whose  larvse  swarm 
in  the  water  of  that  country  "  (cited  by  Trench,  "  On  the  Author- 
ized Version  "). 

Swallow  (KaraTrivovre'}).  The  rendering  is  feeble.  It  is 
drink  down  (/cara) ;  gu^.  ISTote  that  the  camel  was  also  un- 
clean (Lev.  xi.  4). 

25.  Platter  {irapo^^iho';).  irapd,  heside,  oyjrov,  meat.  A  side- 
dish,  with  the  accompanying  sense  of  something  dainty  /  later, 
as  here,  the  dish  itself  as  distinguished  from  its  contents. 

Excess  (aKpaa-Lwi).  d,  not,  KpdTO<i,  jpower.  Hence  conduct 
which  shows  a  want  of  power  over  one's  self :  incontinence  or 
intemperance. 

27.  Whited  sepulchres  {rdtpoK  Ke/eoviafievoi?).  Not  the 
rock-tombs,  belonging  mostly  to  the  rich,  but  the  graves  cov- 
ered with  plastered  structures.  In  general,  cemeteries  were 
outside  of  cities ;  but  any  dead  body  found  in  the  field  was  to 
be  buried  on  the  spot  where  it  had  been  discovered.  A  pilgrim 
to  the  Passover,  for  instance,  might  easily  come  upon  such  a 
grave  in  his  journey,  and  contract  uncleanness  by  the  contact 
(Num.  xix.  16).     It  was  therefore  ordered  that  all  sepulchres 


126  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXIII. 

should  be  whitewashed  a  month  before  Passover,  in  order  to 
make  them  conspicuous,  so  that  travellers  might  avoid  ceremo- 
nial defilement.  The  fact  that  this  general  whitewashing  was 
going  on  at  the  time  when  Jesus  administered  this  rebuke  to 
the  Pharisees  gave  point  to  the  comparison.  The  word  ksko- 
viafikvoK;  (whitened,  from  Kovii,  dust)  carries  the  idea  of  whiten- 
ing with  a,;powder,  as  powdered  lime. 

29.  Tombs  of  the  prophets.  By  this  name  are  called  four 
monuments  at  the  base  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  in  the  valley  of 
Jehoshaphat ;  called  at  present  the  tombs  of  Zechariah,  Absa- 
lom, Jehoshaphat,  and  St.  James.  Two  of  them  are  monoliths 
cut  out  of  the  solid  rock  ;  the  others  are  mei'ely  excavations,  with 
ornamental  portals.  "  They  appear,"  says  Dr.  Thomson, ''  to  be 
quite  extensive,  consisting  of  winding  or  semicircular  galleries, 
passing  under  the  mountain  more  than  a  hundred  feet  from 
east  to  west,  and  terminating  in  a  rotunda  about  eighty  feet 
from  the  entrance.  There  is  no  authority  for  the  name  which 
they  commonly  bear."  Possibly  they  were  in  sight  of  our 
Lord  when  he  spoke,  and  were  pointed  to  by  him.  The  refer- 
ence would  be  all  the  more  telling,  if,  as  has  been  conjectured, 
the  Pharisees  were  engaged  in  constructing  the  tombs  of  Zech- 
ariah and  Absalom  at  the  time  that  the  Lord  addressed  them,  and 
that  the  chambered  sepulchres  of  James  and  Jehoshaphat,  lying 
between  those  two,  were  the  sepulchres  which  they  were  gar- 
nishing at  their  entrances. 

35.  Temple  (vaoO).  Rev.,  rightly,  sawc^ary.  See  on  Matt, 
iv.  5.  Zechariah  was  slain  between  the  temple  proper  and  the 
altar  of  burnt-offering,  in  the  priests'  court. 

37.  Hen  (opw?).  Generic:  hi/rd  or  fowl;  but  hen  is  used 
generically  of  the  mother-bird  of  all  species. 


Ch.  XXIV.]  MATTHEW.  127 


CHAPTER  XXIY. 

1.  Went  out  and  departed  from  the  temple  {i^eX^wv 
dirb  Tov  lepov  iiropeveTo).  Rev.,  better  :  Went  out  from  thetem- 
ple  and  was  gomg  on  his  way.  The  temple,  lepov,  not  vaov  : 
the  whole  of  the  buildings  connected  with  the  temple,  all  of 
which,  including  the  vao';,  or  sanctuary,  and  the  porches  and 
courts,  constituted  the  lepov.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 

3.  Coming  [Trapova-ia^).  Originally,  presence,  from  irapel- 
vai,  to  he  present.  In  this  sense  in  Philip,  ii.  12 ;  2  Cor.  x.  10. 
Also  arrival,  as  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  17  ;  2  Cor.  vii.  6,  7  ;  2  Thess.  ii. 
9 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  12.  Of  the  second  coming  of  Christ :  James  v. 
8  ;  1  John  ii.  28 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  15. 

Of  the  world  {al&vci).  Bather  the  existing,  current  age. 
They  do  not  ask  the  signs  of  the  Messiah's  coming  at  the  end 
of  all  time,  to  judge  the  world. 

4.  Deceive  {irXav^aj}).)     Lit.,  lead  astray,  as  Rev. 

5.  In  my  name  (eTrt  to  ovoixari  jjlov).  Lit,  on  my  name, 
i.e.,  on  the  strength  of;  resting  their  claims  on  the  name  Mes- 
siah. 

12.  Shall  abound  {vXTjSvvS^vai).  Lit.,  shall  be  multiplied. 
See  Acts  vi.  1,  7  ;  vii.  17  ;  ix.  31;  Heb.  vi.  Ii. 

Of  many  {t&v  iroWSyv).  The  A.  V.  in  omitting  the  defi- 
nite article,  misses  the  force  of  Christ's  saying.  It  is  not  the  love 
of  manypeq^ile  only  that  shall  be  chilled,  but  of  the  many,  the 
majority,  the  great  iody. 

Wax  cold  {ylrvy^treTai).  The  verb  means  originally  to  hreathe 
or  blow  ;  and  the  picture  is  that  of  spiritual  energy  blighted  or 
chilled  by  a  malign  or  poisonous  wind. 


128  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XXIV. 

14.  World  {rfj  olKovfievrj).  Lit.,  the  inhaUUd.  The  whole 
habitable  globe.     Rev.,  in  margin,  inhabited  earth. 

15.  Abomination  of  desolation  {^SeKvy/M Tfi<:  ifyr]/Mdi<Tem<s). 
The  cognate  verb,  ^SeXva-aofiai,  means  to  feel  a  nausea  or  loath- 
ing for  food  :  hence  used  of  disgust  generally.  In  a  moral  sense 
it  denotes  an  object  of  moral  or  religions  repugnance.  See  2 
Chron.  xv.  8  ;  Jer.  xiii.  27 ;  Ezek.  xi.  21 ;  Dan.  ix.  27  ;  xi.  31. 
It  is  used  as  equivalent  to  idol  in  1  Kings  xi.  17 ;  Dent.  vii. 
26  ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  13.  It  denotes  anything  in  which  estrange- 
ment from  God  manifests  itself ;  as  the  eating  of  unclean 
beasts,  Lev.  xi.  11 ;  Deut.  xiv.  3 ;  and,  generally,  all  forms  of 
heathenism.  This  moral  sense  must  be  emphasized  in  the  New 
Testament  use  of  the  word.  Compare  Luke  xvi.  15  ;  Apoc.  xvii. 
4,  5  ;  xxi.  27.  It  does  not  denote  mere  physical  or  aesthetic  dis- 
gust. The  reference  here  is  probably  to  the  occupation  of  the 
temple  precincts  by  the  idolatrous  Koraans  under  Titus,  with 
their  standards  and  ensigns.  Josephus  says  that,  after  the 
burning  of  the  temple  the  Romans  brought  their  ensigns  and 
set  them  over  against  the  eastern  gate,  and  there  they  offered 
sacrifices  to  them,  and  declared  Titus,  with  acclamations,  to  be 
emperor. 

17.  Him  which  is  on  the  house.top  (o  eVt  tov  Sm/iaro^). 
From  roof  to  roof  there  might  be  a  regular  communication, 
called  by  the  Rabbis  "  the  road  of  the  roofs."  Thus  a  person 
could  make  his  escape  passing  from  roof  to  roof,  till,  at  the  last 
house,  he  would  descend  the  stairs  on  the  outside  of  the  house, 
but  within  the  exterior  court.  The  urgency  of  the  flight  is  en- 
hanced by  the  fact  that  the  stairs  lead  into  this  court.  "  Though 
you  must  pass  by  the  very  door  of  your  room,  do  not  enter  to 
take  anything  out.     Escape  for  your  life." 

22.  Should  be  shortened  (iKo\o0coS7)a-av).  'Rev.,  had  been 
shortened.  A  very  picturesque  word.  The  verb  is,  literally, 
to  dock,  to  cut  of,  leaving  a  stump,  as  a  limb.  Wye,  abridged. 
As  a  fact,  various  causes  did  combine  to  shorten  the  siege. 
Herod  Agrippa  was   stopped   in   his  work   of   strengthening 


Ch.  XXIV.]  MATTHEW.  129 

the  walls  by  orders  from  the  emperor ;  the  Jews,  absorbed  in 
their  party  strifes,  had  totally  neglected  preparations  to  stand  a 
siege  ;  the  magazines  of  corn  and  provisions  were  burnt  before 
the  arrival  of  Titus.  Titus  arrived  suddenly,  and  the  Jews 
voluntarily  abandoned  parts  of  the  fortification.  Titus  himself 
confessed  that  God  was  against  the  Jews,  since  otherwise 
neither  his  armies  nor  his  engines  would  have  availed  against 
their  defences. 

24.  Signs  and  wonders  {(77)iJLeia  Koi  Tepara).  See  on  Matt, 
xi.  20.  The  two  words  often  joined  in  the  New  Testament. 
See  John  iv.  48  ;  Acts  ii.  22  ;  iv.  30  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  12.  The 
words  do  not  denote  different  classes  of  supernatural  manifesta- 
tions, but  these  manifestations  regarded  from  diiferent  points 
of  view.  The  same  miracle  may  be  a  mighty  work,  or  a 
glorious  work,  regarded  with  reference  to  its  power  and  gran- 
deur ;  or  a  sign  of  the  doei-'s  supernatural  power ;  or  a  wonder, 
as  it  appeals  to  the  spectator.  Tepwi  (derivation  uncertain)  is 
a  miracle  regarded  as  a  portent  or  prodigy,  awakening  amaze- 
ment. It  most  nearly  corresponds,  therefore,  to  the  etymo- 
logical sense  of  the  word  miracle  (Lat.,  miraculum,  a  wonderful 
ihin^,  from  m,ira/ri,  to  wonder). 

26.  In  the  desert — Secret  chambers.  'B.%\.,  wilderness — 
inner  chambers.  Both  retired  places,  indicating  that  the  false 
Messiahs  will  avoid  public  scrutiny. 

27.  Shineth  (^aiVerat).  Eev.,  better,  «^  sem.  The  coming 
of  the  Lord  will  be  a  plain,  unmistakable  fact,  like  the  light- 
ning which  lightens  both  ends  of  the  heaven  at  once,  and  is 
seen  of  all.  It  will  not  be  connected  with  some  particular 
place,  but  will  manifest  itself  and  be  recognized  over  the  whole 
world.     Compare  Apoc.  i,  7 :  "  Every  eye  shall  see  him." 

28.  Carcase  (Trrw/ia).     From  iriizrw,  to  fall.     Originally  a 

fall,  and  thence  a  fallen  lody  ;  a  corpse.    Compare  Lat.  cadaver, 

from  cado,  to  fall.     See  Mark  vi.  29 ;   Apoc.  xi.  8.     On  the 

saying  itself,  compare  Job  xxxix.  30. 
9 


130  WORD   STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXIV. 

Eagles  [aeroi).  Rev.  puts  vultures  in  margin.  The  griffon 
vulture  is  meant,  which  surpasses  the  eagle  in  size  and  power. 
Aristotle  notes  how  this  bird  scents  its  prey  from  afar,  and 
congregates  in  the  wake  of  an  army.  In  the  Russian  war  vast 
numbers  were  collected  in  the  Crimea,  and  remained  until  the 
end  of  the  campaign  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  camp,  although 
previously  scarcely  known  in  the  country. 

30.  Mourn  (KoyJrovTai,).  Stronger:  heat  their  breasts  {71  an- 
guish. 

31.  With  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet  (/iera  aaXiri/^'yo'i 
(poainj's  /ieyaXr)';).  Some  read  with  a  great  trumpet.  The  blow- 
ing of  trumpets  was  anciently  the  signal  for  the  host  of  Israel 
on  their  march  through  the  desert.  It  summoned  to  war,  and 
proclaimed  public  festivals,  and  marked  the  beginnings  of 
months ;  Num.  x.  1-10 ;  Ps.  Ixxxi.  3.  Hence  the  symbolism 
of  the  New  Testament.  Jehovah's  people  shall  be  summoned 
before  their  king  by  sound  of  trumpet.  Compare  the  procla- 
mation of  Christ  as  king  at  the  trumpet  of  the  seventh  angel, 
Apoc.  xi.  15. 

32.  A  parable  {tt^v  irapa^oXrjv).  More  strictly,  the  parable 
which  she  has  to  teach.     Rightly,  therefore,  Rev.,  her  parable. 

Branch  {icKdho'i).  From  KXdco,  to  ireak.  Hence  a  young 
sUp  or  shoot,  such  as  is  broken  off  for  grafting.  Such  were 
the  "  branches  "  which  were  cut  down  and  strewed  in  the  Lord's 
path  by  the  multitudes  (Matt.  xxi.  8). 

40.  Shall  be  taken— left.  Both  verbs  are  in  the  present 
tense,  which  makes  the  saying  more  lively.  One  is  taken  and 
one  is  left.     So  Rev. 

41.  The  mill  (tc3  /iv\&)).  The  ordinary  hand-mill  with  a 
handle  fixed  near  the  edge  of  the  upper  stone,  which  is  turned 
by  two  women. 


Ch.  XXV  ]  MATTHEW.  131 

42.  What  hour.  Later  texts,  however,  read  vfj-epa,  day. 
•jTola  riiJiepa,,  in  what  kind  of  a  day,  whether  a  near  or  a  remote 
one.  Similarly  ver.  43 :  iv  Troia  ^vXuk^,  in  what  kind  of  a 
watch,  whether  a  night  or  a  morning  watch. 

43.  Would  come  (ep')(eTat,).  Kev.,  was  coming.  But  the 
present  is  graphically  thrown  in  as  in  vv.  40,  41 :  is  coming  or 
Cometh. 

Broken  up  {Siopvyrjvai).  Rev.,  broken  through.  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  19.     Wye,  imdermined. 

45.  In  due  season  {iv  KaopiZ).  At  the  regular  hours  which 
his  Lord  observes  when  at  home ;  and  not  delaying  because  he 
thinks  that  his  Lord  delayeth  his  coming  (ver.  48),  but  doing  his 
duty  in  its  appointed  time. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

1.  Lamps  {XafiirdSai;).  Lit.,  torches.  Probably  a  short, 
wooden  stem  held  in  the  hand,  with  a  dish  at  the  top,  in  which 
was  a  piece  of  cloth  dipped  in  oil  or  pitch. 

3.  They  that  were  foolish  {a'lTive^  fimpai).  Read  al  yap 
/Mopal,forthefooUsh.  The /b/*  justifies  the  epithet /bo&A  in 
the  preceding  verse. 

5.  Slumbered  and  slept  {evvara^av  Koi  eKa^evhov).  Slum- 
hered  is,  literally,  nodded.  Note  the  variation  of  tense.  Nodded 
is  aorist,  denoting  a  transient  act,  the  initial  stage  of  slumber. 
They  dropped  thei/r  heads.  Slept  is  imperfect,  of  continuous 
slumber. 

6.  There  was  a  cry  made  {Kpavyfj  yeyovev).  Rev.,  there  is 
a  cry.  The  verb  is  in  the  perfect  tense,  representing  the  past 
event  as  perpetuated  in  the  present  result,  and  hence  is  rendered 
by  the  English  present.     A  great'  and  decisive  change  was  the 


132  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXV. 

result  of  the  cry.  No  more  sleeping,  waiting,  or  silence.  There 
is  a  cry,  and  behold  the  awaking,  the  bustle,  the  trimming  of 
lamps  and  the  rimning  to  the  oil-vendors. 

To  meet  him  {eh  airdvT'qaiv).  The  translation  can  hardly 
convey  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  phrase,  which  implies  a  ous- 
tOTTb  oxfa/miliar  ceremony.     Come  forth  unto  meeting. 

7.  Then  all  those  virgins  arose  (rare -^yipS^crav  -n-aaai  at. 
'TrapMvoi  eKelvai).  The  Greek  order  is  expressive.  Then  a/rose 
all  the  vi/rgins,  those  form^er  ones.  Those  {eKelvai)  a  pronoun  of 
remoter  reference,  and  emphatic  by  its  position  at  the  end  of 
the  sentence. 

Trimmed  {eKoa-firiaav).  From  Ko<7fi6<;,  order,  and  meaning 
to  put  in  order  or  a/rrcmge.  Tynd.,  ^prepared.  Trench  ("  Para- 
bles ")  quotes  from  Ward  ("  View  of  the  Hindoos  "),  describing 
a  marriage  ceremony  in  India :  "  After  waiting  two  or  three 
hours,  at  length  near  midnight  it  was  announced,  as  in  the  very 
words  of  Scripture,  '  Behold  the  bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye  out 
to  meet  him.'  All  the  persons  employed  now  lighted  their 
lamps,  and  ran  with  them  in  their  hands  to  fill  up  their  stations 
in  the  procession.  Some  of  them  had  lost  their  lights,  and 
were  unprepared,  but  it  was  then  too  late  to  seek  them,  and  the 
cavalcade  moved  forward." 

Their  lamps  {eavrmv).  Lit.,  "  their  om;?!  lamps ; "  emphasiz- 
ing ^e  personal  preparation  in  contrast  with  the  foolish,  who 
depended  for  supply  on  their  fellows. 

8.  Are  gone  out  {a-iSivvwrai,).  The  A.  V.  misses  the 
graphic  force  of  the  continuous  present,  denoting  something  in 
progress.  They  see  the  flame  waning  and  flickering,  and  cry, 
Our  lamps  are  going  out !    So  Eev. 

9.  Not  so,  lest,  etc.  (/tTjTrore  ov  fir)  apKea-rj).  The  Greek  does 
not  give  the  blunt  negative  of  the  A.  V.  It  is  a  more  courteous 
form  of  refusal,  making  the  reason  for  refusing  to  supply  the 


Ch.  XXV.]  MATTHEW.  133 

place  of  the  negative.  Owe  us  of  your  oil,  say  the  foolish. 
The  wise  reply,  Lest  perchcmce  there  he  not  by  any  ineans 
{pi  fif),  the  double  negative)  enough.  The  Rev.  gives  it  very 
happily.     JPeradventure  there  wiil  not  he  enough,  etc. 

10.  And  while  they  went  {aTrepxo/Mivav).  A  present  parti- 
ciple, and  very  graphic :  while  they,  are  going  ouway. 

They  that  were  ready  (at  eroifioi).  Lit.,  the  ready  ov pre- 
pared ones. 

To  the  marriage  (yd/iov^).  Marriage^/eas^,  as  Matt.  xxii. 
2,  3,  4  ;  and  so  Eev. 

11.  Lord,  lord.  Applying  directly  to  the  bridegroom, 
whose  will  was  supreme,  now  that  he  had  arrived  at  the  bride's 
residence. 

14.  Travelling  (aTToSij/twi/).  The  sense  is  more  nearly  aSow^ 
to  tra/vel,  like  our  going  abroad. 

15.  Several  ability  (ISiav).  Lit.,  his  own  or  peculiar  capac- 
ity for  business. 

16.  Straightway  (ev^ew?).  Connected  with  the  beginning 
of  this  verse,  instead  of  with  the  end  of  ver.  15 :  Straightway 
he  that  had  recei/oed,  etc.,  indicating  promptness  on  the  servant's 
part. 

Traded  with  them  {rjpycuraTo  iv  avroh).  Lit.,  wrought 
with  them.     The  virgins  wait,  the  servants  work. 

Made  {iij-oirja-ev).  Not  made  them,  as  A.  V.  The  word  is 
used  in  our  sense  of  make  money.  Wye.  and  Tynd.,  won. 
Geneva,  gained.     Some  read  iKepBrja-ev,  gained,  as  in  ver.  17. 

24.  Hard  (o-kXij/jo?).  Stronger  than  the  austere  (ava-TTipo^) 
of  Luke  xix.  21  (see  there),  which  is  sometimes  used  in  a  good 


134  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXV. 

sense,  as  this  never  is.     It  is  an  epithet  given  to  a  surface 
which  is  at  once  dry  and  hard. 

Strawed  (SteaKopTria-a^).  'Rev.,  didst  scatter.  Not  referring 
to  the  sowing  of  seed,  for  that  would  be  saying  the  same  thing 
twice.  The  scattering  refers  to  the  winnovnng  of  the  loosened 
sheaves  spread  out  upon  the  threshing-floor.  "  The  word,"  as 
Trench  observes  "could  scarcely  be  applied  to  the  measured 
and  orderly  scattering  of  the  sower's  seed.  It  is  rather  the  dis- 
persing,  making  to  fly  in  every  direction."  Hence  used  of  the 
pursuit  of  a  routed  enemy  (Luke  i.  51) ;  of  the  prodigal  scatter- 
ing his  goods  ;  inaTcing  the  money  fly,  as  we  say  (Luke  xv.  13) ; 
of  the  wolf  scattering  the  sheep  (Matt.  xxvi.  31).  Wye,  spread 
abroad. 

25.  That  is  thine  {to  <t6v).  The  Greek  is  more  concise,  and 
is  better  given  by  Rev.,  Lo,  thou  hast  thine  own. 

26.  Slothful.  With  no  more  trouble  than  he  expended  in 
digging,  he  might  have  gone  to  the  exchangers.  The  verse 
should  be  read  interrogatively.  Didst  thou  indeed  know  this  of 
me  ?  Thou  shouldst  then  have  acted  with  the  promptness  and 
care  which  one  observes  in  dealing  with  a  hard  master.  To 
omit  the  interrogation  is  to  make  the  Lord  admit  that  he  was 
a  hard  master. 

27.  Put  {^aXelv).  Lit.,  throw  or  fling  down,  as  one  would 
throw  a  bag  of  coin  upon  the  exchanger's  table. 

Exchangers  {rpaTre^irai^).  Taking  their  name  from  the 
table  or  counter  at  which  they  sat  {rpdire^a).  The  Jewish  bank- 
ers bore  precisely  the  same  name. 

Usury  (To/cft)).  A  very  graphic  word,  meaning  first  child- 
biHh,  and  then  oflfspring.  Hence  of  interest,  which  is  thejyrod- 
uce  or  offspring  of  capital.  Originally  it  was  only  what  was 
paid  for  the  use  of  money  ;  hence  usury;  but  it  became  synony- 
mous  with  esetortionate  interest.     Eev.,  better,  with  interest. 


Ch.  XXV.]  MATTHEW.  135 

The  Jewish  law  distinguished  between  interest  and  increase. 
In  ETome  very  high  interest  seems  to  have  been  charged  in  early- 
times.  Practically  usury  was  unlimited.  It  soon  became  the 
custom  to  charge  monthly  interest  at  one  per  cent,  a  month. 
During  the  early  empire  legal  interest  stood  at  eight  per  cent., 
but  in  usurious  transactions  it  was  lent  at  twelve,  twenty-four, 
and  even  forty-eight.  The  Jewish  bankers  of  Palestine  and 
elsewhere  M^ere  engaged  in  the  same  undertakings.  The  law  of 
Moses  denounced  usury  in  the  transactions  of  Hebrews  with 
Hebrews,  but  permitted  it  in  dealing  with  strangers  (Deut. 
xxiii.  19,  20 ;  Ps.  xv.  5). 

32.  All  the  nations  {nravra  to,  eBvr}).  The  whole  human 
race ;  though  the  word  is  generally  employed  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament to  denote  Gentiles  as  distinguished  from  Jews. 

Separate  them  (avroix;).  Masculine,  while  the  word  nations 
is  neuter.  Nations  are  regarded  as  gathei-ed  collectively  ;  but  in 
contemplating  the  act  of  separation  the  Lord  regards  the  indi- 
viduals. 

The  sheep  from  the  goats  (or  kids,  so  Rev.  in  margin). 
"  The  bald  division  of  men  into  sheep  and  goats  is,  in  one  sense, 
so  easy  as  not  to  be  worth  performing ;  and  in  another  sense  it  is 
so  hard  as  only  to  be  possible  for  something  with  supernatural 
insight"  (John  Morley,  "Yoltaire").  G-oats  are  an  appro- 
priate figure,  because  the  goat  was  regarded  as  a  comparatively 
worthless  animal.  Hence  the  point  of  the  elder  son's  complaint 
in  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal :  Ifot  so  much  as  a  kid  (Luke  xv. 
29).     The  diminutive  {epl4>i,a)  expresses  contempt. 

33.  Goats  (ipc<f)ia).  Diminutive.  Lit. ,  kidlings.  The  sheep 
and  goats  are  represented  as  having  previously  pastured  together. 

_  Compare  the  parables  of  the  Tares  and  the  Net. 

On  the  right  (e'/e  Sefteov).  Lit., //w«,  the  right  side  or  parts. 
The  picture  to  the  Greek  reader  is  that  of  a  row,  beginning  at 
the  judge's  right  hand. 


136  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXVI. 

35.  Ye  took  me  in  {awrr/arjeTe  (le).  Tynd.,  Iwasha/rhour- 
less  and  ye  lodged  me.  The  preposition  avv  implies  along  with. 
Ye  took  me  with  you  into  the  household  circle. 

36.  Visited  {I'rreaKe'facT^e).  Lit.,  Te  looked  upon*  Our 
word  visit  is  from  the  Latin  viso,  to  look  steadfastly  at,  and 
thence  to  visit.  "We  retain  the  original  thought  in  the  popular 
phrases  go  to  see  one,  and  to  look  in  upon  one. 

40.  The  least.  The  word  in  the  Greek  order  is  emphatic: 
One  of  these  my  brethren,  the  least.     So  Eev.,  even  these  least. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

2.  Is  betrayed  {irapaUhorat).  The  present  tense  expresses 
here  something  which,  though  future,  is  as  good  as  present,  be- 
cause already  determined,  or  because  it  must  ensue  in  virtue  of 
an  unalterable  law.  Thus  the  passover  is  {ylverai):  it  must 
come  round  at  the  fixed  season.  The  Son  of  Man  is  betrayed 
according  to  the  divine  decree.     Compare  ver.  24. 

3.  Palace  {avXijv).  But  the  word  never  means  palace  in  the 
New  Testament.  It  is  the  court,  the  open  court  or  hall,  form- 
ing the  centre  of  an  oriental  building,  and  often  used  as  a  meet- 
ing-place.    He  v.,  court.     Wye,  hall. 

7.  An  alabaster  box  (aXa^aaTpov).  'Rev.,  crv^e ;  flask  in 
margin.  Lit.,  an  alabaster,  just  as  we  call  a  drinking-vessel 
made  of  glass  a  glass.  Luther  renders  glass.  It  was  a  kind  of 
cruet,  having  a  cylindrical  form  at  the  top.  Pliny  compares 
these  vessels  to  a  closed  rosebud,  and  says  that  ointments  are 
best  preserved  in  them. 

8.  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste?  Wye,  Whereto  this 
loss  f     Tynd.,  What  needed  this  waste  ?     See  on  John  xii.  3. 

10.  When  Jesus  understood  it  (7V0W  Se  6 'It/o-oO?).  The 
A.  V.  implies  that  some  time  elapsed  before  Jesus  was  aware 

*  Hebraistically,  of  gracious  visitatiou.     Comp.  Luke  vii.  16  ;  Heb.  ii.  6. 


Ch.  XXVI]  MATTHEW.  137 

of  the  disciples'  complaint.     But  the  statement  is  that  Jesus 
perceived  it  at  once.     Rev.,  rightly,  Jesus  perceiving  it. 

Good  work  {koKov).  Lit.,  beautiful,  but  in  a  moral  sense: 
an  excellent,  morally  beautiful  deed. 

15.  What  will  ye  give?  {ri  SeXeri  /loi  hovvai?)  Rather, 
What  are  ye  willing  to  give  me  ?  It  brings  out  the  chaffering 
aspect  of  the  transaction.     So  Rev. 

They  covenanted  with  him  for  {ea-rria-av  airm).  But  the 
meaning  is,  they  weighed  unto  him;  or,  very  literally,  they 
placed  for  him  (in  the  balance).  Although  coined  shekels  were 
in  circulation,  weighing  appears  to  have  been  practised,  espe- 
cially when  considerable  sums  were  paid  out  of  the  temple- 
treasury. 

Thirty  pieces  of  silver  (rpidKovTa  apyvpia).  Matthew  re^ 
f  ers  to  Zech.  xi.  12.  These  pieces  were  shekels  of  the  sanctuary, 
of  standard  weight,  and  therefore  heavier  than  the  ordinary 
shekel.  See  on  Matt.  xvii.  24.  Reckoning  the  Jerusalem 
shekel  at  seventy-two  cents,  the  sum  would  be  twenty-one  dol- 
lars and  sixty  cents.  This  was  the  price  which,  by  the  Mosaic 
law,  a  man  was  condemned  to  pay  if  his  ox  should  gore  a  ser- 
vant (Exod.  xxi.  32).  Our  Lord,  the  sacrifice  for  men,  was 
paid  for  out  of  the  temple-money,  destined  for  the  purchase 
of  sacrifices.  He  who  "  took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant " 
was  sold  at  the  legal  price  of  a  slave. 

18.  Such  a  man  (rbv  Seiva).  The  indefiniteness  is  the 
Evangelist's,  not  our  Lord's.  He,  doubtless,  described  the  per- 
son and  where  to  find  him. 

20.  He  sat  down  {aveKeno).  But  this  rendering  misses  the 
force  of  the  imperfect  tense,  which  denotes  something  in 
progress.  The  Evangelist  says  he  was  sitting  or  reclining, 
introducing  us  to  something  which  has  been  going  on  for  some 
time. 


138  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Cn.  XXVI. 

22.  Began  to  say  (rjp^avro).  Denoting  the  commencement 
of  a  series  of  questions  ;  one  after  the  other  {every  one)  saying, 
Is  it  If 

Is  it  I  ?  (/t^Tt  iyd)  elfii).  The  form  of  the  negative  expects  a 
negative  answer.     "  Surely  I  am  not  the  on^P 

23.  The  dish  (rpv/SXta)).  'Wjc, platter.  A  dish  containing 
a  hroth  made  with  nuts,  raisins,  dates,  figs,  etc.,  into  which 
pieces  of  bread  were  dipped. 

25.  Which  betrayed  (o  Tra/saStSow).  The  article  with  the 
participle  has  the  force  of  an  epithet :  The  hetrayer. 

28.  Testament  (Sia^Kr)';).  From  SiaTl&rj/ii,,  to  distribute/ 
dispose  of.  Hence  of  the  disposition  of  one's  property.  On 
the  idea  of  disposing  or  arranging  is  based  that  of  settlement  or 
agreement,  and  thence  of  a  covenant.  The  Hebrew  word  of 
which  this  is  a  translation  is  primarily  covenant,  from  a  verb 
meaning  to  cut.  Hence  the  phrase,  to  inake  a  covenant,  in 
connection  •  with  dividing  the  victims  slain  in  ratification  of 
covenants  (Gen.  xv.  9-18).  Covenant  is  the  general  Old  Tes- 
tament sense  of  the  word  (1  Kings  xx.  34 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  15 ; 
1  Sam.  xviii.  3) ;  and  so  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare 
Mark  xiv.  24 ;  Luke  i.  72  ;  xxii.  20 ;  Acts  iii.  25  ;  vii.  8.  Bishop 
Lightfoot,  on  Gal.  iii.  15,  observes  that  the  word  is  never  found 
in  the  New  Testament  in  any  other  sense  than  that  of  covenant, 
with  the  exception  of  Heb.  ix.  15-17,  where  it  is  testament. 
We  cannot  admit  this  exception,  since  we  regard  that  passage 
as  one  of  the  best  illustrations  of  the  sense  of  covenant.  See 
on  Heb.  ix.  15-17.     Render  here  as  Eev.,  covenant. 

Is  shed  {eK-xyvvo/xevov).  The  present  participle,  is  ieingshed. 
Christ's  thought  goes  forward  to  the  consummation. 

29.  New  {kuivov).  Another  adjective,  veov,  is  employed  to 
denote  new  wine  in  the  sense  of  freshly-made  (Matt.  ix.  17 ; 
Mark  ii.  22 ;  Luke  v.  37,  38,  39).  '  The  difference  is  between 


Ch.  XXVI.]  MATTHEW.  139 

newness  regarded  in  point  of  tvme  or  of  quality.  The  young,  for 
instance,  who  have  lately  sprung  up,  are  veou  or  veatrepot  (Luke 
XV.  12,  13).  The  new  garment  (Luke  v.  36)  is  contrasted  as  to 
quality  with  a  worn  and  threadbare  one.  Hence  Kaivov.  So  a 
new  heaven  (2  Pet.  iii.  13)  is  kmvo^,  contrasted  with  that  which 
shows  signs  of  dissolution.  Tlie  tomb  in  which  the  body  of 
Jesus  was  laid  was  Kaivov  (Matt,  xxvii.  60) ;  in  which  no  other 
body  had  lain,  making  it  ceremonially  unclean ;  not  recently 
hewn.  Trench  ("  Synonyms  ")  cites  a  passage  from  Polybius, 
relating  a  stratagem  by  which  a  town  was  nearly  taken,  and 
saying  "we  are  still  new  {icaivol)  and  young  (veoi)  in  regard  of 
such  deceits."  Here  Kauvoi  expresses  the  inexperience  of  the 
men ;  vioi,  their  youth.  Still,  the  distinction  cannot  be  pressed 
in  all  cases.  Thus,  1  Cor.  v.  Y,  "Purge  out  the  old  leaven 
that  ye  may  be  a  new  {veov)  lump  ;"  and  Col.  iii.  10,  "  Put  on 
the  new  {veov)  man,"  plainly  carry  the  sense  of  quality.  In  our 
Lord's  expression,  "  drink  it  new,"  the  idea  of  quality  is  domi- 
nant. All  the  elements  of  festivity  in  the  heavenly  kingdom 
will  be  of  a  new  and  higher  quality.  In  the  New  Testament, 
besides  the  two  cases  just  cited,  veo?  is  applied  to  wine,  to  the 
young,  and  once  to  a  covenant. 

30.  Sung  a  hymn.  Yery  probably  the  second  part  of  the 
Jewish  HaUel  or  Hallehyah,  embracing  Ps.  cxv.,  cxvi.,  cxvii., 
cxviii. 

They  went  out.  In  the  original  institution  of  the  Pass- 
over it  was  enjoined  that  no  one  should  go  out  of  his  house 
until  morning  (Exod.  xii.  22).  Evidently  this  had  ceased  to  be 
regarded  as  obligatory. 

32.  I  will  go  before  you.  The  thought  links  itself  with 
what  Christ  had  just  said  about  the  shepherd  and  the  sheep. 
Compare  John  x.  4.  I  will  go  before  you,  as  a  shepherd  before 
his  flock. 

34.  Before  the  cock  crow.  A  little  more  graphic  if  the 
article  is  omitted,  as  in  the  Greek.     Before  a  single  cock  shall 


140  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMBXT.      [Ch.  XXVT. 

be  heard,  early  in  the  night,  thou  shalt  deny  me.  Dr.  Thom- 
son ("  Land  and  Book  ")  says  that  the  barn-door  fowls  "  swarm 
round  every  door,  share  in  the  food  of  their  possessors,  are  at 
home  among  the  children  in  every  room,  roost  overhead  at 
night,  and  with  their  ceaseless  crowing  are  the  town-clock  and 
the  morning-bell  to  call  up  sleepers  at  early  dawn." 

35.  Though  I  should  die  {kcLv  Bey  fie  aTro^avelv).  The  A. 
V.  misses  the  force  of  Birj :  "  Though  it  should  be  necessary  for 
me  to  die."  "Wye,  "  ^  it  shall  lehove  me  to  die.^'  Kev.,  ex- 
cellently, "  Even  if  I  must  die." 

36.  Gethsemane.  Meaning  oil-press.  Beyond  the  brook  Ke- 
dron,  and  distant  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  from  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem.  Dean  Stanley  says  of  the  olive-trees  there :  "  In 
spite  of  all  the  doubts  that  can  be  raised  against  their  antiquity, 
the  eight  aged  olive-trees,  if  only  by  their  manifest  difference 
from  all  others  on  the  mountain,  have  always  struck  the  most 
indifferent  observers.  They  will  remain,  so  long  as  their  already 
protracted  life  is  spared,  the  most  venerable  of  their  race  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth.  Their  gnarled  trunks  and  scanty  foliage 
will  always  be  regarded  as  the  most  affecting  of  the  sacred 
memorials  in  or  about  Jerusalem  ;  the  most  nearly  approach- 
ing to  the  everlasting  hills  themselves  in  the  force  with  which 
they  carry  us  back  to  the  events  of  the  gospel  history  "  ("  Sinai 
and  Palestine  "). 

40.  What !  It  is  hardly  possible  to  convey  the  exact  force  of 
the  Greek  ovtco^,  thus  or  so.  The  idea  is,  "  are  ye  thus  unable, 
or  so  utterly  unable  to  watch  ? " 

45.  The  hour  is  at  hand.  He  probably  heard  the  tramp 
and  saw  the  lanterns  of  Judas  and  his  band. 

47.  One  of  the  twelve.  Kepeated  in  all  three  evangelists, 
in  the  narratives  both  of  the  betrayal  and  of  the  arrest.  By  the 
time  Matthew's  Gospel  was  written,  the  phrase  had  become  a 
stereotyped  designation  of  the  traitor,  like  he  that  betrayed  him. 


Ch.  XXVI.]  MATTHEW.  141 

A  great  multitude.  The  Sanhedrin  had  neither  soldiery 
nor  a  regularly-armed  band  at  command.  In  John  xviii.  3, 
Judas  receives  a  cohort  of  soldiers  and  officers  from  the  chief 
priests  and  Pharisees.  Part  of  the  band  would  consist  of  this 
regularly-armed  cohort,  and  the  rest  of  a  crowd  armed  with 
cudgels,  and  embracing  some  of  the  servants  of  conspicuous 
men  in  the  Sanhedrin. 

49.  Kissed  him  [icarecjiiXrja-ev).  The  compound  verb  has  the 
force  of  an  emphatic,  ostentatious  salute.  Meyer  says  emhraoed 
and  kissed.  The  same  word  is  used  of  the  tender  caressing  of 
the  Lord's  feet  by  the  woman  in  the  Pharisee's  house  (Luke  vii. 
38),  of  the  father's  embrace  of  the  returned  prodigal  (Luke  xv. 
20),  and  of  the  farewell  of  the  Ephesian  elders  to  Paul  (Acts 
XX.  3Y). 

50.  Wherefore  art  thou  come  ?  (e</>'  o  irdpei).  The  inter- 
rogation of  the  A.  Y.  is  wrong.  The  expression  is  elliptical 
and  condensed.  Literally  it  is,  that  for  which  thou  art  here  y 
and  the  mind  is  to  supply  do  or  he  about.  The  Lord  spurns 
the  traitor's  embrace,  and  says,  in  effect,  "  Enough  of  this  hyp- 
ocritical fawning.  Do  what  you  are  here  to  do."  So  Eev., 
Do  that  for  which  thou  a/rt  come. 

51.  The  servant  (tov  hovhjov).  The  article  marks  the  spe- 
cial servant ;  the  Jo<^-servant. 

Ear  {mTiov).  A  diminutive  in  form  but  not  in  sense ;  accord- 
ing to  a  Greek  popular  usage  which  expressed  parts  of  the 
body  by  diminutives ;  as  pivia,  the  nostrils  ;  ofifidriov,  the  eye  ; 
<rapKiov,  the  hody.  Peter  aimed  his  blow  at  the  servant's  head, 
but  missed. 

52.  Put  up  again.     Peter  was  still  brandishing  his  sword. 

53.  Twelve  legions  of  angels.  Compare  the  story  of 
Elisha  at  Dothan  (2  Kings  vi.  17). 


142  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XXVL 

55.  A  thief  {XTjo-Trju).  Better  Eev.,  a  robber.  See  John  x. 
1,  8 ;  and  Luke  xxiii.  39-43.  It  is  more  than  a  petty  stealer; 
rather  one  with  associates,  who  would  require  an  armed  band  to 
apprehend  him.  Hence  the  propriety  of  the  reference  to  swords 
and  staves. 

I  sat  (iKo^e^ofiTjv).  The  imperfect  tense,  denoting  something 
habitual.     I  was  accustomed  to  sit. 

63.  I  adjure  thee.  I  call  upon  thee  to  swear.  The  high- 
priest  put  Christ  upon  oath. 

That  (iW).  In  order  that;  signifying  the  design  with  which 
he.adjured  the  Lord. 

64.  Thou  hast  said.  An  affirmation.  You  have  spoken 
the  truth.  What  thou  hast  asked  me  is  the  fact.  Compare 
ver.  25. 

Nevertheless  (tt-X^i/).  Howemer.  Apart  from  my  affirma- 
tion, you  shall  see  for  yourself. 

66.  Guilty  of  death  {€vo-)(p^  l^avdrov).  Rev.,  worthy  of 
death.  See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  18.  iv,  in,  exeo,  to  hold.  The  idea 
is,  literally,  holden  of  death  /  in  bonds  to  death. 

67.  Buffet  (6KoXa</)to-ai').     With  the  fist. 

Smote  with  the  palms  of  their  hands.  All  expressed  by 
one  word,  epdinaav,  from  pairk,  a  rod,  and  meaning  to  smite 
with  rods,  not  with  the  palms.  The  same  word  is  employed 
Matt.  V.  39.     It  came  to  mean  generally  to  strike. 

69.  A  damsel  {jiLa  iraiSia-Kij).  Lit.,  one  damsel,  because 
the  writer  has  in  mind  a  second  one  (ver.  71). 

71.  Gone  out.     Through  fear  of  being  further  questioned. 


Ch.  XXVn.]  MATTHEW.  143 

72.  The  man.     As  if  he  did  not  know  Jesus'  name. 

74.  To  curse  {KaTal^efiari^eiv).  Anew  development  of  pro- 
fanity. Hitherto  he  had  merely  sworn.  Now  he  adds  impre- 
cation; invoking  curses  on  himself  if  the  case  be  not  as  he  says. 

CHAPTER  XXYIL 
3.  Repented  himself  (jit6Ta/ie\»/,5e^?).     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  29. 

What  is  that  to  us?  They  ignore  the  question  of  Christ's 
innocence.  As  to  Judas'  sin  or  conscience,  that  is  Ms  matter. 
Thou  wilt  see  to  that. 

5.  In  the  temple.  But  the  best  reading  is  ek  tov  vaov,  into 
the  sa/incbucm).  He  cast  the  pieces  over  the  barrier  of  the  en- 
closure which  surrounded  the  sanctua/ry,  or  temple  proper,  and 
within  which  only  the  priests  were  allowed,  and  therefore  vnto 
the  sanctuary. 

6.  It  is  not  lawful.  In  such  cases  the  Jewish  law  provided 
that  the  money  was  to  be  restored  to  the  donor ;  and  if  he  in- 
sisted on  giving  it,  that  he  should  be  induced  to  spend  it  for 
something  for  the  public  weal.  This  explains  the  apparent  dis- 
crepancy between  Matthew's  account  and  that  in  the  book  of 
Acts  (i.  18).  By  a  fiction  of  the  law  the  money  was  still  con- 
sidered to  be  Judas',  and  to  have  been  applied  by  him  to  the 
purchase  of  the  potter's  field. 

Scarlet  {kokkCvtiv).  From  kokko^,  cochineal,  which  grew  in 
several  parts  of  Greece.  Garments  of  this  color  would  seem  to 
have  been  rare  among  the  orientals.  Herodotus  relates  that 
the  admiration  of  Darius,  then  an  oflScer  in  the  army,  was  ex- 
cited by  the  scarlet  cloak  of  a  Samian  exile,  who,  on  his  offering 
to  purchase  it,  presented  it  to  him,  and  was  afterward  richly 
rewarded  when  Darius  came  to  the  throne  (iii.  139). 


144  WOKD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVIL 

28.  Robe  (x^afivBa).  The  short  military  cloak  which  kings 
and  emperors  as  well  as  soldiers  wore. 

32.  Compelled  to  go  {■^'yydpevcrav).  See  on  Matt.  v.  41. 
Eev.  has  imjpressed  in  margin. 

33.  Golgotha.  An  Aramaic  word,  Gulgoltha,  =  the  Hebrew, 
Gulgoleth,  and  translated  sJcull  in  Judg.  ix.  53  ;  2  Kings  ix.  35. 
The  word  Calvary  comes  through  the  Latin  calva/ria,  meaning 
shull,  and  used  in  the  Yulgate.  The  New  Testament  narrative 
does  not  mention  a  mount  or  hill.  The  place  was  probably  a 
rounded  elevation.  The  meaning  is  not,  as  Tynd.,  a^lace  of 
dead  men^s  skulls,  but  simply  skull. 

34.  Wine  (ohov).  The  older  texts  read  o^o<i,  vinegar.  The 
compound  of  wine  and  gall  was  intended  as  a  stupefying 
draught. 

36.  Watched  {erripovv).  Or,  to  give  the  'force  of  the  imper- 
fect tense,  kept  watch.  This  was  to  prevent  the  infliction  of 
wanton  cruelties,  and  also  to  prevent  what  sometimes  happened, 
the  taking  down  and  restoring  of  the  victim. 

37.  Accusation  {ahlav).  Lit.,  cause,  and  so  rendered  by 
"Wye.  Tynd.,  cause  of  his  death.  The  word  accusation  is  com- 
pounded with  the  Latin  causa,  a  cause.  It  is  the  cause  of  his 
condemnation  and  suffering. 

38.  Thieves.  (Xrja-Tac).    Eev.,  rohhers.    See  on  Matt.  xxvi. 

65. 

42.  He  saved  others,  etc.  The  Greek  order  is.  Others  he 
saved;  himself  he  cannot  sanje. 

43.  If  he  will  have  him  {el  MXei  ainov).  Kev.,  correctly, 
^  he  desireth  him :  i.e..  If  he  Wees  him.  Compare  Ps.  xviii 
(Sept.  xvii.)  19  ;  lecause  he  delighted  in  me  {■^^eXTjo-e  /le),  Ps. 
xli.  (Sept.  xl.)  11  (re^^X^/ea?  /te). 


Ch.  XXVII.]  MATTHEW.  145 

36.  Ninth  hour.  "Early  on  Friday  afternoon  the  new 
course  of  priests,  of  Levites,  and  of  the  '  stationary  men '  who 
were  to  be  the  representatives  of  all  Israel,  arrived  in  Jerusa- 
lem, and  having  prepared  themselves  for  the  festive  season 
went  up  to  the  temple.  The  approach  of  the  Sabbath,  and  then 
its  actual  commencement,  were  announced  by  threefold  blasts 
from  the  priests'  trumpets.  The  first  three  blasts  were  blown 
when  one-third  of  the  evening-sacritice  service  was  over,  or 
about  the  ninth  hour ;  that  is,  about  3  p.m.  on  Friday  "  (Eders- 
heim,« The  Temple"). 

48.  Vinegar  (ofous).  Sour  wine ;  the^osca  or  ordinary  drink 
of  the  Koman  soldiers. 

Gave  him  to  drink  (eVort^ej').  The  imperfect  tense  implies 
was  in  the  act  of  giving,  or  aiout  to  give.  At  this  point  the  Jews 
standing  near  interposed,  saying,  Zet  he  (a^e?) !  "  Stop !  Do  not 
give  him  the  drink.     Let  us  see  if  Elijah  will  come  to  his  aid." 

50.  Yielded  up  the  ghost  {d^rJKe  to  irvevfia).  Lit.,  dis- 
missed his  spirit.  Eev.,  yielded  wp  his  spirit.  The  fact  that 
the  evangelists,  in  describing  our  Lord's  death,  do  not  use  the 
neuter  verb,  eSavev,  he  died,  but  he  hreathed  out  his  life  (i^- 
eTTvevcre,  Mark  xv.  37),  he  gave  up  his  spirit  {-TrapeScoKe  rb  'rrvev- 
fia,  John  xix.  30),  seems  to  imply  a  voluntary  yielding  up  of  his 
life.  Compare  John  x.  18.  Augustine  says,  "  He  gave  up  his 
life  ieoause  he  vi^illed  it,  when  he  willed  it,  and  as  he  willed  it." 

51.  The  veil  of  the  temple.  According  to  the  Kabbis  this 
was  a  handbreadth  in  thickness,  and  woven  of  seventy-two 
twisted  plaits,  each  plait  consisting  of  twenty-four  threads.  It 
was  sixty  feet  long  and  thirty  wide.  Two  of  them  were  made 
every  year,  and  according  to  tlie  exaggerated  language  of  the 
time  it  needed  three  hundred  priests  to  manipulate  it.  This 
veil  was  the  one  which  covered  the  entrance  to  the  holy  of 
holies,  and  not,  as  has  been  asserted,  the  veil  which  hung  before 
the  main  entrance  to  the  sanctuary.  The  holy  of  holies  con- 
tained only  a  large  stone,  on  which  the  high-priest  sprinkled 

10 


146  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVIL 

the  blood  on  the  day  of  atonement,  occupying  the  place  where 
the  ark  with  the  mercy-seat  had  stood. 

54.  The  Son  of  God.  But  there  is  no  article.  The  words 
must  not  be  construed  as  a  recognition  of  Christ's  divine  son- 
ship.  They  were  uttered  by  a  pagan  soldier  in  his  own  sense 
of  a  demigod  or  hero.  Yet  they  may  have  taken  color  from 
the  fact  that  the  soldiers  had  heard  from  the  chief  priests  and 
others  that  Christ  had  claimed  to  be  God's  son. 

55.  Which  had  followed  (aiVti/e?).  Denoting  a  class :  who 
were  of  the  body  of  women  that  had  followed  him. 

56.  Magdalene  {-q  MaySaXrjvt)).  Neither  Mary  of  Bethany 
(Matt.  xxvi.  6-13)  nor  the  woman  who  had  been  a  sinner  (Luke 
vii.  37-48).  The  word  denotes  merely  her  town  :  She  of  Mag - 
dala. 

57.  When  even  was  come.  The  Hebrews  reckoned  two 
evenings,  an  earlier  and  a  later.  The  former  began  midway 
between  noon  atid  sunset,  or  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 
The  latter  began  at  sunset,  six  o'clock.  The  reference  here  is 
to  the  earlier  evening,  though  the  time  may  have  been  well  on 
toward  the  beginning  of  the  later.  The  preparations  had  to  be 
hurried  because  the  Sabbath  would  begin  at  sunset, 

60.  New  tomb  {Kaww).  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29.  Not  newly 
hewn,  hxii  fresh,  uudefiled  by  anybody. 

A  great  stone.  Though  in  the  Jews'  sepulchres  in  general 
there  were  doors  hung  on  hinges,  the  grooves  and  perforations 
for  which  may  still  be  seen.  Joseph's  tomb  may  have  been 
differently  constructed,  or  else  was  in  an  unfinished  state. 

63.  We  remember  {eixvrjar^ixev).  Lit.,  we  remembered :  i.e., 
it  occurred  to  us  :  we  have  just  remembered,  and  have  come  to 
tell  you  before  it  shall  be  too  late. 


Ch.  XXVin.]  MATTHEW.  147 

That  deceiver  {iKeivo<s  6  irXdvos;).  The  pronoun  that  is  very 
picturesque  ;  being  used  of  distant  objects,  and  therefore  here 
as  pointing  to  one  who  is  out  of  the  way  and  far  removed. 
nxdvoi,  deceiver,  is  akin  to  -irXavdm,  to  wmder;  and  hence  a 
vagabond  impostor. 

64.  Error  i^Xdvi)).  ISTot,  as  many  render,  deceit  or  imposture, 
referring  to  irXdvo^  above ;  but  the  error  on  the  people's  part. 
The  last  error,  namely,  the  false  impression  that  he  has  risen 
from  the  dead,  will  be  worse  than  the  iirst  error — the  impression 
made  by  his  impostures  that  he  was  the  Messiah. 

65.  Ye  have  (eyere).  Or,  as  some  render,  imperatively : 
Have  a  guard  !     Rev.,  in  margin,  tahe. 

66.  Sealing  the  stone  and  setting  a  watch  {<T^parii<yavr^<i 
Tov  Id^ov,  fierd  TJ79  Kov<7ro)Sia<;).  Lit.,  having  sealed  the  stone 
with  the  watch.  Eev.,  Sealing  the  stone,  the  guard  hein^  with 
them.  This  is  rather  awkward,  but  the  rendering  rightly  cor- 
rects the  A.  V.  The  idea  is  that  they  sealed  the  stone  in  the 
presence  of  the  guard,  and  then  left  them  to  keep  watch.  It 
would  be  important  that  the  guard  should  witness  the  sealing. 
The  sealing  was  performed  by  stretching  a  cord  across  the  stone 
and  fastening  it  to  the  rock  at  either  end  by  means  of  sealing 
clay.  Or,  if  the  stone  at  the  door  happened  to  be  fastened  with 
a  cross  beam,  this  latter  was  sealed  to  the  rock. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

3.  Countenance  (elSia).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  appearance. 
The  word  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  It  does 
not  refer  to  the  face  alone,  but  to  the  general  aspect.  Wye, 
looking. 

As  lightning.  In  effulgence.  Each  evangelist's  account  of 
the  resurrection  emphasizes  different  particulars.  Matthew 
alone  notes  the  outward  glory,  the  earthquake,  the  agency  of 


148  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    [Ch.  XXVIIL 

the  ange],  and  the  impotence  of  the  military  and  priestly  power 
to  crush  the  new  faith.  He  only  notices  the  adoration  of  the 
risen  Lord  before  his  ascension,  and  traces  to  its  origin  the  cal- 
umny current  among  the  Jews  to  this  day. 

7.  He  goeth  before  you  {Trpoayei).    He  is  in  the  act  of 

going.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  32. 

9.  All  hail  (^aipere).  The  ordinary  Greek  form  of  saluta- 
tion. 

12.  Large  money  (apyvpta  iKava).  Lit.,  sufficient  money. 
Enough  to  bribe  them  to  invent  a  lie. 

14.  We  will  persuade  {ireiaoiMev).  i.e.,  satisfy  or  wppease. 
Compare  Gal.  i.  10.     "  Do  I  conciliate  men  or  God  ? " 

Secure  you  {yfia<;  a/jjepi/ivov;  Tronjaofjuev).  Lit.,  make  you 
without  care.  The  word  secure,  however,  is,  etymologically,  a 
correct  rendering.  It  is  from  the  Latin  se  =  sine,  without,  and 
Gura,  care.  It  has  passed  into  the  popular  meaning  to  maTce 
safe.  Compare  1  Cor.  vii.  32.  "  I  would  have  you  to  be  free 
from  ca/res  "  (Rev.). 

17.  Worshipped  (irpotreKvvqaav).  As  in  ver.  9.  Prostrated 
themselves.  The  first  time  that  the  disciples  are  described  as 
doing  so. 

18.  Came  to.  Yerse  17  evidently  describes  the  impression 
made  by  seeing  him  at  a  distance.  Possibly  from  feelings  of 
modesty  they  had  not  ventured  close  to  him.  Jesus  now  ap- 
proaches and  addresses  them. 

Spake — saying  {iXaXrja-eu — Xiycov).  Two  different  words 
are  here  used  to  express  speech,  with  a  nice  distinction  which 
can  hardly  be  conveyed  without  paraphrase.  The  verb  TuiKeiv 
is  used  of  speaking,  in  contrast  with  or  as  a  breaking  of  silence, 
voluntary  or  imposed.     Thus  the  dumb  man,  after   he   was 


Ch.  XXVIII.]  MATTHEW.  149 

healed,  sjpake  {ikdX'rja-ev) ;  and  Zacharias,  when  his  tongue  was 
loosed,  began  to  speak  (iXaXei).  In  the  use  of  the  word  the 
writer  contemplates  the  fact  rather  than  the  substance  of  speech. 
Hence  it  is  used  of  God  (Heb.  i.  1),  the  point  being,  not  what 
God  said,  but  the  fact  that  he  spake  to  men.  On  the  contra- 
ry, Xiyeiv  refers  to  the  matter  of  speech.  The  verb  originally 
means  iopich  out,  and  hence  to  use  words  selected  as  appropriate 
expressions  of  thought,  and  to  put  such  words  together  in  or- 
derly discourse.  Here,  then,  we  have  Jesus  first  breahing  si- 
lence (eXaXr)a-ev),  and  then  discoursing  (Xeyav). 

Power  {i^ovcTia).    Better,  authority,  as  Hev. 

Is  given  {iB69^).     Lit.,  wasgi/ven,  by  the  divine  decree. 

19.  Teach  {(uiSijTevaaTe).     Kev.,  rightly,  make  disciples  of. 

In  the  name  (et?  to  ovofia).  Kev.,  correctly,  ^'^  into  the 
name."  Baptizing  into  the  name  has  a  twofold  meaning.  1. 
Unto,  denoting  object  or  purpose,  as  et?  fierdvoiav,  unto  repent- 
ance (Matt.  iii.  11)  ;  et?  a<^ecrn/  dfiaprtuv,  for  the  rem,issio7i  of 
sins  (Acts  ii.  38).  2.  Into,  denoting  union  or  communion  with, 
as  Kom.  vi.  3,  "baptized  into  Christ  Jesus  ;  into  his  death;" 
i.e.,  we  are  brought  by  baptism  into  fellowship  with  his  death. 
Baptizing  into  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  implies  a  spiritual 
and  mystical  union  with  him.  Eh,  into,  is  the  preposition 
commonly  used  with  baptize.  See  Acts  viii.  16 ;  xix.  3,  5  ;  1 
Cor.  i.  13,  15 ;  x.  2 ;  Gal.  iii.  27.  In  Acts  ii.  38,  however, 
Peter  says,  "  Be  baptized  upon  {eTrl)  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  in  Acts  x.  48,  he  commands  Cornelius  and  his  friends  to  be 
baptized  in  (eV)  the  name  of  the  Lord.  To  be  baptized  upon 
the  name  is  to  be  baptized  on  the  confession  of  that  which  the 
name  implies :  on  the  ground  of  the  name ;  so  that  the  name 
Jesus,  as  the  contents  of  the  faith  and  confession,  is  the  ground 
upon  which  the  becoming  baptized  rests.  In  the  name  {iv)  has 
reference  to  the  sphere  within  which  alone  true  baptism  is  ac- 
complished. The  name  is  not  the  mere  designation,  a  sense 
which  would  give  to  the  baptismal  formula  merely  the  force  of 


150  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    [Ch.  XXVni. 

a  cha/rm.  The  name,  as  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  ("  Hallowed  be 
thy  name  "),  is  the  expression  of  the  sum  total  of  the  divine 
Being :  not  his  designation  as  God  or  Lord,  but  the  formula  in 
which  all  his  attributes  and  characteristics  are  summed  up.  It 
is  equivalent  to  \n.B  person.  The  finite  mind  can  deal  with  him 
only  through  his  name ;  but  his  name  is  of  no  avail  detached 
from  his  nature.  When  one  is  baptized  into  the  name  of  the 
Trinity,  he  professes  to  acknowledge  and  appropriate  God  in 
all  that  he  is  and  in  all  that  he  does  for  man.  He  recognizes 
and  depends  upon  God  the  Father  as  his  Creator  and  Preserver ; 
receives  Jesus  Christ  as  his  only  Mediator  and  Kedeemer,  and 
his  pattern  of  life ;  and  confesses  the  Holy  Spirit  as  his  Sancti- 
fier  and  Comforter. 

Alway  (Trao-a?  ra?  ij/iepa?).  Lit.,  all  the  days.  Wye,  in  all 
days. 

20,  End  of  the  world  {a-vvreXeui';  tov  alwvos:).  Rev.,  in 
margin,  and  lit.,  consummation  of  the  age.  The  current  age  is 
meant;  and  the  consv/inmation  is  coincident  with  the  second 
coming  of  Christ,  after  the  Gospel  shall  have  been  proclaimed 
throughout  the  world.  "  The  Saviour's  mind  goes  no  farther  ; 
for  after  that,  evangelizing  work  will  cease.  No  man,  after  that, 
will  need  to  teach  his  neighbor,  saying,  '  Know  the  Lord ' " 
(Jer.  xxxi.  34)  (Morison  "On  Matthew"). 


LIST  OF  GKEEK  WORDS  USED  BY  MATTHEW  ONLY. 


ayyelov,  vessel,  xiii.,  48 ;  xxv.,  4 
ayKKTTpov,  hook,  xvii.,  27 
riSmof,  innocent,  xxvii.,  4,  24 
aifioppoea,  having  an  issue  of  blood, 

ix.,  20 
aipcrifu),  choose,  xii.,  18 
aKfjifiv,  yet,  XV.,  16 
a/cpi/Soo),  inquire  diligently,  ii. ,  7,  16 
aKajSi/Sufm,  draw  up,  xiii.,  48 
dvainos,  blameless,  xii.,  5,  7 
airrjUov,  anise,  xxiii.,  23 
d7ray;(o;iiai,  hang  one's  self,  xxvii.,  5 
a.TvovmTa>,  wash,  xxvii.,  24 
/3ap,  son,  xvi.,  17 
^apuTLfjios,  very  precious,  xxvi.,  7 
^aerai/ioTijr,  tormentor,  xviii.,  34 
^aTToXoyiw,    use    vain    repetitions, 

vi.,  7 
0ia(rrijr,  violent,  xi.,  12 
Ppoxr),  rain,  vii.,  25,  27 
fidefiov,  debt,  xviii.,  27 
dfii/a  (o),  such  a  man,  xxvi.,  18 
dea-p-T),  bundles,  xiii.,  30 
SiuKcoXuo),  forbid,  iii.,  14 
StaWdrropai,  be  reconciled,  v.,  24 

hiaa-ac^ia,  tell,  XViii.,  31 
SiSpaxpov,  half -shekel,  xvii.,  24 
8if'|o8oy,  parting  of  the  highways, 

xxii.,  9 
fiicTijf,  two  years  old,  ii.,  16 
Sio-Tafo),  doubt,  xiv.,  31 ;  xxviii.,  17 
SiiJXifw,  strain  through,  xxiii.,  24 
SiX^^'^,  set  at  variance,  x.,  35 
ifiSoprjKovTdKi,!,  seventy  times,  xviii., 

22 


('yepa-is,  resurrection,  xxvii.,  53 
eSviKos,  Gentile,  v.,  47  ;  vi.,  7; xviii., 

17 
eiSea,  countenance,  xxviii.,  3 
iiprjvovoios,  peacemaker,  v.,  9 
cKXapno),  shine  forth,  xiii.,  43 
'Eppavovi^X,  Emmanuel,  i.,  23 
ipiTopia,  merchandise,  xxii.,  5 
ipTTpffHa,  burn  up,  xxii.,  7 
e^opKi^m,  adjure,  xxvi.,  63 
i^artpos,  outer,  viii.,  12  ;  xxii.,  13  ; 

XXV.,  30 
emyapffpeva,  marry,  xxii.,  24 
imKu'Sii^ai,  to  set  upon,  xxi.,  7 
iiTLopKew,  forswear,  v.,  33 
iiTKmelpoi,  SOW  upon,  xiii.,  25 
ipevyopat,  utter,  xiii.,  35 
ipl^ai,  strive,  xii.,  19 
iplfjuov,  goat,  kid,  xxv.,  33 
halpos,  fellow,  friend,  xi.,  16  ;  xx., 

13  ;  xxii.,  12 ;  xxvi.,  50 
evb'ia,  fair  weather,  xvi.,  2 
euKoem,  agree,  v.,  25 
eiivovxli<o,  make  a  eunuch,  xix.,  12 
evpvx(i>poi,  broad,  vii.,  13 
ftfdwo,  tares,  xiii.,  25-40 
'hXi',  my  God,  xxvii.,  46 
Sau/xdo-ior,  wonderful,  xxi.,  15 
SepKTTijf,  reaper,  xiii.,  30,  39 
^pfjvos,  lamentation,  ii.,  18 
?lvp6opai,  to  be  wroth,  ii.,  16 
lira,  jot,  v.,  18 
Ka3d,  as,  xxvii.,  10 
Ka^TjyriTrjs,  master,  xxiii.,  8,  10 
Karapav'Sdvai,  Consider,  vi.,  28 


152         LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  MATTHEW  ONLY. 


KnTaraSf/iaTifo),  curse,  xxvi ,  74 
KaTan-ovTl^ofim,   sink,    be    drowned, 

xiv.,  30;  xyiii.,  6 
K^Tos,  whale,  xii.,  40 
KovaraBia,  watch,  guard,  xxvii.,  65, 

66;  xxviii.,  11 
Kpvtpaios,  secret,  vi.,  18 
KufiLvov,  cummin,  xxiii.,  23 
Ku>voi\lr,  gnat,  xxiii.,  24 
/iaXaxia,  sickness,  iv.,  23;  ix.,  35; 

X.,  1 
fielCo",  the  more,  xx.,  31 
fiiTaipo),  depart,  xiii.,  53  ;  xix.,  1 
fieroiKeo-ia,  carrying  away,  i.,  11,  12, 

17 
filXiov,  mile,  v.,  41 
/uicrSoo/iai,  hire,  xx.,  1,  7 
fivXav,  mill,  xxiv.,  41 
voiwTiia,  tribute-money,  xxii.,  19 
vocra-La,  brood,  xxiii.,  37 
oiKfVfia,  household,  xxiv.,  25 
oliuaKos,  belonging  to  the  house,  x., 

25,36 
&vap,  dream,  i.,  20;  ii.,  12,  13,  19, 

22;  xxvii.,  19 
oiSafimr,  by  no  means,  ii.,  6 
irayiSeva,  ensnare,  xxii.,  15 
TrapaSaXao-o-ior,  upon  the  sea-coast, 

iv.,  13 
napaKova,  neglect,  xviii.,  17 
Trapo/ioiiifo),  to  be  like  unto,  xxiii.,  27 
Trapo^jfis,  platter,  xxiii.,  25 
TrXarvs,  wide,  vli.,  13 


no\v\oy ia,  much-speaking,  vi.,  7 
Trpo<faava,  forestall,  xvii.,  25 
■nvppa^w,  to  be  red  or  fiery,  xvi.,  2, 3 
poKa,  Eaca,  v.,  22 
paniCoi,  smite,  v.,  39  ;  xxvi.,  67 
aayrjvrj,  drag-net,  xiii.,  47 
(re\rivi.d^ofim,  to  be  lunatic,  iv.,  24 ; 

xvii.,  15. 
(TiTicrros,  fatling,  xxii.,  4 
araTrjp,   stater ;    piece    of    money, 

xvii.,  27 
<rvvaipa>,  take  (a  reckoning),  xviii., 

23,  24;  XXV.,  19 
a-vvduTTja-is,  meeting,  viii.,  34 
o-vvav^dvofjLai,  grow  together,  xiii.,  30 
iTvi/Tdtr<ra>,  appoint,  xxvi.,  19;  xxvii., 

10 
ToKavTov,  talent,    xviii.,    24;    xxv., 

15-28 
Ta(pT],  burial,  xxvii.,  7 
reXcvTrj,  end  (in  sense  of  death),  ii., 

15 
T-paTrffiTT^f,  exchanger,  xxv.,  27 
TpilTTjj/ia,  eye  (of  a  needle),  xix.,  24 
Tvcf>6a>,  to  smoke,  xii.,  20 
ippd^o),  declare,  xiii.,  36;  xv.,  15 
(pvXaKTripioD,  phylactery,  xxiii.,  5 
cpvTcia,  plant,  XV.,  13 
X^afivs,  robe,  xxvii.,  28,  31 
■^fvSoiicipTvpla,   false    witness,    xv., 

19;  xxvi.,  59. 
^ixoyxu,  wax  cold,  xxiv.,  12 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  MARK. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Maek  the  Evai^gelist  is,  by  the  best  authorities,  identified 
with  John  Marl?,  the  son  of  Mary.  The  surname  Mark  was 
adopted  for  use  among  the  Gentiles ;  Mark  {Ma/rcus)  being  one 
of  the  commonest  Latin  names  (compare  Marcus  Tullius  Cic- 
ero, Marcus  Aurelius),  as  John  was  one  of  the  commonest 
Hebrew  names.  Mark  was  a  cousin  of  Barnabas,  and  was,  from 
a  very  early  period,  the  intimate  friend  and  associate  of  Peter 
(Acts  xii.  11-17),  who  affectionately  refers  to  him  as  "  my  son  " 
at  the  close  of  his  first  epistle.  The  general  opinion  of  the 
fathers,  as  well  as  that  of  modern  authorities,  is  that  Mark  drew 
the  great  mass  of  his  materials  from  the  oral  discourses  of  Peter. 
This  opinion  was  perpetuated  in  Christian  art,  in  representa- 
tions of  Peter  seated  on  a  throne  with  Mark  kneeling  before 
him  and  writing  from  his  dictation ;  Mark  sitting  and  writing, 
and  Peter  standing  before  him,  with  his  hand  raised,  dictating ; 
and  Peter  in  a  pulpit,  preaching  to  the  Romans,  and  Mark  tak- 
ing down  his  words  in  a  book  (see  Mrs.  Jameson,  "  Sacred  and 
Legendary  Art,"  i.,  149). 

This  opinion  finds  support  in  the  evidences  of  Peter's  in- 
fluence upon  the  style  of  this  Gospel.  The  restlessness  and  im- 
petuosity of  Mark's  disposition,  of  which  we  have  hints  in  his 
forsaking  Paul  and  Barnabas  at  Perga  (Acts  xiii.  13 ;  xv.  38), 
in  his  subsequent  readiness  to  join  them  on  the  second  mission- 
ary journey  (Acts  xv.  39),  and,  if  the  tradition  be  accepted,  in 
his  rushing  into  the  street  on  the  night  of  Christ's  arrest,  clad 
only  in  a  linen  sheet  (Mark  xiv.  51,  52),  would  naturally  be  in 


154  INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK. 

sympathy  with  the  well-known  character  of  Peter.  Peter  was 
a  man  of  observation  and  action  rather  than  of  reflection  ;  im- 
pulsive and  impetuous.  "  When  we  assume,"  says  Dr.  Mori- 
son,  "  that  Mark  drew  directly  from  the  discoursings  of  St. 
Peter,  then  we  understand  how  it  comes  to  pass  tliat  it  is  in  his 
pages  that  we  have  the  most  particular  account  of  that  lament- 
able denial  of  his  Lord  of  which  the  apostle  was  guilty.  On 
no  other  person's  memory  would  the  minute  particulars  of  the 
prediction,  and  of  its  unanticipated  fulfilment,  be  so  indelibly 
engraven.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that,  while  the  very  severe 
rebuke  which  our  Lord  administered  to  St.  Peter  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Caesarea  Philippi  is  faithfully  and  circumstantially 
recorded  in  Mark's  pages,  the  splendid  eulogium  and  distin- 
guishing blessing,  which  had  been  previously  pronounced,  are, 
as  it  were,  modestly  passed  by.  Doubtless  the  great  apostle 
would  not  be  guilty  of  making  frequent  or  egotistic  references 
to  such  marks  of  distinction  "  ("  Commentary  on  Mark  "). 

Unlike  the  other  gospels,  Mark's  narrative  is  not  subordinated 
to  the  working  out  of  any  one  idea.  Matthew's  memoirs  turn  on 
the  relation  of  Christ  to  the  law  and  the  prophets.  He  throws  a 
bridge  from  the  old  economy  to  the  new.  His  is  the  Gospel  as 
related  to  the  past,  the  Gospel  of  Christianity  regarded  as  the 
fulfilment  of  Judaism.  Luke  exhibits  Jesus  as  a  Saviour,  and 
expounds  the  freeness  and  universality  of  the  Gospel,  and  the 
sacredness  of  humanity.  John  wrote  that  men  might  believe 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and  might  have  life  in  him.  "While 
Matthew  and  Luke  deal  with  his  offices,  John  deals  with  his 
person.  John  carries  forward  the  piers  of  Matthew's  bridge 
toward  that  perfected  heavenly  economy  of  which  his  Apoca- 
lypse reveals  glimpses.  In  Matthew  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  ;  in 
John,  the  Eternal  Wwd.  In  Matthew  he  is  the  f ulfiller  of  the 
law  ;  in  Jolm  he  foreshadows  the  grander  and  richer  economy 
of  the  Spirit. 

Mark,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  chronicler  rather  than  a  his- 
torian. His  narrative  is  the  record  of  an  observer,  dealing 
with  the  facts  of  Christ's  life  without  reference  to  any  domi- 
nant conception  of  his  person  or  office.  Christ's  portrait  is 
drawn  "  in  the  clearness  of  his  present  energy ; "  not  as  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK.  155 

fulfilment  of  the  past,  as  by  Matthew,  nor  as  the  foundation  of 
the  future,  as  by  John.  His  object  is  to  portray  Jesus  in  his 
daily  life,  "  in  the  awe-inspiring  grandeur  of  his  human  per- 
sonality, as  a  man  who  was  also  the  Incarnate,  the  wonder- 
working Son  of  God."  Hence  his  first  words  are  the  appro- 
priate keynote  of  his  Gospel :  "  The  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God." 

Such  a  narrative  might  have  been  expected  from  Petei-, 
with  his  keen-sightedness,  his  habit  of  observation,  and  his 
power  of  graphically  describing  what  he  was  so  quick  to  per- 
ceive. There  is,  of  course,  less  room  for  the  exhibition  of  these 
traits  in  his  epistles,  though  they  emerge  even  there  in  certain 
peculiar  and  picturesque  words,  and  in  expressions  which  reflect 
incidents  of  his  personal  association  with  Christ.  Those  brief 
epistles  contain  over  a  hundred  words  which  occur  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament.  Certain  narratives  in  the  Book  of 
Acts  record  incidents  in  which  Peter  was  the  principal  or  the 
only  apostolic  actor,  and  the  account  of  which  must  have  come 
from  his  own  lips  ;  and  these  narratives  bear  the  marks  of  his 
keen  observation,  and  are  characterized  by  his  picturesque 
power.  Such  are  the  accounts  of  the  healing  of  the  cripple  at 
the  temple-gate  (iii.) ;  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  (v.) ;  of  Peter's 
deliverance  from  prison  (xii.)  ;  of  the  raising  of  Dorcas  (ix.)  ; 
and  of  the  vision  of  the  great  sheet  (x.).  In  these,  especially  if 
we  compare  them  with  narratives  which  Luke  has  evidently  re- 
ceived from  other  sources,  we  are  impressed  with  the  picturesque 
vividness  of  the  story ;  the  accurate  notes  of  time  and  place 
and  number ;  the  pictorial  expressions,  the  quick  transitions ; 
the  frequent  use  of  such  words  as  straightway,  immediately ; 
the  substitution  of  dialogue  for  narrative,  and  the  general  ful- 
ness of  detail. 

All  these  characteristics  appear  in  Mark's  Gospel,  and  are 
justly  regarded  as  indicating  the  influence  of  Peter,  though 
comparatively  few  of  the  same  words  are  employed  by  both  ;  a 
fact  which  may  be,  in  great  part,  accounted  for  by  the  differ- 
ence between  a  hortatory  epistle  and  a  narrative.  The  traces  of 
Peter's  quick  perception  and  dramatic  and  picturesque  power  are 
everywhere  visible  in  Mark.     While  Matthew  fully  records  the 


156  INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK. 

discourses  of  our  Lord,  Mark  pictures  his  deeds.  Hence,  while 
Matthew  gives  us  fifteen  of  his  parables,  Mark  reproduces  only 
four,  and  that  in  a  condensed  form.  "  Mark  does  not  wear 
the  flowing  robes  of  Matthew.  His  dress  is  'for  speed  suc- 
cinct.' Swift-paced,  incisive,  his  narrative  proceeds  straight  to 
the  goal,  like  a  Roman  soldier  on  his  march  to  battle."  His 
Gospel  is  the  Gospel  of  the  present,  not  of  the  past.  His  refer- 
ences to  the  Old  Testament,  with  the  exception  of  i.  2,  3,  are 
quotations  occurring  in  the  discourses  of  Christ,  or  cited  by 
others.  They  belong,  as  Canon  Farrar  observes,  "  to  the  nar- 
rative, not  to  the  recorder  "  (xv.  28  is  an  interpolation).  The 
word  v6/j,o<;,  law,  never  occurs  in  Mark  nor  in  Peter. 

Mark's  is,  therefore,  pre-eminently  the  pictorial  Gospel:  the 
Gospel  of  detail.  "  There  is,"  says  Canon  Westcott,  "  perhaps 
not  one  narrative  which  he  gives  in  common  with  Matthew  and 
Luke,  to  which  he  does  not  contribute  some  special  feature." 
Thus  he  adds  to  John  the  Baptist's  picture  of  loosing  the  shoe- 
latchet  another  touch,  in  the  words  to  stoop  down  (i.  T).  He 
uses  a  more  gi-aphic  term  to  describe  the  opening  of  the 
heavens  at  Christ's  baptism.  According  to  Matthew  and  Luke 
the  heavens  were  opened  [avew'x^crav)  ;  Mark  depicts  them  as 
o'ent  asunder  {axi'^ofjL.evov'; ;  i.  10).  Matthew  and  Luke  repre- 
sent Jesus  as  led  (dvi^x^)  i^^to  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  ; 
Mark  as  driven  (ew/SaXXet) ;  adding,  Se  was  with  the  wild 
heasts  ;  to  which  some  detect  a  reference  in  Peter's  comparison 
of  the  devil  to  a  roaring  lion  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  He  gives  a  realistic 
toiich  to  the  story  of  James  and  John  forsaking  their  employ- 
ment at  the  call  of  Jesus,  by  adding  that  they  left  their  father 
with  the  hired  servants  (i.  20).  After  the  discourse  from  the 
boat  to  the  multitude  upon  the  shore,  Mark  alone  tells  us  that 
the  disciples  sent  away  the  multitude,  and  throws  in  the  little 
details,  they  took  him  as  he  was  /  and  there  were  with  them 
other  little  ships  (iv.  36).  His  account  of  the  storm  which  fol- 
lowed is  more  vivid  than  Matthew's  or  Luke's.  He  pictures 
the  waves  heating  into  the  boat,  and  the  boat  beginning  to  fill ; 
notes  the  steersman's  cushion  at  the  stem  on  which  the  sleep- 
ing Lord's  head  reposed  (iv.  37,  38)  ;  and  throws  the  awaking 
by  the  disciples  and  the  stilling  of  the  tempest  into  a  dramatic 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK.  157 

form  by  the  distressful  question,  Master,  carest  thou  not  that 
we  perish  ?  and  the  command  to  the  sea  as  to  a  raging  mon- 
ster, Peace!    Be  still!  (iv.  38,  39). 

In  the  narrative  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  only 
Mark  relates  the  Saviour's  question,  How  many  loaves  have  ye? 
Go  and  see  (vi.  38).  An  oriental  crowd  abounds  in  color,  and 
to  Mark  we  are  indebted  for  the  gay  picture  of  the  crowds  ar- 
ranged on  the  green  grass,  in  companies,  like  flower-heds  with 
their  varied  hues.  He  alone  specifies  the  division  of  the  two 
fishes  a/mong  them  all  (vi.  39,  41).  He  tells  how  Jesus,  walk- 
ing on  the  sea,  would  home  passed  hy  the  disciples'  boat ;  he  ex- 
presses their  cry  of  terror  at  Christ's  appearance  by  a  stronger 
word  than  Matthew,  using  the  compound  verb  avixpa^av  where 
Matthew  uses  the  simple  verb  expa^av.  He  adds,  they  all  saw 
him  (vi.  48-50).  When  Jesus  descends  from  the  mount  of  trans- 
figuration, it  is  Mark  that  fills  out  the  incident  of  the  disciples' 
controversy  with  the  bystanders  by  relating  that  the  scribes  were 
questioning  with  them.  He  notes  the  amazement  which,  for 
whatever  reason,  fell  upon  the  people  at  Jesus'  appearance,  their 
running  to  salute  him,  and  his  inquiry.  What  question  ye  with 
tliem  ?  (ix.  14, 16).  Mark  gives  us  the  bystanders'  encouragement 
of  Bartimeus  when  summoned  by  Jesus,  and  tells  how  he  cast  off 
his  outer  garment  and  leaped  up  (x.  49,  50).  He  alone  relates 
the  breaking  oi  the  alabaster  by  the  woman  (xiv.  3),  and  Clirist's 
taking  the  little  child  in  his  arms  after  he  had  set  him  in  the 
midst  (ix.  36). 

In  the  account  of  the  two  demoniacs  of  Gadara,  Matthew 
(viii.)  relates  that  they  were  met  coming  out  of  the  tombs,  and 
that  they  were  exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  one  could  pass  that 
way.  Mark  mentions  only  one  demoniac,  but  adds  that  he  had 
Ms  dwelling  in  the  toinlas  {KaToUrjo-iv  elxev,  stronger  than 
Luke's  abode,  efievev) ;  that  the  attempt  had  been  made  to  fetter 
him,  but  that  he  had  broken  the  fetters ;  and  that  he  was  day 
and  night  in  the  tombs  and  in  the  mountains,  crying  and  cut- 
ting himself  with  stones  (v.  3-6).  In  the  interview  with  the 
lawyer  who  desired  to  know  what  kind  of  a  commandment  was 
great  in  the  law,  Matthew  (xxii.  34-40)  ends  the  dialogue  with 
Jesus'  answer  to  this  question.     Mark  gives  the  lawyer's  reply 


158  INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK. 

and  his  enlargement  npon  Jesns'  answer,  the  fact  that  Jesus 
observed  that  he  answered  discreetly,  and  his  significant  words, 
Thou  art  not  far  from  the  Jcingdom  of  God. 

It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  account  of  Herod's  feast  and 
John  the  Baptist's  raTirder  as  given  by  Matthew  and  Mark  re- 
spectively. Mark  alone  mentions  the  great  banquet  and  the 
rank  of  the  guests.  He  adds  the  little  touches  of  Salome's 
entering  in  and  delighting  the  guests.  He  throws  Herod's 
promise  and  Salome's  request  into  dialogue.  Where  Matthew 
says  simply,  He  promised  with  an  oath  to  give  her  whatsoever 
she  should  ash,  Mark  gives  it,  Ash  of  me  whatsoever  thou  wilt, 
and  I  will  give  it  thee.  And  he  sware  unto  her,  whatsoever 
thou  shdlt  ash  of  me,  I  vjill  give  it  thee,  unto  the  half  of  my 
hingdom.  The  whole  narrative  is  more  dramatic  than  Matthew's. 
Matthew  says  that  Salome  was  put  forward  by  her  mother. 
Mark  pictures  her  going  out,  and  details  her  conversation  with 
Herodias,  and  her  eiitering  in  again  with  haste,  and  demanding 
the  horrible  hoon  forthwith.  Mark  also  enlarges  upon  Herod's 
regret :  he  was  exceeding  sorry ;  and  where  Matthew  notes 
merely  his  compliance  with  the  damsel's  request,  Mark  lets  us 
into  his  feeling  of  unwillingness  to  refuse  her.  Mark,  too, 
emphasizes  the  promptness  of  the  transaction.  Salome  de- 
mands the  Baptist's  head  forthwith ;  Herod  sends  the  exe- 
cutioner straightway.  Mark  alone  mentions  the  executioner. 
While  the  dialogue  is  not  peculiar  to  Mark,  it  is  to  be  noted 
that  it  is  charactei'istic  of  Peter's  style,  so  far,  at  least,  as  can  be 
inferred  from  the  stories  in  the  book  of  Acts,  of  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  (v.  3-9),  Cornelius  (x.),  and  Peter's  deliverance  from 
prison  (xii.). 

Mark  is  peculiarly  minute  and  specific  as  to  details  of  persons, 
times,  numbers,  and  places  ;  a  feature  in  which,  also,  he  resem- 
bles Peter  (compare  Acts  ii.  15  ;  vi.  3  ;  iv.  22  ;  v.  7,  23  ;  xii.  4). 
Thus,  of  persons,  "  They  entered  into  the  house  of  Simon  and 
Andrew  with  James  and  John  "  (i.  29) :  "  Simon  and  they  that 
were  with  him  followed  after  him  "  (i.  36) :  "  In  the  days  of 
Abiathar  the  high-priest "  (ii.  26)  :  "  The  Pharisees  took  coun- 
sel with  the  Rerodians  "  (iii.  6) :  "  The  woman  was  a  Oreeh,  a 
Syro-Phenician  by  nation"  (vii.  26).     Compare,  also,  xi.  11; 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK.  159 

xiii.  3  ;  xv.  21.  Of  'places :  "  A  multitude  from  Galilee  and 
Judaea"  etc.  (iii.  7,  8)  :  The  demoniac  proclaimed  his  recovery 
in  Deoajpolis  (v.  20) :  Jesus  departed  "  from  the  border  of  Tyre 
and  came  through  Sidon  unto  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  through  the 
midst  of  the  borders  of  Deoajpolis  "  (vii.  31).  Compare  viii.  10 ; 
xi.  1 ;  xii.  41 ;  xiv.  68.  Of  number :  The  paralytic  was  "borne 
oifour^^  {\i.  3):  The  swine  were  about  two  thousand  {w.  13): 
The  twelve  were  sent  out  two  and  two  (vi.  7) :  The  people  sat 
Aow^hj  hundreds  sxidi fifties  (vi.  40):  "Before  the  cock  crow 
twice  thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice  "  (xiv.  30).  Of  time :  Jesus 
rose  up  in  the  morning,  a  great  while  before  day  (i.  35) :  "  The 
same  day,  when  the  even  was  come  "  (iv.  35).  Compare  xi.  11 ; 
xiv.  68  ;  XV.  25. 

But  Mark  does  not  confine  himself  to  mere  outward  details. 
He  abounds  in  strokes  which  bring  out  the  feeling  of  his  char- 
acters. He  uses  six  different  words  expressive  of  fear,  wonder, 
trouble,  amazement,  extreme  astonishment.  The  compound 
e'^^a/i/Seto-^at,  greatly  amazed,  affrighted  (ix.  15 ;  xvi.  6,  6)  oc- 
curs nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Thus  the  look  and 
emotion  of  our  Lord  are  portrayed  :  "^e  looleed  round  about  on 
them  with  anger,  being  grieved  at  the  hardness  of  their  heart " 
(iii.  5) :  "  He  looked  round  about  on  them  which  sat  round 
about  him,  and  said,  Behold  my  mother,"  etc.  (iii.  34) :  "  Re 
looked  round  about "  to  see  who  had  touched  him  in  the  crowd 
(v.  32) :  "  He  rnarvelled  because  of  their  unbelief "  (vi.  6) : 
He  looked  on  the  young  ruler  and  loved  him  (x.  21) :  He  was 
moved  with  compassion  toward  the  leper  (i.  41) :  He  sighed 
deeply  in  his  spirit  (viii.  13). 

Similarly  Mark  depicts  the  tender  compassion  of  the  Lord. 
A  beautiful  hint  of  his  delicate  and  loving  appreciation  of  an 
ordinary  need  closes  the  story  of  the  healing  of  the  ruler's 
daughter.  In  their  joy  and  wonder  at  her  miraculous  restora- 
tion, the  friends  would  naturally  forget  the  immediate  practical 
demand  for  food,  of  which  the  Lord  promptly  reminds  them  by 
his  command  that  something  should  be  gimen  her  to  eat  (v.  43). 
Luke  notes  the  same  circumstance.  In  like  manner  his  appre- 
ciation of  his  disciples'  weariness  appears  in  the  words,  "  Come 
ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  place  and  rest  awhile  "  (vi.  31). 


160  INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK. 

He  is  moved  with  compassion  toward  the  multitude  because  they 
are  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd  (vi.  34) :  lie  is  touched  with 
the  need  and  fatigue  of  the  many  who  had  come  from  far  (viii. 
3) :  he  shows  his  interest  in  the  condition  of  the  epileptic  lad 
by  inquiring  into  the  history  of  his  ease  (ix.  21) :  he  is  TTbuch 
displeased  at  the  disciples'  rebuke  of  those  who  are  bringing  the 
young  children  to  him  (x.  14). 

In  like  manner  Mark  describes  the  mental  and  emotional 
states  of  those  who  were  brought  into  contact  with  Christ.  Those 
who  witnessed  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  understood  not,  and 
their  heart  was  hardened  (vi.  52) :  the  disciples  were  perplexed, 
questioning  among  themselves  what  the  rising  again  from  the 
dead  shoidd  mean  (ix.  10) :  they  were  amazed  at  his  words 
about  a  rich  man  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (x.  24) : 
a  sudden  and  mysterious  awe  fell  upon  them  in  their  journey  to 
Jerusalem  (x.  32):  Pilatemar-yeZZerfat  Jesus  being  already  dead, 
and  sent  for  the  centurion  in  order  to  ask  whether  he  had  heen 
any  while  dead  (xv.  44).  Compare  i.  22,  27 ;  v.  20,  42 ;  vi. 
20 ;  vii.  37 ;  xi.  18.  He  depicts  the  interest  excited  by  the 
words  and  works  of  Christ ;  describing  the  crowds  which  jSlocked 
to  him,  and  their  spreading  abroad  the  fame  of  his  power 
(i.  28,  45 ;  ii.  13  ;  iii.  20,  21 ;  iv.  1 ;  v.  20,  21,  24 ;  vi.  31 ;  vii. 
36). 

We  find  in  Mark  certain  peculiarly  forcible  expressions  in  our 
Lord's  language,  such  as,  "  To  them  that  are  without "  (iv.  11) ; 
"  Ye  leave  the  commandment  of  God,  and  hold  fast  the  tradi- 
tion of  men  "  (vii.  8) ;  "  This  adulterous  and  sinful  generation  " 
(viii.  38) ;  "  Be  set  at  nought "  (ix.  12) ;  "  Quickly  to  speak  evil 
of  me  "  (ix.  39) ;  "  Shall  receive  Irethren  and  sisters  and  moth- 
ers," etc.,  "  with persecutio?is  "  (x.  30). 

His  narrative  runs.  His  style  abounds  in  quick  transitions. 
The  word  ev^im,  straightway,  occurs  in  his  Gospel  something 
like  forty  times.  He  imparts  vividness  to  his  narration  by  the 
use  of  the  present  tense  instead  of  the  historic  (i.  40,  44 ;  ii.  3, 
sq.;  xi.  1,  2,  7  ;  xiv.  43,  66).  He  often  defines  his  meaning  by 
coupling  similar  words  or  phrases.  Beelzebub  is  called  by  two 
names  (iii.  22),  and  by  a  third  (iii.  30) :  The  sick  are  brought  at 
even,  when  the  sun  did  set  (i.  32) :  The  blasphemer  hath  no  more 


INTRODUCTION  TO  MARK  161 

forgimeness,  but  is  guilty  of  cm  eternal  sin  (iii.  29) :  He  spake 
with  mcmy  jpa/rahles,  and  without  aparahle  he  spake  not  (iv.  33, 
34).  Compare  iii.  5,  27  ;  v.  26  ;  vi.  25  ;  vii.  21 .  He  employs 
over  seventy  words  which  are  found  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament.  We  find  him  preserving  the  identical  Aramaic 
words  uttered  by  the  Lord.  In  his  Gospel  alone  occur  Boaner- 
ges (iii.  17) ;  Talitha  cumi  (v.  41) ;  Korban  (vii.  11 ) ;  Eph- 
jphatha  (vii.  34) ;  and  Ab})a  (xiv.  36).  Writing  for  liomans  we 
find  him  transferring  certain  Latin  words  into  Greek,  such  as 
legio,  legion  (v.  9) ;  centurio,  Kevrvplav,  centurion,  which  else- 
where is  eKarovrap'x^o'^-XT'  (xv.  39) ;  quadrans,  farthing  (xii. 
42) ;  fjogellare,  to  scourge  (xv.  16) ;  speculator,  executioner  (vi. 
27) ;  census,  tribute  (xii.  14) ;  sextarius,  pot  (vii.  4) ;  jpraetorium, 
(xv.  16).  Three  of  these,  centurio,  speculator,  and  sextarius  are 
found  in  his  Gospel  only.  He  always  adds  a  note  of  explanation 
to  Jewish  words  and  usages. 

His  style  is  abrupt,  concise,  and  forcible;  his  diction  less 
pure  than  that  of  Luke  and  John.  Besides  irregularities  of 
construction  which  cannot  be  explained  to  the  English  reader, 
he  employs  many  words  which  are  expressly  forbidden  by  the 
grammarians,  and  some  of  which  are  even  condemned  as  slang. 
Such  are  icr^'^Tox;  ex^t,  is  at  the  point  of  death  (v.  23) ;  xpa^^a- 
To<;,  bed  (ii.  4,  9,  11,  12) ;  fiov6<f>SaXfio<;,  with  one  eye  (ix.  47) ; 
KoXku^itnai,  money-changers  (xi.  15)  ;  Kopaaiov,  maid  (v.  41)  ; 
opKt^a),  I  adjure  (v.  7) ;  paTria-p-a,  a  blow  of  the  hand  (xiv.  65) ; 
pa<j}(Bo<;,  needle  (x.  25). 

I  have  described  the  characteristics  of  Mark  at  some  length, 
because  they  lie  peculiarly  in  the  line  of  the  special  purpose  of 
this  book,  which  deals  with  individual  words  and  phrases,  and 
with  peculiarities  of  diction,  rather  than  with  the  exegesis  of 
passages.  Of  this  Gospel  it  is  especially  true  that  its  pecu- 
liar flavor  and  quality  cannot  be  caught  without  careful  verbal 
study.  It  is  a  gallery  of  word-pictures.  Eeading  it,  even  in 
the  familiar  versions,  we  may  discover  that  it  is,  as  Canon 
Westcott  remarks,  "essentially  a  transcript  from  life;"  but 
nothing  short  of  an  insight  into  the  original  and  individual 
words  will  reveal  to  us  that  the  transcript  itself  is  alive. 

11 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  MARK. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  Beginning  {apxv)^  without  the  article,  showing  that  the 
expression  is  a  kind  of  title.  It  is  the  beginning,  not  of  his 
book,  but  of  the  facts  of  the  Gospel.  He  shows  from  the 
prophets  that  the  Gospel  was  to  begin  by  the  sending  forth  of  a 
forerunner. 

3.  A  voice  {<f>covr)).  Ko  article  as  A.  V.  and  Eev.,  "  the 
voice."  It  has  a  sort  of  exclamatory  force.  Listening,  the 
prophet  exclaims,  Zo  /  a  voice. 

4.  John  did  baptize  {ijevero  'Iwdvvrj^  6  ^aini^cov).  Lit., 
John  came  to  pass  or  arose  who  baptised.  Kev.,  John  came 
who  haptized. 

Baptism  of  repentance  {^aTma-fia  fj,eTavoia<i).  A  bap- 
tism the  characteristic  of  which  was  repentance ;  which  in- 
volved an  obligation  to  repent.  We  should  rather  expect  Mark 
to  put  this  in  the  more  dramatic  form  used  by  Matthew :  Say- 
ing, Hepent  ye  ! 

5.  There  went  out  {i^eiropevero).     The  imperfect   tense 

signifies,  there  kept  going  out. 

The  river.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 
Confessing.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  6. 


Ch.  I.]  MARK.  163 

6.  With  camels'  hair  (rpixa<;  Kafii]\ov).  Lit.,  hairs.  ]S^t 
with  a  camel's  skin,  but  with  a  vesture  woven  of  camels'  hair. 
Compare  2  Kings  1,  8. 

Wild  honey.  "  The  innumerable  fissures  and  clefts  of  the 
limestone  rocks,  which  everywhere  flank  the  valleys,  afford  in 
their  recesses  secure  shelter  for  any  number  of  swarms  of  wild 
bees  ;  and  many  of  the  Bedouin,  particularly  about  the  wilder- 
ness of  Judaea,  obtain  their  subsistence  by  bee-hunting,  bring- 
ing into  Jerusalem  jars  of  that  wild  honey  on  which  John  the 
Baptist  fed  in  the  wilderness  "  (Tristram,  "  Land  of  Israel "). 
Wye,  honey  of  the  wood. 

7.  To  stoop  down.     A  detail  peculiar  to  Mark. 
And  unloose.     Compare  to  hear  ;  Matt.  iii.  11. 

10.  Straightway.  A  favorite  word  with  Mark.  See  In- 
troduction. 

Opened  {(T'xi^ofj,evov<;).  Lit.,  as  Eev.,  rent  asunder:  much 
stronger  than  Matthew's  and  Luke's  dvem^Srjtrav,  were  opened. 

11.  Thou  art  my  beloved  son.  The  three  synoptists  give 
the  saying  in  the  same  form  :   Thou  art  my  son,  the  beloved. 

12.  Driveth  him  (e'/e/SaWet).  Stronger  than  Matthew's 
dvrjX'^t  was  led  up,  and  Luke's  ^jero,  was  led.  See  on  Matt. 
ix.  38.  It  is  the  word  used  of  our  Lord's  expulsion  of  demons, 
Mark  i.  34,  89. 

The  Wilderness.  The  place  is  unknown.  Tradition  fixes 
it  near  Jericho,  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Quarantania,  the 
precipitous  face  of  which  is  pierced  with  ancient  cells  and  chap- 
els, and  a  ruined  church  is  on  its  topmost  peak.  Dr.  Tristram 
says  that  every  spring  a  few  devout  Abyssinian  Christians  are 
in  the  habit  of  coming  and  remaining  here  for  forty  days,  to 
keep  their  Lent  on  the  spot  where  they  suppose  that  our  Lord 
fasted  and  was  tempted. 


164  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TB/iTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

13.  With  the  wild  beasts.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  The  region 
just  alluded  to  abounds  in  boars,  jackals,  wolves,  foxes,  leop- 
ards, hyenas,  etc. 

15.  The  time  (o  Kaiph).  That  is,  ih.e period  completed  by 
the  setting  up  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  Compare  the  fulness  of 
the  time,  Gal.  iv.  4. 

Repent.  See  on  Matt.  iii.  2 ;  xxi.  29.  Mark  adds,  and  le- 
U&oe  in  the  Gospel. 

16.  Casting  a  net  {afi(^i,^aXXovra<;).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  18. 
Mark  here  uses,  more  graphically,  only  the  verb,  without  add- 
ing net.  Lit.,  throwing  about  in  the  sea.  Probably  a  fisher- 
man's phrase,  like  a  cast,  a  ImuI. 

17.  To  become  {yevia-Sai).    An  addition  of  Mark. 

19.  A  little  farther.     Added  by  Mark. 
Mending.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  21. 

20.  With  the  hired  servants.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  It  may 
imply  that  Zebedee  carried  on  his  business  on  a  larger  scale 
than  ordinary  fishermen. 

22.  He  taught  {^v  SiSdaKav).  The  finite  verb  with  the  par- 
ticiple denoting  something  continuous :  was  teaching. 

23.  Straightway.    At  the  conclusion  of  his  teaching. 

With  an  unclean  spirit  {iv  irvevfian  aKo^dprtp).  Lit.,  "wi. 
an  unclean  spirit."  'Ev  {in)  has  the  force  of  m  the  power  of. 
Dr.  Morison  compares  the  phrases  in  drink,  in  love. 

24.  Us.  Me  and  those  like  me.  "  The  demons,"  says 
Bengel,  "  make  common  cause." 


Ch.  I.]  MARK.  165 

The  Holy  One  of  God.  The  demon  names  him  as  giving  to 
the  destruction  the  impress  of  hopeless  certainty. 

25.  Hold  thy  peace  (0t/tt6^9;Tt).  Lit.,  le  muzzled  or  gagged. 
See  on  Matt.  xxii.  12. 

26.  Had  torn  (o-Trapa^av).  "S^-^.,  tearing,  convulsions Ya.Ta.zx- 
gin.  Luke  has  had  thrown  him  down  in  the  midst.  Mark  adds 
the  crying  out  with  a  loud  voice. 

27.  They  questioned  among  themselves  {crw^rjTeiv  irphf 
eavTovsi).  Stronger  than  Luke,  who  has  thet/  spake  together. 
Tynd.,  They  demanded  one  of  another  among  themsehes. 

30.  Lay  sick  of  a  fever  {Kareiceiro  Trvpiaa-ovtra).  Kara, 
prostrate.  Mark  adds,  they  tell  him  of  her.  Luke,  they  hesought 
him  for  her.  Mark,  he  came  to  her.  Luke,  he  stood  over  her. 
Mark  only,  he  took  her  hy  the  hand  a/nd  raised  her  up. 

32.  At  even,  when  the  sun  did  set.  An  instance  of  Mark's 
habit  of  coupling  similar  words  or  phrases. 

That  were  sick.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  23,  24. 

34.  Devils  (Bai/iovia).  The  Rev.,  unfortunately,  and  against 
the  protest  of  the  American  committee,  retains  devils  instead  of 
rendering  demons.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  The  ]!^ew  Testament  uses 
two  kindred  words  to  denote  the  evil  spirits  which  possessed  men, 
and  which  were  so  often  cast  out  by  Christ :  haCfiav,  of  which 
demon  is  a  transcript,  and  which  occurs,  according  to  the 
best  texts,  only  at  Matt.  viii.  31 ;  and  Sai/ioviov,  which  is  not  a 
diminutive,  but  the  neuter  of  the  adjective  Sai/i6vio<;,  of,  or  he- 
longing  to  a  demon.  The  cognate  verb  is  Sai/iovi^ofiai  to  be 
possessed  with  a  demon,  as  in  Mark  i.  32. 

The  derivation  of  the  word  is  uncertain.  Perhaps  hauo,  to 
distribute,  since  the  deities  allot  the  fates  of  men.  Plato  de- 
rives it  from  Sa'^ficov,  knowing  or  wise.  In  Hesiod,  as  in  Pythag- 
oras, Thales,  and  Plutarch,  the  word  haifimv  is  used  of  men  of 


166  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

the  golden  age,  acting  as  tutelary  deities,  and  forming  the  link 
between  gods  and  men.  Socrates,  in  Plato's  "  Oratylus,"  quotes 
Hesiod  as  follows :  "  Socrates :  You  know  how  Hesiod  uses  the 
word  ?  Hermogenes :  Indeed  I  do  not.  Sog.  :  Do  you  not  re- 
member that  he  speaks  of  a  golden  race  of  men  who  came  first  ? 
Her. :  Yes,  I  know  that.     Soo. :  He  says  of  them, 

'  But  now  that  fate  has  closed  over  this  race. 
They  are  holy  demons  upon  earth, 
Beneficent,  averters  of  ills,  guardians  oJ:  mortal  men.'" 

After  some  further  conversation,  Socrates  goes  on :  "  And 
therefore  I  have  the  most  entire  conviction  that  he  called  them 
demons,  because  they  were  ^arifiove<;  {knowing  or  wise).  Ifow, 
he  and  other  poets  say  truly  that,  when  a  good  man  dies, 
he  has  honor  and  a  mighty  portion  among  the  dead,  and  be- 
comes a  demon,  which  is  a  name  given  to  him  signifying 
wisdom.  And  I  say,  too,  that  every  wise  man  who  happens  to 
be  a  good  man  is  more  than  human  {Baifxoviov)  both  in  life  and 
death,  and  is  rightly  called  a  demon."  Mr.  Grote  ("  History 
of  Greece ")  observes  that  in  Hesiod  demons  are  "  invisible 
tenants  of  the  earth,  remnants  of  the  once  happy  golden  race 
whom  the  Olympic  gods  first  made — the  unseen  police  of  the 
gods,  for  the  purpose  of  repressing  wicked  behavior  in  the 
world."  In  later  Greek  the  word  came  to  be  used  of  any  de- 
parted soul. 

In  Homer  Salficop  is  used  synonymously  with  ^eo?  and  Bed, 
god  and  goddess,  and  the  moral  quality  of  the  divinity  is  deter- 
mined by  the  context :  but  most  commonly  of  the  divine  pow- 
er or  agency,  like  the  Latin  7iunien,  the  deity  considered  as  a 
power  rather  than  as  a,  person.  Homer  does  not  use  Bai/xovtov 
substantively,  but  as  an  adjective,  always  in  the  vocative  case, 
and  with  a  sorrowful  or  reproachful  sense,  indicating  that  the 
person  addressed  is  in  some  astonishing  or  strange  condition. 
Therefore,  as  a  term  of  reproach — wretch  !  sirrah  !  madman  ! 
("  Iliad,"  ii.,  190,  200  ;  iv.,  31 ;  ix.,  40).  Occasionally  in  an  ad- 
miring or  respectful  sense  ("Odyssej%"  xiv.,  443  ;  xxiii.,  174) ; 
Excellent  stranger!  noble  sir!  Homer  also  uses  Bai/j,Q}v  of 
one's  genius  or  attendant  spirit,  and  thence  of  one's  lot  ox  fort- 


Ch.  I.]  MARK.  167 

une.  So  in  the  beantif nl  simile  of  the  sick  father  ("  Odyssey," 
v.,  396),  "  Some  malignant  genius  has  assailed  him."  Compare 
"Odyssey,"  x.,  64;  xi.,  61.  Hence,  later,  the  phrase  /cara 
halfjLova  is  nearly  equivalent  to  hy  chance. 

We  have  seen  that,  in  Homer,  the  bad  sense  of  Saifi6vio<;  is 
the  prevailing  one.  In  tlie  tragedians,  also,  Baifiwv,  though 
used  both  of  good  and  bad  fortune,  occurs  more  frequently  in 
the  latter  sense,  and  toward  this  sense  the  word  gravitates  more 
and  more.  The  undertone  of  Greek  thought,  which  tended  to 
regard  no  man  happy  until  lie  had  escaped  from  life  (see  on 
Matt.  V.  3,  Messed),  naturally  imparted  a  gloomy  and  forbidding 
character  to  those  who  were  supposed  to  allot  the  destinies  of 
life. 

In  classical  Greek  it  is  noticeable  that  the  abstract  to  Saifioviov 
fell  into  the  background  behind  Baif^cov,  with  the  development 
in  the  latter  of  the  notion  of  a  jfate  or  genius  connected  with 
each  individual,  as  the  demon  of  Socrates;  while  in  biblical 
Greek  the  process  is  the  reverse,  this  doctiine  being  rejected 
for  that  of  an  overruling  personal  providence,  and  the  strange 
gods,  "  obscure  to  human  knowledge  and  alien  to  human  life," 
taking  the  abstract  term  uniformly  in  an  evil  sense. 

Empedoeles,  a  Greek  philosopher,  of  Sicily,  developed  He- 
siod's  distinction ;  making  the  demons  of  a  mixed  nature  be- 
tween gods  and  men,  not  only  the  link  between  the  two,  but 
having  an  agency  and  disposition  of  their  own  ;  not  immortal, 
but  long-lived,  and  subject  to  the  passions  and  propensities  of 
men.  While  in  Hesiod  the  demons  are  all  good,  according  to 
Empedoeles  they  are  both  bad  and  good.  This  conception  re- 
lieved the  gods  of  the  responsibility  for  proceedings  unbecom- 
ing the  divine  nature.  The  enormities  which  the  older  myths 
ascribed  directly  to  the  gods — thefts,  rapes,  abductions — were 
the  doings  of  bad  demons.  It  also  saved  the  credit  of  the  old 
legends,  obviating  the  necessity  of  pronouncing  either  that  the 
gods  were  unworthy  or  the  legends  untrue.  "  Yet,  though  de- 
vised for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  a  more  scrupulous  religious 
sensibility,  it  was  found  inconvenient  afterward  when  assail- 
ants arose  against  paganism  generally.  For  while  it  abandoned 
as  indefensible  a  large  portion  of  what  had  once  been  genuine 


168  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

faith,  it  still  retained  the  same  word  demons  with  an  entirely- 
altered  signification.  The  Christian  writers  in  their  controver- 
sies found  ample  warrant  among  the  earlier  pagan  authors  for 
treating  all  the  gods  as  demons ;  and  not  less  ample  warrant 
among  the  later  pagans  for  denouncing  the  demons  generally  as 
evil  beings  "  (Grote,  "  History  of  Greece  "). 

This  evil  sense  the  words  always  bear  in  the  New  Testament 
as  well  as  in  the  Septuagint.  Demons  are  synonymous  with 
unclea/ii  spirits  (Mark  v.  12, 15  ;  iii.  22,  30;  Luke  iv.  33).  They 
appear, in  connection  with  Satan  (Luke  x.  17,  18;  xi.  18,  19); 
they  are  put  in  opposition  to  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  x.  20,  21) ;  to  the 
faith  (1  Tim.  iv.  1).  They  are  connected  with  idolatry  (Apoc. 
ix.  20 ;  xvi.  13,  14).  They  are  special  powers  of  evil,  influenc- 
ing and  disturbing  the  physical,  mental,  and  moral  being  (Luke 
xiii.  11, 16 ;  Mark  v.  2-5  ;  vii.  25  ;  Matt.  xii.  45). 

33.  All  the  city  was  gathered  together  at  the  door. 

Peculiar  to  Mark. 

35.  A  great  while  before  day  (evvvxa).  Lit,  while  it  was 
in  the  night.     The  word  is  peculiar  to  Mark. 

36.  Followed  after  {Kare^im^av).  The  word  found  only  in 
Mark.  Simon  and  his  companions,  as  well  as  the  people  of  the 
city,  seem  to  have  been  afraid  lest  he  should  have  permanently 
left  them.  Hence  the  compound  verb  indicates  that  they  fol- 
lowed him  eagerly ;  pursued  him  as  if  he  were  fleeing  from 
them.  Simon,  true  to  his  nature,  was  foremost  in  the  pursuit : 
Simon,  and  they  that  were  with  hitn. 

37.  All.  All  the  people  of  Capernaum,  all  are  seeking  thee. 
The  continuous  present  tense.  So  Eev.,  better  than  A.  Y.  The 
all  is  peculiar  to  Mark. 

38.  Towns  (xctf/xoTToXet?).  Lit.,  wZZa^e-^owjw*,  suburban  towns. 
41.  Moved  with  compassion.    Only  Mark. 


Ch.  II.]  MARK.  169 

43.  Strictly  charged  {efi^pinriardfi€vo<:).  Rev.,  sternly,  in 
margin.  The  word  is  originally  to  snort,  as  of  mettlesome 
horses.  Hence,  to  .fret,  or  chafe,  or  be  otherwise  strongly 
moved ;  and  then,  as  a  result  of  this  feeling,  to  admonish  or  re- 
buke urgently.  The  Lord  evidently  spoke  to  him  ^peremptorily. 
Compare  sent  hvm  out  (i^i^aXev)  ;  lit.,  drove  or  oast  him  out. 
The  reason  for  this  charge  and  dismissal  lay  in  the  desire  of 
Jesus  not  to  thwart  his  ministry  by  awaking  the  premature  vio- 
lence of  his  enemies ;  who,  if  they  should  see  the  leper  and 
hear  his  story  before  he  had  been  officially  pronounced  clean  by 
the  priest,  might  deny  either  that  he  had  been  a  leper  or  had 
been  truly  cleansed. 

45.  The  city.     Properly,  as  Rev.,  a  city ;  any  city. 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  It  was  noised  (^Kova^^.    Lit.,  ii  was  heard. 

That  he  was  in  the  house  ipn  eh  oIkov  e<7Tiv).  The  6ti, 
that,  is  recitative,  introducing  the  report  in  the  direct  form. 
It  was  reported — he  is  in  the  house  !  The  preposition  in  is  lit- 
erally into,  carrying  the  idea  of  the  motion  preceding  the  stay 
in  the  house.  "  iZe  Aaw  ^one  iw^o  the  house,  and  is  there."  But 
the  best  texts  read  eV  oLkw,  in  the  house.  The  account  of  this 
rumor  is  peculiar  to  Mark. 

He  preached  (e\a\et).  Lit.,  spaT&e,  as  Rev.  Imperfect  tense. 
He  was  speaking  when  the  occurrence  which  follows  took  place. 

3.  Borne  of  four.    A  detail  peculiar  to  Mark. 

4.  Come  nigh  unto  him  (Tr/aoo-eYy/o-ai).  The  word  does 
not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament.  But  some  read 
irpoaevi'^Kai,  bring  him,  unto  him.     So  Rev.,  in  margin. 


170  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

They  uncovered  (a-treaT&^aaav).    The  only  use  of  the  word 

in  New  Testament. 

Broken  it  up  {i^opv^avTe(;).  Lit.,  scooped  it  out.  Very 
graphic  and  true  to  fact.  A  modern  roof  would  be  untiled  or 
unshingled;  but  an  oriental  roof  would  have  to  be  dug  to 
make  such  an  opening  as  was  required.  A  composition  of 
mortar,  tar,  ashes,  and  sand  is  spread  upon  the  roofs,  and  rolled 
hard,  and  grass  grows  in  the  crevices.  On  the  houses  of  the 
poor  in  the  country  the  grass  gi-ows  more  freely,  and  goats 
may  be  seen  on  the  roofs  cropping  it.  In  some  cases,  as  in 
this,  stone  slabs  are  laid  across  the  joists.  See  Luke  v.  19, 
where  it  is  said  they  let  him  down  through  the  tiles ;  so  that 
they  would  be  obliged,  not  only  to  dig  through  the  grass  and 
earth,  but  also  to  pry  up  the  tiles.     Compare  Ps.  cxxix.  6. 

The  bed  {Kpd^arTov).  One  of  Mark's  Latin  words,  grdba- 
tus,  and  condemned  by  the  grammarians  as  inelegant.  A  rude 
pallet,  merely  a  thickly  padded  quilt  or  mat,  held  at  the  cor- 
ners, and  requiring  no  cords  to  let  it  down.  They  could  easily 
reach  the  roof  hy  the  steps  on  the  outside,  as  the  roof  is  low  ; 
or  they  could  have  gone  into  an  adjoining  house  and  passed 
along  the  roofs.  Some  suppose  that  the  crowd  was  assembled 
in  an  upper  chamber,  which  sometimes  extended  over  the  whole 
area  of  the  honse.  It  is  not  possible  accurately  to  reproduce 
the  details  of  the  scene.  Dr.  Thomson  says  that  Jesus  probably 
stood  in  the  lewan  or  reception-room,  a  hall  which  is  entered 
from  the  court  or  street  by  an  open  arch  ;  or  he  may  have 
taken  his  stand  in  the  covered  court  in  front  of  the  house  itself, 
which  usually  has  open  arches  on  three  sides,  and  the  crowd 
was  around  and  in  front  of  him. 

6.  Reasoning  {Bia\oyi,^6iJ,evoi,).  The  word  dialogue  is  de- 
rived from  this,  and  the  meaning  literally  is,  that  they  held  a 
dialogue  with  themselves. 

8.  Perceived  (eVtyi/oi;?).  The  preposition  kiri  gives  the 
force  of  full]).  He  was  not  only  immediately  aware  of  their 
thought,  but  clearly  &nA  fully  aware. 


Ch.  II.]  MARK  171 

9.  Walk  (TrepiTraTei).     Lit.,  walk  about. 

10.  Power  {e^ovalav)  ;  or  better,  authority,  as  Eev.,  in  mar- 
gin. The  word  is  derived  frona  e^ecTTi,  it  is  permitted  or  lawful. 
It  combines  the  ideas  of  right  and  might.  Authority  or  right 
is  the  dominant  meaning  in  the  New  Testament. 

13.  Resorted— taught  (ijpxeTo—iSlSaa-Kev).  The  imper- 
fects are  graphic — kept  coming,  kept  teaching. 

14.  See  on  Matt.  ix.  9. 

15.  His  house.     Levi's.     See  Luke  v.  29. 

16.  Scribes  and  Pharisees.  But  the  best  texts  read 
ypafifuiTeK  rmv  ^apiaaicov,  scribes  of  the  Pharisees.  So  Rev. 
Scribes  belonging  to  tlie  sect  of  the  Pharisees.  They  had  fol- 
lowed him  into  the  hall  where  the  company  were  seated.  This 
hall  answered  to  the  k'hdwah  of  Arabian  houses,  which  is  thus 
described  by  William  Gifford  Palgrave  :  "  The  MhJawah  was  a 
long,  oblong  hall  about  twenty  feet  in  height,  fifty  in  length, 
and  sixteen  or  thereabouts  in  breadth.  The  walls  were  covered 
in  a  rudely  decorative  manner  with  brown  and  white  wash,  and 
sunk  here  and  there  into  small  triangular  recesses,  destined  to 
the  reception  of  books,  lamps,  and  other  such  like  objects.  The 
roof  was  of  timber,  and  flat ;  the  floor  was  strewn  with  fine, 
clean  sand,  and  garnished  all  round  alongside  of  the  walls  with 
long  strips  of  carpet,  upon  which  cushions,  covered  with  faded 
silk,  were  disposed  at  suitable  intervals.  In  poorer  houses,  felt 
rugs  usually  take  the  place  of  carpets  "  ("  Central  and  Eastern 
Arabia  "). 

17.  They  that  are  whole  (ot  i<7%uoi/Te9).  Lit.,  they  that  are 
strong.  See  on  Luke  xiv.  30,  was  not  ablej  and  2  Pet.  ii.  11, 
power. 

No  need.  The  Greek  order  throws  the  emphasis  on  these 
words :   No  need  have  they  that  a/re  strong  of  a  physician. 


172  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H. 

Wye,  Whole  men  home  no  need  to  a  leech,  hut  they  that  home 
evil. 

18.  And  of  the  Pharisees.  But  the  o/" is  wrong.  Head  as 
Eev.,  JohvUs  diseiples  and  the  Pharisees. 

Used  to  fast  {rjaav  vqcxTevovrei;).  The  A.  V.  refers  to  the 
fact  as  a  custom ;  but  Mark  means  that  they  were  oiservmg  a 
fast  at  that  time.  Hence  the  use  of  the  participle  with  the 
finite  verb.  E.ev.,  correctly,  were  fasting.  The  threefold  repe- 
tition of  the  word  fast  is  characteristic  of  Mark.  See  Intro- 
duction. 

19.  Children  of  the  bride-chamber  {viol  toO  wfi<^S)vo<i). 
More  correctly  as  Kev.,  sons.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Christ  twice 
uses  a  figure  drawn  from  marriage  in  his  allusions  to  John  the 
Baptist,  the  ascetic.  Compare  John  iii.  29.  The  sons  of  the 
bride-chamber  are  different  from  the  groomsmen.  They  are 
the  guests  invited  to  the  bridal.  The  scene  is  laid  in  Galilee, 
where  groomsmen  were  not  customary,  as  in  Judaea.  Hence 
there  is  no  mention  of  them  in  the  account  of  the  marriage  at 
Cana.  In  Judaea  there  were  at  every  marriage  two  grooms- 
men or  friends  of  the  hridegroom.     See  on  John  iii.  29. 

20.  Then— in  those  days.  The  proper  reading  is  eV  eKeiwi 
rfi  vi^epa,  in  that  day.  So  Kev.  Another  of  Mark's  double 
expressions:  then — in  that  day. 

21.  Seweth  {iTrtppaTTTei).  A  word  found  in  Mark  only. 
Matthew  (ix.  16)  and  Luke  (v.  36)  use  eTn^aXKei,  throweth  wpon, 
as  we  speak  of  clajyping  a  patch  upon. 

23.  He  went(avToi'  irapaTropevea-^ai).  Lit.,  went  along  he- 
side,  along  the  stretches  of  standing  grain.  Matthew  and  Luke 
use  hid,  through,  as  Mark  does,  but  not  Trapd. 

Began,  as  they  went,  to  pluck  {ijp^avro  oBov  iroielv  t'CKXov- 
re?).     Lit.,  hegan  to  make  a  way  jplucUng  the  ears.     This  does 


Ch.  h]  mabk.  1Y3 

not  mean  that  the  disciples  broke  a  way  for  themselves  through 
the  standing  corn  by  plucking  the  ears,  for  in  that  event  thej' 
would  have  been  compelled  to  break  down  the  stalks.  Thej 
could  not  have  made  a  way  by  plucking  the  heads  of  the  grain. 
Mark,  who  uses  Latin  forms,  probably  adopted  here  the  phrase 
iter  facere,  to  make  a  way,  which  is  simply  to  go.  The  same 
idiom  occurs  in  the  Septuagint,  Judges  xvii.  8  ;  iroLrjcrai  oBbv 
avTov,  as  he  journeyed.  The  offence  given  the  Pharisees  was 
the  jprepa/ration  of  food  on  the  Sabbath.  Matthew  says  to  eat, 
stating  the  motive,  and  Luke,  ruHbing  with  their  hands,  de- 
scribing the  act.  See  on  Matt.  xii.  2.  The  Kev.  rightly  re- 
tains the  rendering  of  the  A.  Y. 

25.  Had  need.  Mark  adds  this  to  the  was  an  hwngered, 
which  is  in  both  Matthew  and  Luke.  The  analogy  lay  in  the 
necessity.  The  had  need  is  generic ;  the  toas  hungry  is  spe- 
cific, describing  the  peculiar  character  of  the  need. 

26.  The  shewbread  (jov'i  apTov;  rij?  TrpoBea-ecog).  Lit.,  the 
loaves  of  proposition,  i.e.,  the  loaves  which  were  set  forth  before 
the  Lord.  The  Jews  called  them  the  loaves  of  the  face,  i.e.,  of 
the  presence  of  God.  The  bread  was  made  of  the  finest  wh eaten 
fiour  that  had  been  passed  through  eleven  sieves.  There  were 
twelve  loaves,  or  cakes,  according  to  the  number  of  tribes, 
ranged  in  two  piles  of  six  each.  Each  cake  was  made  of  about 
five  pints  of  wheat.  They  were  anointed  in  the  middle  with  oil, 
in  the  form  of  a  cross.  According  to  tradition,  each  cake  was 
five  hand-breadths  broad  and  ten  long,  but  turned  up  at  either 
end,  two  hand-breadths  on  each  side,  to  resemble  in  outline  the 
ark  of  the  covenant.  The  shewbread  was  prepared  on  Friday, 
unless  that  day  happened  to  be  a  feast-day  that  required  sab- 
batical rest ;  in  which  case  it  was  prepared  on  Thursday  after- 
noon. The  renewal  of  the  shewbread  was  the  first  of  the 
priestly  functions  on  the  commencement  of  the  Sabbath.  The 
bread  which  was  taken  off  was  deposited  on  the  golden  table  in 
the  porch  of  the  sanctuary,  and  distributed  among  the  outgoing 
and  incoming  courses  of  priests  (compare  same  for  tlie  priests). 
It  was  eaten  during  the  Sabbath,  and  in  the  temple  itself,  but 


174  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IH 

only  by  such  priests  as  were  Levitically  pure.     This  old  bread, 
removed  on  the  Sabbath  morning,  was  that  which  David  ate. 

27.  For  man  (Sid).     On  account  of,  or  for  the  sake  of.     This 
saying  is  given  by  Mark  only. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  A  withered  hand  (i^r/panfiivriv  rrjv  %et/3a).  More  cor- 
rectly Rev.,  Ms  hand  withered.  The  participle  indicates  that 
the  withering  was  not  congenital,  but  the  result  of  accident  or 
disease.     Luke  says  his  right  hand. 

2.  They  watched  {jrapeTripovv).  Imperfect  tense.  They 
Tcept  watching.  The  compound  verb,  with  irapd,  hy  the  side  of, 
means  to  watch  carefully  or  closely,  as  one  who  dogs  another's 
steps,  keeping  leside  or  near  him.  Wye,  They  aspieden  him : 
i.e.,  -played  the  spy.     On  rtjpeco,  to  watch,  see  on  John  xvii.  12. 

He  would  heal  {S-epwn-evaei).  Future  tense :  whether  he 
will  heal,  the  reader  being  placed  at  the  time  of  the  watching, 
and  looking  forward  to  the  future. 

3.  Stand  forth  {eyeipe  ehro  /j,ea-ov).  Lit.,  rise  into  the  midst. 
So  Wye,  Hise  into  the  middle.  Tynd.,  Arise  and  stand  in  the 
midst. 

5.  Being  grieved  {a-v\XvTrovfievo<;).  Why  the  compound 
verb,  with  the  preposition  ffvv,  together  with  ?  Herodotus  (vi., 
39)  uses  the  word  of  condoling  with  another's  misfortune. 
Plato  ("  Eepublic,"  462)  says,  "  When  any  one  of  the  citizens 
experiences  good  or  evil,  the  whole  state  will  either  rejoice  or 
sorrow  with  him  {^vWuTrrja-erai).  The  avv  therefore  implies 
Christ's  condolence  with  the  moral  misfortune  of  these  hard- 
hearted ones.  Compare  the  force  of  con,  in  condolence.  Latin, 
con,  with,  dolere,  to  grieve. 


Ch.  in.]  MARK.  176 

Hardness  {irwpcoa-ei).  From  Trwpo?,  a  Jcmd  of  marble,  and 
thence  used  of  a  calhis  on  fractured  bones.  Ucopaait}  is  origi- 
nally the  process  by  which  the  extremities  of  fractured  bones  are 
united  by  a  callus.  Hence  of  callousness,  or  ha/rdness  in  general. 
The  word  occurs  in  two  other  passages  in  the  New  Testament, 
Kom.  XI.  25  ;  Eph.  iv.  18,  where  the  A.  Y.  wrongly  renders 
blindness,  following  the  Yulgate  caecitas.  It  is  somewhat 
strange  that  it  does  not  adopt  that  rendering  here  (Yulgate, 
caecitate)  which  is  given  by  both  Wye.  and  Tynd.  The  Eev. 
in  all  the  passages  rightly  gives  hardening,  which  is  better  than 
ha/rdness,  because  it  hints  at  i\\Q process  going  on.  Mark  only 
records  Christ's  feeling  on  this  occasion. 

7.  Withdrew.  Mark  alone  notes  no  less  than  eleven  occa- 
sions on  which  Jesus  retired  from  his  work,  in  order  to  escape 
his  enemies  or  to  pray  in  solitude,  for  rest,  or  for  private  confer- 
ence with  his  disciples.  See  i.  12;  iii.  7;  vi.  31,  46  ;  vii.  24, 
31 ;  ix.  2  ;  x.  1 ;  xiv.  34. 

A  great  multitude  (TroXw  ttX^^o?).  Compare  ver.  8,  where 
the  order  of  the  Greek  words  is  reversed.  In  the  former  case 
the  greatness  of  the  mass  of  people  is  emphasized ;  in  the  latter, 
the  mass  of  people  itself. 

8.  He  did  (eVotei).  Imperfect  tense.  Others  read  -Koiei,  he 
is  doing.  In  either  case  the  tense  has  a  continuous  force :  what 
things  he  was  doing  or  is  doing.  Note  in  vv.  7,  8,  Mark's 
accurate  detail  of  places.  See  Introduction.  The  reasons  for 
our  Lord's  withdrawing  into  a  boat,  given  with  such  minute- 
ness of  detail  in  vv.  9-11,  are  also  peculiar  to  Mark. 

10.  Pressed  upon  (eVtTrwrTeti').     Lit,  fell  upon. 

Plagues  {fida-Tiya?).  Lit.,  scourges.  Compare  Acts  xxii. 
24;  Heb.  xi.  36.  Our  word  plague  is  irom '7r\rjy'^,'La,tinplaga, 
meaning  a  blow.  Pestilence  or  disease  is  thus  regarded  as  a 
stroke  from  a  divine  hand.  IlXriy^  is  used  in  classical  Greek 
in  this  metaphorical  sense.     Thus  Sophocles,  "  Ajax,"  279 :  "I 


176  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HI. 

fear  that  a  calamity  {Tfkrj^ri)  is  really  come  from  heaven  {^eov, 
god)."  So  of  war.  Aeschylus,  "Persae,"  251:  "  O  Persian 
land,  how  hath  the  abundant  prosperity  been  destroyed  by  a 
single  hlow  (eV  /it^  TrXriyy).  The  word  here,  scourges,  carries 
the  same  idea. 

11.  The  unclean  spirits  (ra).  The  article  indicating  those 
particular  spirits  which  took  part  in  that  scene.  Mark's  preci- 
sion is  shown  in  the  use  of  the  two  articles  and  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  noun  and  adjective  :  The  spirits,  the  imcleai^  ones. 

When  they  saw  (orav  iSedopow).  More  accurately  as  Eev., 
whenever  they  ieheld.  The  imperfect  tense  denotes  a  repeated 
act.  The  av  in  orav  gives  an  indefinite  force  :  as  often  as  they 
might  see  him. 

12.  He  charged  (iireTifia).  The  word  is  commonly  rendered 
rebuke  in  the  New  Testament.  In  classical  Greek  its  predom- 
inant sense  is  that  of  severe,  strenuous  reproach  for  unworthy 
deeds  or  acts.  It  is  several  times  used  in  the  New  Testament, 
as  here,  in  the  sense  of  charge.  In  this  sense  the  word  carries, 
at  bottom,  a  suggestion  of  a  charge  under  penalty  {rifir]). 

That  {iva).  According  to  the  A.  Y.  and  Eev.  the  that  indi- 
cates the  substance  of  Christ's  charge.  Properly,  however,  it 
indicates  the  intent  of  his  charge.  He  charged  them  m  order 
that  they  should  not  make  him  known. 

13.  Whom  he  would  {ox)<}  ijSeXev  avro?).  Eev.,  more  strictly, 
"whom,  he  himself  would;"  not  allowing  any  to  offer  them- 
selves for  special  work.  Out  of  the  larger  number  thus  called 
he  selected  twelve.     See  ver.  14. 

14.  Ordained  {iiroiria-ev).    Lit.,  made.     Eev.,  appoi/nted. 

Might  send  them  forth  {dTroa-TekXr)).  As  apostles.  Com- 
pare the  kindred  noun  diroaroXoi,  apostles. 


Ch.  in.]  MARK.  177 

15.  To  have  power  {exeiv  i^ovaiav).  Note  that  he  does  not 
say  tojyreach  and  to  cast  out,  but  to  preach  and  to  have  author- 
ity to  cast  out.  The  power  of  preaching  and  the  power  of  ex- 
orcising were  so  different  that  special  mention  is  made  of  tlie 
divine  authority  with  which  they  would  need  to  be  clothed.  The 
power  of  driving  out  demons  was  given  that  they  might  apply 
it  in  confirmation  of  their  teaching.     Compare  xvi.  20. 

16.  And  Simon  he  surnamed  Peter.  Mark  relates  only 
his  naming  and  not  his  ajpjpovntment,  leaving  his  appointment 
to  be  understood. 

17.  Although  Mark  mentions  that  the  apostles  were  sent  out 
in  pairs  (vi.  Y),  he  does  not  classify  them  here  in  pairs.  But 
he  alone  throws  Peter  and  James  and  John,  the  three  who 
shared  the  Lord's  particular  intimacy,  into  one  group.  Matthew 
and  Luke  both  introduce  Andrew  between  Peter  and  James. 

He  surnamed  them  Boanerges  {i-ire^Kev  avToh  ovo/j,a 
Boavripje<;).  Lit.,  he  put  upon  them  the  name.  Some  uncer- 
tainty attaches  to  both  the  origin  and  the  application  of  the 
name.  Most  of  the  best  texts  read  ovofiuTa,  names,  instead  of 
name.  This  would  indicate  that  each  of  the  two  was  surnamed 
a  "  son  of  thunder."  Some,  however,  have  claimed  that  it  was 
a  dual  name  given  to  them  as  a  pair,  as  the  name  Dioscuri  was 
given  to  Castor  and  Pollux.  The  reason  of  its  bestowal  we  do 
not  know.  It  seems  to  have  been  intended  as  a  title  of  honor, 
though  not  perpetuated  like  the  surname  Peter,  this  being  the 
only  instance  of  its  occurrence ;  possibly  because  the  incon- 
venience of  a  common  surname,  which  would  not  have  sufii- 
ciently  designated  which  of  them  was  intended,  may  have  hin- 
dered it  from  ever  growing  into  an  appellation.  It  is  justified 
by  the  impetuosity  and  zeal  which  characterized  both  the 
brothers,  which  prompted  them  to  suggest  the  calling  of  fire 
from  heaven  to  consume  the  inhospitable  Samaritan  village 
(Luke  ix.  54) ;  which  marked  James  as  the  victim  of  an  early 
martyrdom  (Acts  xii.  2) ;  and  wliich  sounds  in  the  thunders  of 
John's  Apocalypse.  The  Greek  Church  calls  John  Bpovro^mvoi, 
13 


178  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HL 

the  thunder-voiced.  The  phrase,  sons  of,  is  a  familiar  Hebrew 
idiom,  in  which  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  indi- 
vidual or  thing  named  is  regarded  as  his  parent.  Thus  sfparhs 
are  sons  of  fire  (Job  v.  7) ;  threshed  corn  is  son  of  the  floor  (Isa. 
xxi.  10).  Compare  son  of  _perdition  {John  xvii.  12);  sons  of 
disobedience  (Eph.  ii.  2 ;  v.  6). 

18.  Andrew  i^Avlpkav).  A  name  of  Greek  origin  though 
in  use  among  the  Jews,  from  avr]p,  man,  and  signifying  mamly. 
He  was  one  of  the  two  who  came  earliest  to  Christ  (Matt.  iv. 
18,  20  ;  compare  John  i.  40,  41) ;  and  hence  is  always  styled  by 
the  Greek  fathers  TrpoaTOKkriTO';,  fi/rst  called. 

Philip  {^iXiwirov).  Another  Greek  name,  meaxAng  fond  of 
horses.  In  ecclesiastical  legend  he  is  said  to  have  been  a 
chariot-driver. 

Bartholomew.  A  Hebrew  name — Bar  Tolmai,  son  of 
Tolmai.  Almost  certainly  identical  with  Nathanael.  Philip 
and  Nathanael  are  associated  by  John,  as  are  Philip  and  Bar- 
tholomew in  the  parallel  passages  of  the  synoptics.  Bartholo- 
mew is  not  mentioned  in  John's  list  of  the  twelve  (xxi.  2),  but 
Natlianael  is  ;  while  the  synoptists  do  not  mention  Nathanael 
in  their  lists,  but  do  mention  Bartholomew.  Probably  he  had 
two  names. 

Matthew.     See  on  the  superscription  of  Matthew's  Gospel. 

Thomas.  A  Hebrew  name,  meaning  twin,  and  translated 
by  the  Greek  Didymus  (John  xi.  16). 

Thaddaeus  or  Lebbaeus,  as  in  Matt.  x.  3.  He  is  the  Judas 
of  John  xiv.  22.  Luther  calls  him  derfromme  Judas  {the  good 
Judas).  The  two  surnames,  Lebbaeus  and  Thaddaeus,  mean 
the  same  thing — heloved  child. 

Simon  the  Canaanite.  Properly,  Gananaean.  See  on 
Matt.  X.  4  :  "No  name  is  more  striking  in  the  list  than  that  of 


Ch.  in.]  MARK.  179 

Simon  the  Zealot,  for  to  none  of  the  twelve  could  the  contrast 
be  so  vivid  between  their  former  and  their  new  position.  What 
revolution  of  thought  and  heart  could  be  greater  than  that 
which  had  thus  changed  into  a  follower  of  Jesus  one  of  the 
fierce  war-party  of  the  day,  which  looked  on  the  presence  of 
Kome  in  the  Holy  Land  as  treason  against  the  majesty  of 
Jehovah,  a  party  who  were  fanatical  in  their  Jewish  strictures 
and  exclusiveness  ? "  (Geikie,  "  Life  and  Words  of  Christ "). 

19.  Judas  Iscariot.     See  on  Matt.  x.  4. 

20.  Again.  Glancing  back  to  the  many  notices  of  crowds 
in  the  preceding  narrative.  This  reassembling  of  the  multi- 
tudes, and  its  interference  with  the  repast  of  Christ  and  the  dis- 
ciples, is  peculiar  to  Mark. 

21.  His  friends  {ol  Trap"  avrov).  Lit.,  they  who  were  from 
heside  him  :  i.e.,  by  origin  or  birth.  His  mother  and  brethren. 
Compare  vv.  31,  32.  Wye,  kinsmen.  Tynd.,  they  that  he- 
longed  vmio  him.  Not  his  disciples,  since  they  were  in  the 
house  with  him. 

They  said  {e\eyov).  Imperfect  tense.  Yery  graphic,  they 
kept  saying. 

22.  Beelzebub.    See  on  Matt.  x.  25. 

And.  Not  connecting  two  parts  of  one  accusation,  but  two 
accusations,  as  is  evident  from  the  two  one,  which  are  equiva- 
lent to  quotation  marks. 

24.  And.  Note  the  way  in  which  the  sayings  are  linked  by 
this  conjunction  ;  an  impressive  rhetorical  progression. 

26.  But  hath  an  end.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

27-  Spoil  {Biapirda-ai).  Mark  uses  the  stronger  and  more 
vivid  compound  verb,  where  Matthew  employs  the  simple  dp- 


180  WOHD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

irdaai.  The  verb  means,  primarily,  to  tea/r  in  pieces;  to  carry 
away,  as  the  wind ;  to  efface,  as  footsteps.  So,  generally,  to 
seize  as  plunder,  snatching  right  and  left. 

His  goods  {rh  (TKevT)).  Lit,  his  vessels.  So  Wye.  Compare 
Mark  xi.  16 ;  Acts  ix.  15 ;  x.  11  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  20.  The  special 
object  of  the  robber  may  be  precious  vessels  of  gold  or  silver  ; 
but  the  word  is  probably  used  in  its  general  sense  of  household 
gear. 

28.  Compare  Matt.  xii.  31 ;  and  note  Mark's  superior  preci- 
sion and  fulness  of  detail. 

29.  Guilty  (eVo^^o?).  Yvom  iv,  in,  exco,  to  hold  or  have.  Lit, 
is  in  the  grasp  of,  or  holden  of.  Compare  1  Cor.  xi.  27 ;  James 
ii.  10. 

Eternal  damnation  {almvlov  aiiaprrnji.aro'i).  An  utterly  false 
rendering.  Kightly  as  Eev.,  of  an  eternal  sin.  So  Wye,  ever- 
lasting trespass.  The  A.  V.  has  gone  wrong  in  following  Tyn- 
dale,  who,  in  turn,  followed  the  erroneous  text  of  Erasmus, 
KjOtVeo)?,  judgment,  wrongly  rendered  damnation.  See  Matt, 
xxiii.  33,  and  compare  Kev.  thei-e. 

30.  They  said  (6X,67ov).  Imperfect  tense.  They  Tcept  sayvng, 
ox  piersisted  in  saying.     An  addition  peculiar  to  Mark. 

31.  32.  They  sent  unto  him  calling  him,  and  a  multitude 
was  sitting  about  him.  Detail  by  Mark  only  ;  as  also  the 
words  in  ver.  34,  Looking  round  on  them  which  sat  round 
about  him. 

CHAPTER  IV. 
1.  Again.     He  had  taught  there  before.     See  iii.  7-9. 
In  the  sea.    Mark  only. 

There  was  gathered  {(Tvvd'yeTaC).  The  A.V.  misses  Mark's 
graphic  use  of  the  present,  "  There  is  gathered."     So  Eev. 


Ch.  IV.]  MARK.  181 

7.  Choked  {a-wkirvi^av).  The  preposition,  <7w»  =  con  {to- 
gether), carries  the  idea  of  com-pression. 

It  yielded  no  fruit.    Added  by  Mark. 

8.  That  sprang  up  and  increased  {ava^aivovra  koI  ai^av- 
ofievov).  The  Kev.  literally  renders  the  participles,  growing  wp 
and  moreasing,  thus  describing  the  process  more  vividly.  These 
two  participles,  moreover,  explain  the  use  of  the  imperfect 
tense  iSlBov  {yielded},  denoting  continuance.  It  began  to  yield 
and  kept  yielding  as  it  increased. 

Thirty  {eh  rpidKovTo).     Lit.,  up  to  thirty. 

10.  When  he  was  alone.     Mark  only. 

They  that  were  about  him  with  the  twelve.  Mark  only. 
Matthew  and  Luke,  the  disciples. 

11.  Unto  them  that  are  without  {iKelvoK  tow  e^m).  The 
two  latter  words  are  peculiar  to  Mark.  The  phrase  means 
those  outside  of  our  circle.  Its  sense  is  always  determined  by 
the  contrast  to  it.  Thus,  1  Cor.  v.  12, 13,  it  is  non- Christians  in 
contrast  with  me.  Col.  iv.  5,  Christians  contrasted  -wiihjpeople 
of  the  world.  Compare  1  Thess.  iv.  12 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  7.  Mat- 
thew (xiii.  11),  with  less  precision,  uses  simply  i/eeivoK  {to  them), 
the  pronoun  of  remote  reference.  Luke  viii.  10,  rot?  XaiiroK  {to 
the  rest). 

13.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

Parables  (rois  •rrapa^o\a<;).  The  parables,  which  I  have 
spoken  or  may  hereafter  speak. 

14.  The  sower  soweth  the  word.  More  precise  than 
either  Matthew  or  Luke.    Compare  Matt.  xiii.  19 ;  Luke  viii.  11. 

19.  The  lusts  of  other  things  entering  in  (at  -n-epl  rh 
XoiTTo,  eTn^vjjbiaC).     Lusts,  not  in  the  limited  sense  of  mere 


182  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

sexual  desire,  but  in  the  general  sense  of  longvng.  The  word 
is  also  used  of  desire  for  good  and  lawful  things  (Luke  xxii. 
15  ;  Philip,  i.  23). 

20.  Such  as.  A  good  rendering  of  the  pronoun  o'Onve<iy 
which  indicates  the  class  of  hearers. 

21.  A  candle  (o  Xvxvo?).     Properly,  the  lamp,  as  Kev. 

Brought  (e/)%6Tai).  Lit.,  cometh.  Both  the  lamp  come? 
This  impersonation  or  investing  the  lamp  with  motion  is  ac- 
cording to  Mark's  lively  mode  of  narrative,  as  is  the  throwing 
of  the  passage  into  the  interrogative  form.  Compare  Luke 
Tiii.  16.  The  lamp :  the  article  indicating  2.  familiar  household 
implement.     So  also  ^Hhe  bed"  and  "  the  stand." 

Bushel  (jMoSiov).  The  Latin  modius.  One  of  Mark's  Latin 
words.  See  on  Matt.  v.  15.  The  modius  was  nearer  a  peck 
than  a  bushel. 

Bed  {k\Iv7)v).     a  couch  for  reclining  at  table. 

Candlestick  (Xvxvlav).  Bev.,  correctly,  stam,d ;  i.e.,  lamp- 
stand.     See  on  Matt.  v.  15. 

22.  Which  shall  not  be  manifested  {iav  fif)  ha  (jjavepcoSfi). 
The  A.  V.  makes  Christ  say  that  every  hidden  thing  shall  be 
revealed.  This  is  wrong.  He  says  that  things  are  hidden  in 
order  that  they  nrny  he  manifested.  Concealment  is  a  means  to 
revelation. 

26-29.  The  paeable  oe  the  seed  gkowing  seoeetlt.  Pe- 
culiar to  Mark. 

26.  Should  cast  {0dXri).  Lit.,  should  have  oast,  the  aorist 
tense,  followed  by  the  presents  sleep  and  rise  {KaSevBr/  and 
iyeCp7}Tai,).  The  whole,  literally,  "  As  if  a  man  should  have  cast 
seed  into  the  ground,  and  should  he  sleeping  amd  rising  night 


Ch.  IV.]  MARK.  183 

and  day."  The  aorist  tense  indicates  the  single  act  of  casting  ; 
the  presents  the  repeated,  continned  sleeping  and  rising  while 
the  seed  is  growing. 

Seed  (top  airopov).  The  seed ;  that  particular  seed  which 
he  had  to  sow.     Snch  is  the  force  of  the  article. 

27.  Grow  {fjLTjKvvTjTai).  Lit.,  lengthen;  be  extended  by  the 
seed  lengthening  out  into  blade  and  stalk. 

He  knoweth  not  how  (to?  ovk  olBev  avr6<;).  The  Greek 
order  is  verj'  lively  :  how  Tcnoweth  not  he. 

28..  Of  herself  (avTOfidTrf).  Lit.,  self-acting.  It  occurs  in 
only  one  other  passage  of  the  New  Testament,  Acts  xii.  10 ;  of 
the  city  gate  which  opened  to  Peter  of  its  own  accord. 

29.  Is  brought  forth  (TrapaBol).  This  rendering  cannot  be 
correct,  for  the  verb  is  active,  not  passive,  meaning  to  deliver 
up.  Hence  it  is  usually  explained,  shall  home  delivered  itself 
wp  to  ha/rvest ;  which  is  stilted  and  artificial.  Rev.  is  ripe,  is 
a  free  rendering  from  the  margin  of  A.  Y.  It  is,  perhaps, 
better  to  explain,  as  Meyer  does,  whose  rendering  is  adopted  by 
Rev.  in  margin :  When  the  fruit  shall  have  allowed,  i.e.,  shall 
have  admitted  of  being  harvested.  Xenophon  and  Herodotus 
use  the  word  in  the  sense  of  permit  or  allow ;  and  an  exact 
parallel  to  this  occurs  in  the  historian  Polybius  (xxii.,  24,  9) : 
"When  the  season  permitted"  {■jrapaBiSowrj'i). 

Putteth  in  {aTroa-TeXXei).  Lit.,  sendeth  forth.  So  Rev.  in 
margin.  The  rendering,  putteth  in,  misses  the  figure.  The 
verb  is  the  same  as  that  used  of  sending  forth  the  apostles  to 
reap  the  harvest  of  souls.  See  especially  John  iv.  38  :  "I  sent 
{anrkcneCKa)  you  to  reap" 

30.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

With  what  comparison  shall  we  compare  It?  (eV  tLvi 
airfjv  "jrapa^oXfj  Sw/j^ep ;).     Lit.,  In  what  parable  might  we  put 


184  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

it  ?    Kev.,  In  what  parable  shall  we  set  it  forth  ?    Note  the 
we,  taking  the  hearers,  with  a  fine  tact,  into  consultation. 

31.  When  it  is  sown  {otuv  (nrapri).  This  phrase  is  repeated 
in  ver.  32.  Here  the  emphasis  is  on  orav,  when.  It  is  small 
at  the  time  when  it  is  sown.  In  ver.  32  the  emphasis  is  on 
dirapy,  it  is  sown.     It  begins  to  grow  great  from  the  time  when 

it  is  sown. 

That  are  upon  the  earth.     A  little  detail  peculiar  to  Mark. 

32.  Groweth  up.     Mark  only. 

Herbs  {twv  'Ka'xavcov).  Eev.,  rightly,  the  herbs  ;  those  which 
people  are  wont  to  plant  in  their  gardens.  The  word  denotes 
garden — or  pot-herbs,  as  distinguished  from  wild  herbs. 

Shooteth  out  great  branches  (Trotei  KXdBov?  fMeyaXov;). 
liit.,  maheth,  etc.  Rev.,  putteth  out.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  Mat- 
thew has  hecometh  a  tree.  On  branches,  see  note  on  Matt.  xxiv. 
32.  One  of  the  Talmudists  describes  the  mustard-plant  as  a 
tree,  of  which  the  wood  was  sufficient  to  cover  a  potter's  shed. 
Another  says  that  he  was  wont  to  climb  into  it  as  men  climb 
into  a  fig-tree.  Professor  Hackett  says  that  on  the  plain  of 
Akka,  toward  Carmel,  he  found  a  collection  of  mustard-plants 
from  six  to  nine  feet  high,  with  branches  from  each  side  of  a 
trunk  an  inch  or  more  in  thickness.  Dr.  Thomson  relates  that 
near  the  bank  of  the  Jordan  he  found  a  mustard-tree  more  than 
twelve  feet  high. 

Lodge  (KaTaaKTjvovv).  See  on  Matt.  viii.  20.  Lit.,  pitch 
their  tents. 

33.  Such.  Implying  that  Mark  knew  yet  more  parables  that 
were  spoken  at  that  time. 

As  they  were  able  to  hear  it.    Peculiar  to  Mark. 


Ch.  IV.]  MARK.  185 

36.  Even  as  he  was  in  the  ship.  Eev.,  loot.  Just  as  he 
was,  in  the  boat  in  which  he  was  then  sitting.  Mark  adds  the 
detail  about  the  accompanying  boats. 

37.  Storm  (\aTka'<^).  So  Luke.  Distinctively  2k  furious 
storm  or  hmrriccme.  Compare  Septuagint,  Job  xxxviii.  1,  of 
the  whirlwind  out  of  which  God  answered  Job.  See,  also,  Job 
xxi.  18.  Matthew  uses  a-eia-fib^,  a  shaking.  See  on  Matt.  viii. 
24.  Mr.  Macgregor  ("  Eob  Eoy  on  the  Jordan  ")  says  that  "  on 
the  sea  of  Galilee  the  wind  has  a  singular  force  and  suddenness ; 
and  this  is  no  doubt  because  that  sea  is  so  deep  in  the  world 
that  the  sun  rarefies  the  air  in  it  enormously,  and  the  wind, 
speeding  swiftly  above  a  long  and  level  plateau,  gathers  much 
force  as  it  sweeps  through  flat  deserts,  until  suddenly  it  meets 
this  huge  gap  in  the  way,  and  it  tumbles  down  here  irresistible." 

38.  A  pillow  (to  7rpoa-Ke<f)dKai,op).  The  definite  article  indi- 
cates a  well-known  part  of  the  boat's  equipment — the  coarse 
leathern  cushion  at  the  stern  for  the  steersman.  The  Anglo- 
Saxon  version  has  holster. 

39.  Peace,  be  still  {cnmira,  Tre^iytwao-o),  Lit.,  he  silent!  be 
muzzled  !  Wye,  rather  tamely,  wax  dumh  !  How  much  more 
vivid  than  the  narratives  of  either  Matthew  or  Luke  is  this  per- 
sonification and  rebuke  of  the  sea  as  a  raging  monster. 

Ceased  {eKoiraaev).  From  kotto?,  meaning,  1,  heating;  2, 
toil;  3,  weariness.  A  beautiful  and  picturesque  word.  The 
sea  sank  to  rest  as  if  exhausted  by  its  own  beating. 

There  was  (iyivero).  More  strictly,  there  arose  or  ensued. 
The  aorist  tense  indicates  something  immediate.  Tynd.  has 
foUowed. 

Calm.    "Wye,  peacecibleness. 

41.  They  feared  exceedingly  {i(j)ofii]3r)(Tav  <f>6^ov  fieyav). 
Lit.,  theyfea/red  a  great  fear. 


186  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

What  manner  of  man  is  this  ?  (rk  apa  ovtos  ia-nv  ;).  The 
A.  V.  is  rather  a  rendering  of  Matthew's  •n-oraTro?,  what  man- 
ner of  {vui.  27),  than  of  Mark's  rk,  who.  The  Rev.  gives  it 
rightly  :  WTio  then  is  this  ?  The  then  {apa)  is  argumentative. 
Since  these  things  are  so,  who  then  is  this  ? 


CHAPTER  V. 

3.  The  details  of  vv.  3-5  are  peculiar  to  Mark.  "  The  pict- 
ure of  the  miserable  man  is  fearful ;  and  in  drawing  it,  each 
evangelist  has  some  touches  which  are  peculiarly  his  own  ;  but 
St.  Mark's  is  the  most  eminently  graphic  of  all,  adding,  as  it 
does,  many  strokes  which  wonderfully  heighten  the  terribleness 
of  the  man's  condition,  and  also  magnify  the  glory  of  his  cure  " 
(Trench,  "  Miracles  "). 

Dwelling  {KaToiKrjaiv).  The  Kara,  down,  gives  the  sense  of 
a  settled  habitation.  Compare  our  phrase  settled  down.  So 
Tynd.,  his  abiding. 

The  tombs  {toi<;  /Mv^jfuicnv).  "In  unclean  places,  unclean 
because  of  the  dead  men's  bones  which  were  there.  To  those 
who  did  not  on  this  account  shun  them,  these  tombs  of  the  Jews 
would  afford  ample  shelter,  being  either  natural  caves  or  re- 
cesses hewn  by  art  out  of  the  rOck,  often  so  large  as  to  be  sup- 
ported with  columns,  and  with  cells  upon  their  sides  for  the 
reception  of  the  dead.  Being,  too,  without  the  cities,  and 
oftentimes  in  remote  and  solitary  places,  they  would  attract  those 
who  sought  to  flee  from  all  fellowship  of  their  kind  "  (Trench, 
"Miracles"). 

4.  With  fetters  and  chains  {TriSaK  Kal  aXva-ea-w).  TreSr], 
fetter,  is  akin  to  trktfjb^the  instep;  just  as  the  Latin  pedica,  a 
shackle,  is  related  topes,  a  foot.  The  Anglo-Saxon  plural  of 
fot  {foot)  isfet ;  so  that  fetter  \%feeter.     So  Chaucer  : 

' '  The  pure  fetters  on  his  shinnes  grete 
Were  of  his  bitter  salte  teres  wete." 

"AKvcri';  (derivation  uncertain)  is  a  chain,  a  generic  word,  denot- 
ing a  bond  which  might  be  on  any  part  of  the  body. 


Ch.  v.]  mark.  187 

Broken  in  pieces  {(TvvreTpl(j)^ai).  The  verb  (rwTpi'/3<u  means 
originally  to  riob  together,  to  grind  or  crush.  It  has  been  sug- 
gested that  the  fetters  might  have  been  of  cords  which  could 
be  rubbed  to  pieces.  Wye.  renders,  Mad  broken  the  stocks  to 
small  gdbhets. 

5.  Crying  {Kpd^tov).  Rev.,  crying  out.  The  verb  denotes 
an  ina/rticulate  cry  ;  a  shriek.  Aristophanes  uses  it  of  the  frogs 
("Ranae,"  258),  and  of  the  bawling  of  a  boor  ("Equites,"  285). 

6.  Afar  off  (aTro  /uiKpoS-ev).  Peculiar  to  Mark,  as  is  also  he 
rem. 

7.  Crying — he  saith.  The  inarticulate  cry  (ver.  5),  and  then 
the  articulate  speech. 

Wliat  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  (rt'e/ioi  Kal<Toi;).  Lit.,  what 
is  there  to  me  and  thee  ?     What  have  we  in  common  ? 

I  adjure  thee  by  God.  Stronger  than  Luke's  Ipray  thee. 
The  verb  opKil^a),  I  adjure,  is  condemned  by  the  grammarians 
as  inelegant. 

8.  For  he  said  {e\eyev).  Imperfect  tense,  he  was  saying ; 
the  force  of  which  is  lost  both  in  the  A.  V.  and  Rev.  The  im- 
perfect gives  the  reason  for  this  strange  entreaty  of  the  demon. 
Jesus  was  commanding,  was  saying  "  corns  out ;  "  and,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  epileptic  child  at  the  Transfiguration  Mount,  the 
baffled  spirit  wreaked  his  malice  on  the  man.  The  literal  ren- 
dering of  the  imperfect  brings  out  the  simultaneousness  of 
Christ's  exorcism,  the  outbreak  of  demoniac  malice,  and  the  cry 
Torment  me  not. 

13.  Ran  {ap/j/tja-ev).  The  verb  indicates  hasty,  headlong  mo- 
tion.   Hence,  as  Rev.,  rushed. 

Two  Thousand.  As  usual,  Mark  alone  gives  the  detail  of 
number. 


188  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

A  Steep  place.  But  the  noun  has  the  definite  article:  tov 
Kprifivov,  the  steep,  as  Eev. 

15.  See  {:^eapovaiv).  Eev.,  rightly,  behold.  For  it  was  more 
than  simple  seeing.  The  verb  means  looking  stedfasth/,  as  one 
who  has  an  interest  in  the  object,  and  with  a  view  to  search  into 
and  understand  it :  to  look  inquiringly  and  intently. 

Clothed.  Compare  Luke  viii.  27.  For  a  long  time  he  had 
worn  no  clothes. 

18.  When  he  was  come  {ifi^aivovro';  avrov).  The  participle 
is  in  the  present  tense.  Not  after  he  had  embarked,  but  while 
he  was  in  the  act.  Hence  Eev.,  rightly,  as  he  was  entering. 
"With  this  corresponds  the  graphic  imperfect  TrapeKoXei, :  While 
he  was  stepping  into  the  boat  the  restored  man  was  beseeching 
him. 

That  (Jva).  In  order  that.  Not  the  subject  but  the  aim  of 
the  entreaty. 

23.  My  little  daughter  (to  ^vjarpiov).  This  little  endear- 
ing touch  in  the  use  of  the  diminutive  is  peculiar  to  Mark. 

Lieth  at  the  point  of  death  {ia-xaTO)';  e^et).  One  of  the 
uncouth  phrases  peculiar  to  Mark's  style,  and  which  are  cited  by 
some  as  evidence  of  the  early  composition  of  his  gospel. 

I  pray  thee  come  (Jva  iX^av).  The  words  I  pray  thee  are 
not  in  the  Greek.  Literally  the  ruler's  words  run  thus  :  My  lit- 
tle daughter  lieth  at  the  point  of  death — that  thou  come,  etc.  In 
his  anguish  he  speaks  brokenly  and  incoherently. 

He  went  {airrik^ev).  Lit.,  went  away.  The  aorist  tense, 
denoting  action  once  for  all,  is  in  contrast  with  the  imperfects, 
rjKoXov^ei,  Tcept  following,  and  aweSXi^op,  kept  thronging.  The 
multitude  kept  following  and  thronging  as  he  went  along.  The 
preposition  crvv,  together,  in  the  latter  verb,  indicates  the  united 


Ca  v.]  MAKK.  189 

pressure  of  a  crowd.     Compare  Tynd.,  ver.  31.     Thrusting  thee 
on  every  side. 

26.  Mark  is  much  fuller  and  more  vivid  than  Matthew  or 
Luke. 

Had  suffered  {ira^ovira).  To  be  taken,  as  everywhere  in  tlie 
New  Testament,  in  the  sense  of  suffering  pain,  not  merely  suh- 
jected  to  treatment.  What  she  may  have  suffered  will  appear 
from  the  prescription  for  the  medical  treatment  of  such  a  com- 
plaint given  in  the  Talmud.  "  Take  of  the  gnm  of  Alexandria 
the  weight  of  a  zuzee  (a  fractional  silver  coin) ;  of  alum  the 
same ;  of  crocus  the  same.  Let  them  be  bruised  together,  and 
given  in  wine  to  the  woman  that  has  an  issue  of  blood.  If  this 
does  not  benefit,  take  of  Persian  onions  three  logs  (pints) ;  boil 
them  in  wine,  and  give  her  to  drink,  and  say,  '  Arise  from  thy 
flux.'  If  this  does  not  cure  her,  set  her  in  a  place  where  two 
ways  meet,  and  let  her  hold  a  cup  of  wine  in  her  right  hand,  and 
let  some  one  come  behind  and  frighten  her,  and  say,  '  Arise 
from  thy  flux.'  But  if  that  do  no  good,  take  a  handful  of  cum- 
min (a  kind  of  fennel),  a  handful  of  crocus,  and  a  handful  of 
fenugreek  (another  kind  of  fennel).  Let  these  be  boiled  in  wine 
and  give  them  her  to  drink,  and  say,  '  Arise  from  thj'  flux  ! ' " 
If  these  do  no  good,  other  doses,  over  ten  in  number,  are 
prescribed,  among  them  this  :  "  Let  them  dig  seven  ditches,  in 
which  let  them  burn  some  cuttings  of  vines,  not  yet  four  years 
old.  Let  her  take  in  her  hand  a  cup  of  wine,  and  let  them  lead 
her  away  from  this  ditch,  and  make  her  sit  down  over  that.  And 
let  them  remove  her  from  that,  and  make  her  sit  down  over  an- 
other, saying  to  her  at  each  remove,  '  Arise  from  thy  flux ! ' " 
(Quoted  from  Lightfoot  by  Geikie,  "  Life  and  Words  of  Christ "). 

Of  many  physicians  {xmo).  Lit.,  under ;  i.e.,  under  the 
hands  of. 

And  was   nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grew  worse. 

Luke's  professional  pride  as  a  physician  kept  him  from  such  a 
statement.    Compare  Luke  viii.  43. 


190  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

28.  For  she  said  {eXeyev).  Imperfect  tense.  She  was  or 
kepi  saying  as  she  pressed  through  the  crowd,  either  to  herself 
or  to  others. 

29.  She  knew— she  was  healed.  Note  the  graphic  change 
in  the  tenses,     eyvw,  she  knew,'  Idrai,  she  is  healed. 

Plague.     See  on  iii.  10. 

30.  Knowing  {iTrtr/vov<;).  Rev.,  perceiving.  Lit.,  having 
fully  known. 

That  virtue  had  gone  out  of  him  (t^v  ef  avrov  Bvvafiiv 
e^eXJ^ovaav).  More  correctly  as  Rev.,  that  the  power  proceedimg 
from  him,  had  gone  forth.  The  object  of  the  Saviour's  knowl- 
edge was  thus  complex :  1st,  his  power  ;  2d,  that  his  power  had 
gone  forth.  This  and  the  following  sentence  are  peculiar  to 
Mark. 

32.  He  looked  round  about  {Trepie^eirero).  Imperfect 
tense.  He  kept  lookvng  around  for  the  woman,  who  had  hidden 
herself  in  the  crowd. 

34.  In  peace  (et?  etpiyi'T;!').  \iA.^  im,to peace.  Contemplating 
the  peace  in  store  for  her.  Mark  alone  adds.  Be  whole  of  thy 
plague. 

35.  From  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue.  From  his  house; 
for  the  ruler  himself  is  addressed. 

Troublest  (o-zcuXXet?).  See  on  Matt.  ix.  36.  Compare  Luke 
xi.  22,  where  occurs  the  cognate  word  a-KvXa,  spoils,  things  torn 
or  stripped  from  an  enemy.  "Wye,  travailest.  Tynd.,  dis- 
easest. 

36.  Heard.  This  is  from  the  reading  a.Kovtra'i  (Luke  viii.  50). 
The  correct  reading  is  irapaKovaa<i,  which  may  be  rendered 
either  not  heeding,  as  Rev.  (compare  Matt,  xviii.  17),  or  over- 


Ch.  VI.]  MARK.  ]  91 

heanng,  &&  Eev.  in  margin,  which,  on  the  whole,  seems  the 
more  natural.  Disregarding  would  be  more  appropriate  if  the 
message  had  been  addressed  to  Jesus  himself ;  but  it  was  ad- 
dressed to  the  ruler.  Jesus  overheard  it.  The  present  parti- 
ciple, XdXovfievov,  hei/ng  spoken,  seems  to  fall  in  with  this. 

38.  Seeth  {l^eapet).     'Rev.,  hehoTdeih.     See  on  ver.  15. 

Wailing  (aXaXa^bj/Ta?).  A  descriptive  word  of  the  hired 
mourners  crying  al-a-lai  ! 

40.  Put  them  out.  "Wonderful  authority  in  the  house  of 
a  stranger.  He  was  really  master  of  the  house "  (Bengel). 
Only  Mark  relates  the  taking  of  the  parents  with  the  three  dis- 
ciples into  the  chamber. 

41.  Maid  {Kopdaiov).  Not  a  classical  word,  but  used  also  by 
Matthew. 

42.  Astonishment  (eKOTaaei).  Better  Eev.,  amazement, 
which  carries  the  sense  of  bewilderment.  "EKi7Taai<;,  of  which 
the  English  ecstasy  is  a  transcript,  is  from  e/e,  out  of,  and 
la-TTj/M,  to  place  or  put.  Its  primitive  sense,  therefore,  is  that 
of  removal  /  hence  of  a  man  removed  out  of  his  senses.  In 
Biblical  Greek  it  is  used  in  a  modified  sense,  as  here,  xvi.  8 ; 
Luke  V.  26  ;  Acts  iii.  10,  of  amazement,  often  coupled  ■with.fea/r. 
In  Acts  X.  10 ;  xi.  5 ;  xxii.  17,  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  our 
word  ecstasy,  and  is  rendered  tromce. 


CHAPTER    YI. 

2.  Astonished.    See  on  Matt.  viii.  28. 

Mighty  worl<s  (SwdfieK).  Lit, powers.  See  on  Matt.  xi. 
20.  Tjnd.,  virtues.  Outcomings of  God's ^owe^.*  "powers of 
the  world  to  come  "  (Heb.  vi.  5),  at  work  upon  the  earth. 


192  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI. 

3.  The  carpenter.  This  word  "throws  the  only  flash 
which  falls  on  the  continuous  tenor  of  the  first  thirty  years, 
from  infancy  to  manhood,  of  the  life  of  Christ "  (Farrar,  "Mes- 
sages of  the  Books  "). 

They  were  offended.     See  on  Matt.  v.  29.     Tynd.,  liwt. 

5.  Sick  {appaxTTOi^).  From  a,  not,  and  pdtvvvfii,  to  strengthen. 
Sickness  regarded  as  constitutional  weakness. 

7.  By  two  and  two.  To  help  and  encourage  each  other, 
and  also  for  fulness  of  testimony. 

8-12.  See  Matt.  x. 

14.  Was  spread  abroad.  "  But  for  the  rumor,  Herod  would 
not  have  known  of  him.  A  palace  is  late  in  hearing  spiritual 
news"  (Bengel). 

Mighty  works  do  show  forth  themselves  in  him  {ivep- 
yovaiv  al  Bvvd/Mei^  ev  avrm).  Rev.,  these  powers  work  in  him. 
As  Dr.  Morison  observes,  "  A  snatch  of  Herod's  theology  and 
philosophy."  He  knew  that  John  wrought  no  miracles  when 
alive,  but  he  thought  that  death  had  put  him  into  connection 
with  the  unseen  world,  and  enabled  him  to  wield  its  powers. 

16.  He  is  risen.  The  he,  ovto<;,  is  emphatic.  This  one. 
This  very  John. 

17-29.  On  the  peculiarities  of  Mark  in  this  narrative,  see  In- 
troduction. 

19.  Had  a  quarrel  against  him  {iveXxev  avra).  There  is 
some  dispute  about  the  rendering.  The  Eev.  renders  Set  herself 
against  hiin,  with  no  alternative  translation  in  the  margin ; 
and  in  Luke  xi.  53,  Press  v/pon  him,  vehemently,  with  set  them- 
selves against  him  in  the  margin.  I  see  no  objection  to  ren- 
dering was  angry  at  him,  taking  evel')(ev  avrm  with  an  ellipsis 


Ch.  VI.]  MARK.  193 

of  %oA,oi/,  anger.  Yery  literally,  had  within  herself  {iv)  anger 
against  him.  So  Herodotus,  i.,  118.  Astyages  concealing  the 
anger  {top  x°^°^)  which  he  felt  toward  him  {pi  ivei'x^e).  vi. 
119,  ivelx^  a-(pi  Seivbv  x°^V)  nourished  a  fierce  amger  against 
them.     So  Moulton,  Grimm,  and  De  Wette. 

Desired  (^.SeXei;).  Imperfect  tense,  was  desiring  all  along. 
Her  demand  for  John's  murder  was  the  result  of  a  long-cherished 
wish. 

20.  Observed  him  {aweTi^peC).  A  mistranslation.  Eev., 
.Jcept  him  safe.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  Compare  Matt.  ix.  17,  are 
preserved;  Luke  ii.  19,  Jcept ;  a-vv,  closely  ;  Tqpelv,  to  ^preserve 
or  Tceep,  as  the  result  of  guarding.  See  on  John  xvii.  12,  and 
reserved,  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Did  many  things  {iroXKa  iiroiei).  The  proper  reading,  how- 
ever, is  rjiropei ;  from  d,  not,  and  iropo^,  a  passage.  Hence, 
strictly,  to  be  in  circumstances  where  one  cannot  find  a  way 
out.  So  Kev.,  rightly,  he  was  much  perplexed.  The  other 
reading  is  meaningless. 

21.  Convenient  (evKaipov).  Mark  only.  Convenient  for 
Herodias'  purpose.  "  Opportune  for  the  insidious  woman,  who 
hoped,  through  wine,  lust,  and  the  concurrence  of  sycophants, 
to  be  ab,le  easily  to  overcome  the  wavering  mind  of  her  hus- 
band "  (Grotius  in  Meyer). 

Birthday^  See  on  Matt.  xiv.  6.  The  notice  of  the  banquet 
and  of  the  rank  of  the  guests  is  peculiar  to  Mark. 

Lords  (fieyiaTaa-iv).  Only  here,  and  Apoc.  vi.  15  ;  xviii.  23. 
A  late  word,  from  fiiyai,  great. 

High  captains  (pjjtXtdjO^ots).     Lit.,  commanders  of  a  thou- 
sand men.     Answering  to  a  Roman  military  tribune.     Both 
civil  and  military  dignitaries  were  present,  with  other  distin- 
guished men  of  the  district  {chief  men). 
13 


194  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

22.  The  said  Heroclias  {avTri^Trj<;  'Hpa)BidSo<;).  The  A.  Y. 
misses  the  point  of  avrfj';  by  the  translation  the  said:  the  object 
being  not  to  particularize  the  Herodias  just  referred  to,  but  to 
emphasize  the  fact  that  Herodias'  own  daughter  was  put  for- 
ward instead  of  a  professional  dancer.  Hence  Kev.,  correctly, 
"  the  daughter  of  Herodias  herself  I''' 

Damsel  (jcopaaiw).     See  on  Mark  v.  41. 

25.  Mark's  narrative  emphasizes  the  eager  haste  with  which 
the  murder  was  pushed.  She  came  in  straightway  and  de- 
manded the  boon  forthwith. 

By  and  by  (efawT^?).  Obsolete  in  the  old  sense  of  imme- 
diately. The  A.  Y.  translates  ev^i/?,  straightway,  in  Matt.  xiii. 
21,  hy  and  hy :  eu-SJetu?,  Mark  iv.  17,  im,mediately :  and  the  same 
word  in  Luke  xxi.  9,  iy  and  hy.  'E^avrfj';  is  rendered  imme- 
diately, Acts  X.  33 ;  xi.  11  :  straightway,  Acts  xxiii.  30  :  pres- 
ently, Philip,  ii.  23.  Hev.,  forthwith.  The  expression  by  and 
by  in  older  English  was  sometimes  used  of  place.  Thus  Chau- 
cer. 

"  Right  in  the  same  chamber  by  and  by"  (close  by), 
and 

"  Two  young  knights  lying  by  and  by"  (near  together). 

Edward  lY.  is  reported  to  have  said  on  his  death-bed :  "I  wote 
(know)  not  whether  any  preacher's  words  ought  more  to  move 
you  than  I  that  is  going  by  and  by  to  the  place  that  they  all 
preach  of." 

Charger.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  8. 

26.  Exceeding  sorry.     Where  Matthew  has  sorry. 

27.  Mark's  favorite  straightway.  The  king  is  prompt  in  his 
response. 

Executioner  {aireicovXdTopa).  One  of  Mark's  Latin  words, 
speculator.    A  speculator  was  a  guardsman,  whose  business  it 


Ch.  VI.]  MARK.  195 

was  to  watch  or  spy  out  {specula/ri).  It  came  gradually  to  de- 
note one  of  the  armed  body-guard  of  the  Roman  emperor. 
Thus  Suetonius  says  of  Claudius  that  he  did  not  dare  to  attend 
banquets  unless  his  speculatores  with  their  lances  surrounded 
him.  Seneca  uses  the  word  in  the  sense  of  executioner.  "  He 
met  the  executioners  {speculatoribus),  declared  that  he  had 
nothing  to  say  against  the  execution  of  the  sentence,  and  then 
stretched  out  his  neck."  Herod  imitated  the  manners  of  the 
Koman  court,  and  was  attended  by  a  company  of  speculatores, 
though  it  was  not  their  distinctive  oflSce  to  act  as  executioners. 
Wye.  renders  ma/rh-Jciller,  and  Tynd.  hangman. 

29.  Corpse.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  28. 

Stier  ("  "Words  of  Jesus  ")  says  of  Herod  :  "  This  man,  whose 
inner  life  was  burnt  out ;  who  was  made  up  of  contradictions, 
speaking  of  his  kingdom  like  Ahasuerus,  and  yet  the  slave  of 
his  Jezebel ;  willingly  hearing  the  prophet,  and  unwillingly  kill- 
ing him  ;  who  will  be  a  Sadducee,  and  yet  thinks  of  a  resurrec- 
tion ;  who  has  a  superstitious  fear  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  yet  a 
curiosity  to  see  him." 

31.  Come  apart.     See  on  ch.  iii.  T. 

37.  Shall  we  go  and  buy,  etc.  This  question  and  Christ's 
answer  are  peculiar  to  Mark. 

39.  By  companies  (ffu/iTTOffta  ffy/iTToo-ia).  Peculiar  to  Mark. 
The  Jewish  dining-room  was  arranged  like  the  Eoman  :  three 
tables  forming  three  sides  of  a  square,  and  with  divans  or 
couches  following  the  outside  line  of  the  tables.  The  open  end 
of  the  square  admitted  the  servants  who  waited  at  table.  This 
explains  the  arrangement  of  the  multitude  here  described  by 
Mark.  The  people  sat  down,  literally,  in  tahle-compamies,  ar- 
ranged like  guests  at  table  ;  some  companies  of  a  hundred  and 
some  of  fifty,  in  squares  or  oblongs  open  at  one  end,  so  that  the 
disciples  could  pass  along  the  inside  and  distribute  the  loaves. 

Green.    Mark  only. 


196  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

40.  In  ranks  {irpaatai  ■n-patrtal).  Lit.,  like  beds  in  a  garden. 
The  former  adverb,  hy  companies,  describes  the  arraifigement ; 
this  the  color.  The  red,  blue,  and  yellow  clothing  of  the  poor- 
est orientals  makes  an  Eastern  crowd  full  of  color ;  a  fact  which 
would  appeal  to  Peter's  eye,  suggesting  the  appearance  of  flower- 
beds in  a  garden. 

41.  Brake  and  gave  {KUTeKKaaev,  iSiSov).  The  verbs  are  in 
different  tenses ;  the  former  in  the  aorist,  the  latter  in  the  im- 
perfect. The  aorist  implies  the  instamtoMeous,  the  imperfect 
the  continuous  act.  He  brake,  and  k^pt  gimng  out.  Farrar  re- 
marks that  the  multiplication  evidently  took  place  in  Christ's 
hands,  between  the  acts  of  breaking  and  distributing. 

All.    Peculiar  to  Mark. 

Were  filled.     See  on  Matt.  v.  6. 

43.  Baskets  full  (ko^ivcov  trkTjpoDfiaTa).  Lit.,  fillvngs  of 
baskets.  See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20.  Mark  alone  adds,  and  of  the 
fishes. 

44.  Men  (avSpe?).  Not  generic,  including  men  and  women, 
but  literally  men.  Compare  Matt.  xiv.  21,  beside  women  amd 
children ;  a  detail  which  we  should  have  expected  from  Mark. 

46.  When  he  had  sent  them  away  {aTrord^afievo';).  'Rev., 
more  correctly,  after  he  had  taken  leave.  Unclassical,  and  used 
in  this  sense  only  in  later  Greek.  So  in  Luke  ix.  61 ;  Acts 
xviii.  18  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  13. 

48.  He  saw  (t'Scbi/).  Participle.  Rey.,  seeing.  Better, how- 
ever,  the  literal  homing  seen.  It  was  this  which  induced  him  to 
go  to  them. 

Toiling  (^ao-aw§o/*6j/ot;?).  JAt,  tormented.  Rev.,  distressed. 
See  on  Matt.  iv.  24.     Wye,  tra/vailing.     Tynd.,  tn'ovhled. 

Fourth  watch.    Between  3  and  6  a.m. 


Ch.  VI.]  MARK.  197 

Would  have  passed  by  them.    Peculiar  to  Mark. 

50.  They  all  saw  him.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

Spake  with  them  {iXdXT](rev  fier  avT&v).  Both  Matthew 
and  John  give  the  simple  dative,  avroh,  to  thsm.  Mark's  with 
them,  is  more  familiar,  and  gives  the  idea  of  a  more  friendly 
and  encouraging  address.  It  is  significant,  in  view  of  Peter's 
relation  to  this  gospel,  that  Mark  omits  the  incident  of  Peter's 
walk  on  the  waves  (Matt.  xiv.  28-31). 

51.  Ceased.     See  on  Mark  iv.  38. 

Sore  amazed  (XiW  e/c  "Treptcraov  i^iaravTo).  Lit.,  exceedi/ngly 
ieyond  measure.  A  strong  expression  peculiar  to  Mark.  'E^ia-- 
ravTo,  were  amazed.  Compare  the  cognate  noun  e/cffrao-t?,  and 
see  on  Mark  v.  42. 

52.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

The  miracle  of  the  loaves  (cTrt  rot? aprots).  Eev.,  concern- 
mg  the  loaves.  Lit.,  wpon  /  in  the  m,atter  of.  They  did  not 
reason  from  the  multiplying  of  the  loaves  to  the  stilling  of  the 
sea. 

53.  Drew  to  the  shore  {^poampihia^aav).  Peculiar  to 
Mark.  Rev.,  moored  to  the  shore,  though  the  meaning  may  be 
near  the  shore.  'Avi^rj,  he  went  up  (ver.  51),  seems  to  indicate  a 
vessel  of  considerable  size,  standing  quite  high  out  of  the  water. 
They  may  have  anchored  off  shore. 

65.  Ran  round.  From  place  to  place  where  the  sick  were, 
to  bring  them  to  Jesus.     Matthew  has  they  sent. 

Carry  about  (irepi^ipeiv).  •jrepC,  about;  one  hitiier  and  an- 
other thither,  wherever  Christ  might  be  at  the  time. 

Beds  {jcpa^aTToii).  Condemned  as  bad  Greek,  but  used  by 
both  Luke  and  John.     See  on  Mark  ii.  4. 


198  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  TU. 

56.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

In  the  streets  (ayopat?).  Riglitly,  'Rev.,  market-jplacea.  See 
on  Matt.  xi.  16. 

Border.     See  on  Matt.  ix.  20. 

CHAPTER  YII. 

2.  Defiled  {koivuk).  Lit.,  common  ;  and  so  Kev.  in  margin, 
Wye.,  and  Tynd. 

That  is.     Added  by  way  of  explanation  to  Gentile  readers. 

Oft  {TTvyiMfi).  Eev.,  diligently.  A  word  which  has  given 
critics  much  difficulty,  and  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  speak 
decisively.  The  Kev.  gives  in  the  margin  the  simplest  mean- 
ing, the  literal  one,  with  the  fist ;  that  is,  rubbing  the  un- 
cleansed  hand  with  the  other  doubled.  This  would  be  satisfac- 
tory if  there  were  any  evidence  that  such  was  the  custom  in 
washing ;  but  there  is  none.  Edersheim  ("  Life  and  Times  of 
Jesus,"  ii.,  11,  note)  says  "  the  custom  is  not  in  accordance  with 
Jewish  law."  But  he  elsewhere  says  ("The  Temple,"  206, 
note),  "  For  when  water  was  poured  upon  the  hands  they  had 
to  be  lifted,  yet  so  that  the  water  should  neither  run  up  above 
the  wrist,  nor  back  again  upon  the  hand ;  best,  therefore,  by 
doubling  the  fingers  into  a  fist.  Hence  (as  Lightfoot  rightly  re- 
marks) Mark  vii.  3,  should  be  translated  except  they  wash  their 
hatids  with  the  fist?''  Tischendorf ,  in  his  eighth  edition,  retains  an 
ancient  reading,  trvKvd,  frequently  or  diligently,  which  may  go 
to  explain  this  translation  in  so  many  of  the  versions  (Gothic, 
Yulgate,  Syriac).  Meyer,  with  his  usual  literalism  gives  with 
the  fist,  which  I  am  inclined  to  adopt. 

Holding  (/cparowTes).  Strictly,  holding  ^m^  or /as^.  So 
Ileb.  iv.  14 ;  Apoc.  ii.  25  ;  denoting  dhstinate  adherence  to  thi 
tradition. 


Ch.  VII.]  MARK.  199 

'4.  Wash  themselves  {^a-Trrlatovrai).  Two  of  the  most  im- 
portant manuscripts,  however,  read  pavTiacavrai,  sjprinhled  them- 
selmes.  See  Rev.,  in  margin.  This  reading  is  adopted  by  West- 
eott  and  Hort.  The  American  Revisers  insist  on  hathe^  instead 
of  wash,  already  used  as  a  translation  of  vi-^mvTat  (ver.  3).  The 
scope  of  this  work  does  not  admit  of  our  going  into  the  endless 
controversy  to  which  this  word  has  given  rise.  It  will  be  snflS- 
cient  to  give  the  principal  facts  concerning  its  meaning  and 
usage. 

In  classical  Greek  the  primary  meaning  is  to  merse.  Thus 
Polybius  (i.,  51,  6),  describing  a  naval  battle  of  the  Eomans  and 
Carthaginians,  says,  "  They  sank{e^d.'iTrifyv)  many  of  the  ships." 
Josephns  ("  Jewish  War,"  iv.,  3,  3),  says  of  the  crowds  which 
flocked  into  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the  siege,  "  They  over- 
whelmed {e^dirTia-av)  the  city."  In  a  metaphorical  sense  Plato 
uses  it  of  drunkenness :  drowned  in  drink  {^e^am-na-nhoi, 
"  Symposium,"  176) ;  of  a  youth  overwhelmed  {^airri^o/j^evov) 
with  the  argument  of  his  adversary  ("  Euthydemus,"  277). 

In  the  Septuagint  the  verb  occurs  four  times :  Isa.  xxi,  4, 
Terror  hath  frighted  me.  Septuagint,  Iniquity  iaptises  me 
(/SoTTT/^et)  ;  2  Kings  v.  15,  of  Naaraan's  dipping  himself  in 
Jordan  (e/SaTTTtcraTo) ;  Judith  xii.  7,  Judith  washing  herself 
{i^airri^eTo)  at  the  fountain  ;  Sirach  xxxi.  25,  being  iaptised 
(/SaTTTt^oA'ei/os)  from  a  dead  body. 

The  New  Testament  use  of  the  word  to  denote  submersion 
for  a  religious  purpose,  may  be  traced  back  to  the  Levitical 
washings.  See  Levit.  xi.  32  (of  vessels) ;  xi.  40  (of  clothes) ; 
ITum.  viii.  6,  7  (sprinkling  with  purifying  water) ;  Exod.  xx'x. 
19,  21  (of  washing  hands  and  feet).  The  word  appears  to  have 
been  at  that  time  the  technical  term  foi'  such  washnigs  (compare 
Luke  xi.  38  ;  Heb.  ix.  10  ;  Mark  vii.  4),  and  could  not  therefore 
have  been  limited  to  the  meaning  immerse.  Thus  the  washing 
of  pots  and  vessels  for  ceremonial  purification  could  not  have 
been  by  plunging  them  in  water,  which  would  have  rendered 
impure  the  whole  body  of  purifying  water.  The  word  may  be 
taken  in  the  sense  of  washifig  or  sprinkling. 

"  The  Teaching  of  the  Apostles  "  (see  on  Matt.  x.  10)  throws 
light  on  the  elastic  interpretation  of  the  term,  in  its  directions 


200  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VIL 

for  baptism.  "  Baptize — in  living  (i.e.,  running)  water.  But 
if  thou  hast  not  living  water,  baptize  in  other  water ;  and  if 
thou  canst  not  in  cold,  then  in  warm.  But  if  thou  hast  neither, 
pour  water  upon  the  head  thrice  into  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  (Chap.  VII.). 

Pots  {^eaTav).  Another  of  Mark's  Latin  words,  adapted  from 
the  Latin  sextarius,  &  joint  measure.  Wye,  cruets.  Tynd,, 
cruses. 

Brazen  vessels  {'xoXkuov).    More  literally,  copper. 

Tables  {kXiv&v).  Omitted  in  some  of  the  best  manuscripts 
and  texts,  and  by  Kev.  The  A.  V.  is  a  mistranslation,  the 
word  meaning  couches.  If  this  belongs  in  the  text,  we  cer- 
tainly cannot  explain  ^aTTTia-fioini  as  immersion. 

6.   Well  (aaXoi?).     Finely,  heautlfully.     Ironical. 

10.  Honor.  Wye.  has  worship.  Compare  his  rendering  of 
Matt.  vi.  2,  "  That  they  be  worshipped  of  men ;  "  xiii.  57,  "  A 
prophet  is  not  without  worship  but  in  his  own  country ; "  and 
especially  John  xii.  26,  "  If  any  man  serve  me,  my  Father  shall 
worship  him." 

Die  the  death  {Bavdr^  TeKevTaTw).  Lit.,  come  to  an  end  hy 
death.     See  on  Matt.  xv.  4. 

11.  Corban.  Mark  only  gives  the  original  word,  and  then 
translates.     See  on  Matt.  xv.  6. 

13.  Making  of  none  effect.  Rev.,  malcing  void.  See  on 
Matt.  XV.  6. 

Ye  handed  down.  Note  the  past  tense,  identifying  them 
for  the  moment  with  their  forefathers.  Compare  Matt,  xxiii. 
35,  ^  Ye  slew.  Christ  views  the  Jewish  persecutors  and  bigots, 
ancient  and  modern,  as  a  whole,  actuated  by  one  spirit,  and 
ascribes  to  one  section  what  was  done  by  another. 


Ch.  vn.]  MARK.  201 

17.  The  disciples.  Matthew  says  Peter.  There  is  no  dis- 
crepancy.   Peter  spoke  for  the  band. 

18.  So.  So  unintelligent  as  not  to  understand  what  I  uttered 
to  the  crowd. 

19.  Draught  {a^eSp&va).  Liddell  and  Scott  give  only  one 
definition — ^jprvoy,  cloaca  ;  and  derive  from  eSpa,  seat,  hreech, 
funda/ment.  Compare  English  stool.  The  word  does  not  refer 
to  a  part  of  the  body. 

Purging  all  meats  {KoSapi^mv  TrdvTa  to,  ^poDfiara).  Ac- 
cording to  the  A.  Y.  these  words  are  in  apposition  with  draught : 
the  draught  which  makes  pure  the  whole  of  the  food,  since  it  is 
the  place  designed  for  receiving  the  impure  excrements. 

Christ  was  enforcing  the  truth  that  all  defilement  comes  from 
within.  This  was  in  the  face  of  the  Eabbinic  distinctions  be- 
tween clean  and  unclean  meats.  Christ  asserts  that  Levitical 
uncleanness,  such  as  eating  with  unwashed  hands,  is  of  small 
importance  compared  with  moral  uncleanness.  Peter,  still 
under  the  influence  of  the  old  ideas,  cannot  understand  the 
saying  and  asks  an  explanation  (Matt.  xv.  15),  which  Christ 
gives  in  vv.  18-23.  The  words  purging  aU  meats  (Rev.,  mak- 
ing all  m,eats  cleam)  are  not  Christ's,  but  the  Evangelist's,  ex- 
plaining the  bearing  of  Christ's  words ;  and  therefore  the  Eev. 
properly  renders,  this  he  said  (italics),  mahing  all  meats  clean. 
This  was  the  interpretation  of  Chrysostom,  who  says  in  his 
homily  on  Matthew :  "  But  Mark  says  that  he  said  these  things 
making  all  meats  pure."  Canon  Farrar  refers  to  a  passage 
cited  from  Gregory  Thaumaturgus :  "And  the  Saviour,  who 
purifies  all  meats,  says."  This  rendering  is  significant  in  the 
light  of  Peter's  vision  of  the  great  sheet,  and  of  the  words, 
"  "What  God  hath  cleansed  "  (eVa^a/ato-e),  in  which  Peter  prob- 
ably realized  for  the  first  time  the  import  of  the  Lord's  words 
on  this  occasion.  Canon  Farrar  remarks :  "  It  is  doubtless 
due  to  the  fact  that  St.  Peter,  the  informant  of  St.  Mark, 
in  writing  his  Gospel,  and  as  the  sole  ultimate  authority  for 
this  vision  in  the  Acts,  is  the  source  of  both  narratives, — that 


202  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VII. 

we  owe  the  hitherto  unnoticed  circumstance  that  the  two  verbs, 
clecmse  and  profane  (or  defile),  both  in  a  peculiarly  pregnant 
sense,  are  the  two  most  prominent  words  in  the  narrative  of 
both  events  "  ("  Life  and  Work  of  Paul,"  i.,  276-7). 

21.  Evil  Thoughts  (8ta\o7K7/noi  o/A:a«oi).  Thoughts,  those 
which  are  evil.  So  Kev.,  in  margin.  Thoughts  that  are  evil. 
The  word  SiaKoyiafMol,  thoughts,  does  not  in  itself  convey  a  bad 
sense ;  and  hence  the  addition  of  adjectives  denoting  evil,  as 
here  and  James  ii.  4.  Radically,  it  carries  the  idea  of  discus- 
sion or  debate,  with  an  under-thought  of  suspicion  or  doubt, 
either  with  one's  own  mind,  as  Luke  v.  22 ;  vi.  8  ;  or  with 
another,  Luke  ix.  46  ;  Philip,  ii.  14;  Eom.  xiv.  1. 

22.  Wickedness  {irovrtpiai).  Plural.  Eev.,  wichednesses. 
Prom  TTovelv,  to  toil.  The  adjective  Troz/iypo?  means,  first,  op- 
jpressed  by  toils  ;  then  in  bad  case  or  plight,  from  which  it  runs 
into  the  sense  of  morally  bad.  This  conception  seems  to  have 
been  associated  by  the  high-born  with  the  life  of  the  lower, 
laboring,  slavish  class ;  just  as  our  word  hnave  (like  the  Ger- 
man Jcnabe  from  which  it  is  derived)  originally  meant  simply  a 
boy  or  a  servant-lad.  As  ttoi/os  means  hard,  vigorous  labor, 
battle  for  instance,  so  the  adjective  "jrovrjpo'i,  in  a  moral  sense, 
indicates  acti/ve  wickedness.  So  Jeremy  Taylor  :  "  Aptness  to 
do  shrewd  turns,  to  delight  in  mischiefs  and  tragedies ;  a  loving 
to  trouble  one's  neighbor  and  do  him  ill  offices."  IIov7)p6<i, 
therefore,  is  dangerous,  destructive.  Satan  is  called  o  Trovtjpo^, 
the  wicked  one.  KaKO';,  evil  (see  evil  thoughts,  ver.  21),  character- 
izes evil  rather  as  defect :  "  That  which  is  not  such  as,  accord- 
ing to  its  nature,  destination,  and  idea  it  might  be  or  ought 
to  be  "  (Cremer).  Hence  of  incapacity  in  war  y  of  cowardice 
{Kaicid).  KaKO'i  BovXo^,  the  evil  servant,  in  Matt.  xxiv.  48,  is  a 
servant  wanting  in  proper  fidelity  and  diligence.  Thus  the 
thoughts  are  styled  evil,  as  being  that  which,  in  their  nature 
and  purpose,  they  ought  not  to  be.  Matthew,  however  (xv.  19), 
calls  these  thoughts  irovrjpot,  the  thoughts  in  action,  taking 
shape  in  purpose.     Both  adjectives  occur  in  Apoc.  xvi.  2. 


Ch.  VII.]  MARK.  203 

Lasciviousness  (aa-iXr^eia).  Derivation  unknown.  It  in- 
cludes lasciviousness,  and  may  well  mean  that  here ;  but  is 
often  used  without  this  notion.  In  classical  Greek  it  is  defined 
as  violence,  with  sjpitefvl  treatment  and  audacity.  As  in  this 
passage  its  exact  meaning  is  not  implied  by  its  being  classed 
with  other  kindred  terms,  it  would  seem  better  to  take  it  in  as 
wide  a  sense  as  possible — that  of  lawless  insolence  and  wanton 
caries,  and  to  render,  with  Trench,  wantonness,  since  that 
word,  as  he  remarks,  "  stands  in  remarkable  ethical  connec- 
tion w\t\\  aaeXr/eia,  and  has  the  same  duplicity  of  meaning" 
("  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testament ").  At  Rom.  xiii.  13, 
where  lasciviousness  seems  to  be  the  probable  meaning,  from 
its  association  with  chambering  {Koirai,^),  it  is  rendered  wanton- 
in  A.  V.  and  Kev.,  as  also  at  2  Pet.  ii.  18. 


Evil  eye  {6<f)$aXiJi,o<;  irovqpo'i).  A  malicious,  mischief -work- 
ing eye,  with  the  meaning  of  positive,  injurious  activity.  See 
on  wickednesses. 

Blasphemy  {^\aa(fyr]/j,ia).  The  word  does  not  necessarily 
imply  blasphemy  against  God.  It  is  used  of  reviling,  calumny, 
evil-speaking  in  general.  See  Matt,  xxvii.  39  ;  Rom.  iii.  8 ; 
xiv.  16 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  4,  etc.     Hence  Eev.  renders  railing. 

Pride  (virepr](f>avia).  From  virep,  abov'e,  and  (^aivea^ai,  to 
show  one's  self.  The  picture  in  the  word  is  that  of  a  man  with 
his  head  held  high  above  others.  It  is  the  sin  of  an  uplifted 
heart  against  God  and  man.  Compare  Prov.  xvi.  5  ;  Rom.  xii. 
16  (mind  not  high  things) ;  1  Tim.  iii.  6. 

24.  Went  away.  See  on  ch.  vi.  31.  The  entering  into  the 
house  and  the  wish  to  be  secluded  are  peculiar  to  Mark. 

25.  Daughter  i^v^aTpiov).  Diminutive.  Rev.,  little  daugh- 
ter.    See  on  ch.  v.  23. 

26.  Syro-Phoenician.  Phoenician  of  Syria,  as  distinguish- 
ed from  a  Lilyo-PhoenicioAi  of  North  Africa,  Libya  being  often 
used  for  Africa. 


204  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VH 

27.  Let  the  children  first  be  filled.    Peculiar  to  Mark. 
The  dogs.    Diminutive.     See  on  Matt.  xv.  26. 

28.  Mark  adds  under  the  tcMe. 

The  children's  crumbs.  See  onMatt.  xv.  26.  This  would 
indicate  that  the  little  dogs  were  pet  dogs  of  the  children,  their 
masters. 

29.  30.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

Laid  (fie/SXTjfj.evov).  Lit.,  thrown.  She  had  probably  ex- 
perienced some  fearful  convulsion  when  the  demon  departed. 
Compare  Mark  ix.  22,  of  the  demon  which  possessed  the  boy : 
"  It  hath  cast  him,  etc.  (e/SaXev)."     See  also  Mark  i.  26  ;  ix.  26. 

32-37.  A  narrative  peculiar  to  Mark. 

32.  Deaf  {Kcocpbv).     See  on  Matt.  ix.  32. 

Had  an  impediment  in  his  speech  (jioyiXaKov).  Moyif, 
with  difficulty  /  XaXo:;,  speaking.  Not  absolutely  dumb.  Com- 
pare he  spakeplain,  yer.  35. 

33.  Put  (e/SaXei/).     Lit,  threw :  thrust. 

35.  Plain  {opl^m).     Lit.,  rightly.     So  Wye. 

36.  Charged  (Steo-TeiXaro).  The  verb  means,  first,  to  sep- 
arate /  then  to  define  or  distinguish  ;  and  as  that  which  is  sep- 
arated and  distinguished  is  emjphasized,  to  commamd  or  straitly 
charge. 

37.  Astonished.     See  on  Matt.  vii.  28. 

To  speak  (XaXeti;).  See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  The  emphasis 
is  not  on  the  matter,  but  on  the  fact  of  speech. 


Ch.  vrn.]  MAKK.  206 


CHAPTER  Till. 

2.  I  have  compassion  (anfKa'^yyiifni.ai).  A  peculiar  verb, 
from  atfKarfyya,  the  inward  parts,  especially  the  nobler  entrails 
— the  heart,  lungs,  liver,  and  kidneys.  These  came  gradually 
to  denote  the  seat  of  the  affections,  like  our  word  heart.  This 
explains  the  frequent  use  of  the  word  howels  in  the  A.  V.  in  the 
sense  of  tender  rneroy,  affection,  cornpassion.  See  Luke  i.  78 ; 
2  Cor.  vii.  15  ;  Philip,  i.  8 ;  Philem.  7,  12,  20.  The  Eev.  has 
properly  rejected  it  in  every  such  case,  using  it  only  in  its 
literal  sense  in  the  single  passage,  Acts  i.  18. 

They  have  been  with  me  {irpoa-fjihovaiv).  Lit.,  they  con- 
ti/rnoe,  as  Eev, 

3.  Faint.     See  on  Matt.  xv.  32.     Wye,  fail. 
Some  of  them  came  from  far.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 
6.  To  sit  down  (avwireaelv).     Lit.,  to  recline. 
Brake  and  gave.     See  on  Mark  vi.  41. 

8.  Were  filled.  See  on  Matt.  v.  6.  Wye,  fulfilled.  Tynd., 
sufficed. 

9.  Baskets.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20. 

Four  thousand.  Matthew  (x'v.  38)  here  adds  a  detail  which 
we  should  rather  expect  in  Mark :  leside  women  and  children. 

10.  With  his  disciples.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

11.  Began.  The  beginnings  of  things  seem  to  have  a  pe- 
cnliar  interest  for  Mark.  See  i.  1,  45  ;  iv.  1 ;  v.  17,  20 ;  vi.  2, 
7,  34,  55. 


206  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VDX 

Sign  [ar^fielov).  See  on  Matt.  xi.  20.  Wye,  token.  As  ap- 
plied to  the  miracles  of  our  Lord,  this  word  emphasizes  their 
ethical  purport,  as  declaring  that  the  miraculous  act  points  back 
of  itself  to  the  grace  and  power  or  divine  character  or  authority 
of  the  doer. 

12.  Sighed  deeply  in  his  spirit.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

There  shall  no  sign  be  given  {elho'hrjaeraia'n^elov).  Lit., 
■if  a  sign  shall  he  given.  The  expression  is  elliptical.  It  is  a 
Hebrew  idiom,  and  is  really,  at  bottom,  a  form  of  imprecation. 
If  I  do  not  thus  or  so,  may  some  judgment  overtake  me.  Com- 
pare Heb.  iii.  11. 

14.  The  one  loaf  is  a  detail  given  by  Mark  only. 

22-26.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

23.  Took  [eiriKa^ofievo';).     Tynd.,  caught. 

If  he  saw  {eXrt  /SXevret?).  Rev.,  more  accurately,  renders  the 
direct  question :  8eest  thou  aught  ?  The  change  of  tenses  is 
graphic.     Ashed  (imperfect).     Dost  thou  see  (present). 

24.  I  see  men  as  trees  walking  (following  the  reading, 
BXetro)  roiii;  av'^paTrov;  cb?  BivBpa  •jrepiiraTovvTa^).  The  Kev. 
reads,  following  the  amended  text,  I  see  m^n,for  {on)  Ihehold 
{opib)  them  as  trees,  walking.  He  saw  them  dirnhj.  They 
looked  like  trees,  large  and  misshapen ;  but  he  knew  they  were 
men,  for  they  were  walking  about. 

25.  Made  him  look  up.  The  best  texts  omit,  and  substi- 
tute Bii^eyjrev,  he  looked  stedfastly.  See  on  Matt.  vii.  5.  In- 
stead of  vaguely  staring,  he  fixed  his  eyes  on  definite  objects. 

He  saw  (ive^Xeirev).  Imperfect  tense.  Continuous  action. 
He  saw  and  continued  to  see.  Compare  the  aorist  tense  above : 
Jle  looked  stedfastly,  fastened  his  eyes,  denoting  the  single  act, 
the  first  exercise  of  his  restored  sight. 


Ch.  Vni.]  MARK.  207 

Every  man.  Following  the  reading  a-7ravTa<;.  But  the  best 
texts  read  airavra,  all  things.     So  Kev. 

Clearly  {Tri'Kavy&<;).  From  rJjXe,  far,  avyij,  shining.  The 
farthest  things  were  clearly  seen. 

29.  He  saith  (i'rrrjpdiTa).  More  correctly,  he  questioned  or 
ashed.  So  Rev.  Mark  omits  the  commendation  of  Peter.  See 
Introduction. 

On  vv.  31-33,  compare  notes  on  Matt.  xvi.  21-28. 

32.  He  spake  the  saying  openly.  Mark  only.  Not  as  a 
secret  or  mystery,  as  in  his  words  about  being  lifted  wp,  or  huild- 
mg  the  temple  in  three  days.  Not  ambiguously,  but  explicitly. 
Wye,  plainly. 

34.  Jesus  now  pauses ;  for  what  he  has  to  say  now  is  to  be 
said  to  all  who  follow  him.  Hence  he  calls  the  multil/ude  with 
his  disciples.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

Will  (^eXet).  Eev.,  would.  See  on  Matt.  i.  19.  It  is  more 
than  is  wishful. 

His  cross.  The  pronoun  avrov,  his,  is  in  an  emphatic  posi- 
tion. 

35.  And  the  gospel's.    Pecuhar  to  Mark. 

36.  Gain — lose.     See  on  Matt.  xvi.  26. 

38.  My  words.  Bengel  remarks  that  one  may  confess  Christ 
in  general  and  yet  be  ashamed  of  this  or  that  saying. 

In  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation.  Peculiar  to 
Mark. 


208  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Compare  Matt.  xvii.  1-13  ;  Luke  ix.  28-36. 

2.  Transfigured.     See  on  Matt.  xvii.  2. 

3.  Shining  (o-TiX/Soi'Ta).  'Rev.,  glistering.  The  word  is  used 
of  a  gleam  from  polished  surfaces — arms,  sleek  horses,  water  in 
motion,  the  twinkling  of  the  stars,  lightning. 

As  no  fuller,  etc.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

5.  Answered.  Though  no  question  had  been  asked  him: 
but  the  Lord's  transfiguration  was  an  appeal  to  him  and  he  de- 
sired to  respond. 

7.  Sore  afraid.     Wye,  aghast  hy  d/read. 
Beloved  son.    Wye,  most  dearworthy. 

8.  Suddenly  {i^diriva).  The  Greek  word  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament. 

9.  Tell  {BtTjyija-covTai).  Mark's  word  is  more  graphic  than 
Matthew's  eiTrrjre.  The  word  is  from  Bid,  through,  and  ■^yeo/^at., 
to  lead  the  way.  Hence  to  lead  one  through  a  series  of  events : 
to  narrate. 

Questioning.    Wye,  asking.    Tynd.,  disputing. 

14.  The  scribes.  The  particularizing  of  the  scribes  as  the 
questioners,  and  vv.  15, 16,  are  peculiar  to  Mark. 

15.  Were  greatly  amazed  {i^e^a/j,^^:^aav).  A  word  pe- 
culiar to  Mark.     See  Introduction. 


Ch.  IX.]  MARK.  209 

18.  Ittaketh  him(KaTa\a/Sj;).  lAt^seisethholdofhim.  Our 
word  catalepsy  is  derived  from  this. 

Teareth  {prjo-a-ei).  Eev.,  dasheth  down,  with  rendeth  in 
margin.  The  verb  is  a  form  of  prffvvixi,  to  Ireak.  The  form 
prjaa-m  is  used  in  classical  Greek  of  dancers  beating  the  ground, 
and  of  beating  drums.  Later,  in  tlie  form  pda-creiv,  a  term  of 
fighters :  to  fell,  or  knock  down,  which  is  the  sense  adopted  by 
Rev. 

Gnasheth  with  his  teeth.  'Rev.,  grindeth.  This  and  the 
pvning  away  are  peculiar  to  Mark. 

19.  Faithless  {aina-TO';).  Faithless  has  acquired  the  sense 
of  treacherous,  not  keeping  faith.  But  Christ  means  without 
faith,  and  such  is  Tyndale's  translation.  Wye,  out  of  belief. 
Unhelieving  would  be  better  here.  The  Eev.  retains  this  ren- 
dering of  the  A.  V.  at  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  15 ;  Tit.  i.  15 ;  Apoc. 
xxi.  8,  and  elsewhere. 

20.  Mark  is  more  specific  in  his  detail  of  the  convulsion 
which  seized  the  lad  as  he  was  coming  to  Jesus.  He  notes  the 
convulsion  as  coming  on  at  the  demoniac's  sight  of  our  Lord. 
"  When  he  saw  him,,  straightway  the  spirit,"  etc.  Also  his  fall- 
ing on  the  ground,  wallowing  and  foaming.  We  might  expect 
the  detail  of  these  symptoms  in  Luke,  the  physician. 

21-27.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  He  gives  the  dialogue  between 
Jesus  and  the  boy's  father,  and  relates  the  process  of  the  cure 
in  graphic  detail. 

22.  Us.  Yery  touching.  The  father  identifies  himself  with 
the  son's  misery.  Compare  the  Syro-Phoenician,  who  makes 
her  daughter's  case  entirely  her  own  :  "  Have  mercy  on  me  " 
(Matt.  XV.  22). 

23.  If  thou  canst  believe  {^o  el  Svvrj).  Lit.,  theifthou  canst. 
The  word  believe  is  wanting  in  the  best  texts.  It  is  difficult  to 
explain  to  an  English  reader  the  force  of  the  definite  article 

14 


210  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX 

here.  "  It  takes  up  substantially  the  word  spoken  by  the  father, 
and  puts  it  with  lively  emphasis,  without  connecting  it  with 
the  further  construction,  in  order  to  link  its  fulfilment  to  the 
petitioner's  own  faith"  (Meyer).  We  might  paraphrase  thus. 
Jesus  said  :  "  that  if  thou  canst  of  thine— as  regards  that,  all 
things  are  possible,"  etc.  There  is  a  play  upon  the  words  Sui/j;, 
coAist,  and  Swara,  jpossible,  which  cannot  be  neatly  rendered. 
"  If  thou  canst — all  things  can  heP 

24.  Cried  out  and  said  (Kpd^a<; — eXeyev).  The  former  de- 
noting the  inarticulate  cry,  the  ejaculation,  followed  by  the 
words,  "  Lord,  I  believe,"  etc. 

30.  Passed  tiirough  {TrapeTropevovTo).  Lit.,  passed  along 
(irapa).  Not  tarrying.  Bengel  says,  "  not  through  the  cities, 
hnt past  them." 

31.  He  taught  (iSiSaa-Kev).  The  Eev.  would  have  done  bet- 
ter to  give  the  force  of  the  imperfect  here  :  He  was  teaching. 
He  sought  seclusion  because  he  was  engaged  for  the  time  in  in- 
structing. The  teaching  was  the  continuation  of  the  "  began  to 
teach  "  (viii.  31). 

Is  delivered.  The  present  tense  is  graphic.  The  future  is 
realized  by  the  Lord  as  already  present.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  2. 

33-35.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

35.  Servant  (Sta/coi^o?).  Rev.,  minister.  Probably  from 
ZimKod,  to  pursue  y  to  be  the  follower  of  a  person  ;  to  attach  one's 
self  to  him.  As  distinguished  from  other  words  in  the  I^ew 
Testament  meaning  servant,  this  represents  the  servant  in  his 
activity  ;  while  SovXa,  slave,  represents  him  in  his  condition 
or  relation  as  a  hondm.an.  A  SiciKovoi;  may  be  either  a  slave  or 
a  f  I'eeman.  The  word  deacon  is  an  almost  literal  transcription 
of  the  original.  See  Philip,  i.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  8,  12.  The  word 
is  often  used  in  the  New  Testament  to  denote  ministers  of  the 
gospel.  See  1  Cor.  iii.  5  ;  Eph.  iii.  7 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  2,  and  else- 
where.    Mark  uses  BovXo';  in  x.  44. 


Ch.  X.]  MARK.  211 

36.  Let  {eaT7]<Tev).     Wye.  renders  ordamed. 

When  he  had  taken  him  in  his  arms  {evaritcakuTdfi.evo'i). 
The  verb  is  found  only  in  Mark,  and  only  he  records  this  detail. 

37.  In  my  name.  Lit.,  '■'■upon  {em)  my  name."  See  on 
Matt,  xviii.  5. 

38.  in  thy  name.  John's  conscience  is  awakened  by  the 
Lord's  words.  They  had  not  received  the  man  who  cast  out 
devils  in  Christ's  name. 

42.  iVfillstone.  Eev.,  great  millstone.  See  on  Matt,  xviii. 
6.  Wye,  millstone  of  asses.  Note  the  graphic  present  and 
perfect  tenses ;  the  millstone  is  hanged,  and  he  hath  been  cast. 

43.  Hell.     See  on  Matt.  v.  22. 

47.  With  one  eye  (jiov6(j)3-aXfiov).  Lit.,  one-eyed.  One  of 
Mark's  words  which  is  branded  as  slang.  Wye.  oddly  renders 
goggle-eyed. 

50.  Have  lost  its  saltness  (ai'aXovyei'ijTat).  \A\,.,7nay  hm)e 
'become  saltless.     Compare  on  Matt.  v.  13. 

Will  ye  season  {apTva-ere).  Lit.,  will  ye  restore.  Compare 
Col.  iv.  6. 

CHAPTER  X. 
2.  Tempting.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  13. 

4.  Bill  {^i^iov).  See  on  Matt.  xix.  7.  Diminutive.  Lit., 
a  Utile  hook  ;  Lat.,  Uhellus,  from  which  comes  our  word  lihel,  a 
written  accusation.  Accordingly  Wye.  has  a  libel  of  forsaking, 
and  Tynd.  a  testimonial  of  her  dvvorcement. 

7.  Shall  cleave.     See  on  Matt.  xix.  5.     Tynd.,  bide  by. 


212  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

8.  Shall  be  one  flesh  {ecrovrai.  ek  a-dpKa  fiiav).  Lit.,  "shall 
be  unto  one  flesh."  The  preposition  expresses  more  graphically 
than  the  A.  V.  the  heoommg  of  one  from  two.  So  Kev.,  shall 
hecome. 

9.  What.     Kegarding  the  two  as  one. 

13.  They  brought  {irpoa-e^epov).  Imperfect  tense;  they 
were  bringing,  as  he  went  on  his  way.  Similarly,  were  reiuJe- 
ing,  as  they  were  successively  brought. 

16.  Took  them  in  his  arms.     See  on  ix.  36. 

Put  his  hands  upon  them  and  blessed  them.  The  best 
texts  read  KuTevKoyei,  riS-el?  to,^  X6t/3«9  eir  avrd,  Messed  them, 
laying  his  hands  upon  them  ;  including  the  laying  on  of  hands 
in  the  blessing.  The  compound  rendered  Messed  occurs  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  stronger  than  the  simple 
form,  and  expresses  the  earnestness  of  Christ's  interest.  Alford 
veafiiQve,  fervently  Messed. 

17.  Running  and  kneeled.     Two  details  peculiar  to  Mark. 

18.  Why  callest  thou,  etc.  Compare  Matt.  xix.  17.  The 
renderings  of  the  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  here  are  correct.  There  is  no 
change  of  reading  as  in  Matthew,  where  the  text  was  altered 
to  conform  it  to  Mark  and  Luke. 

22.  He  was  sad  {(7Tvyvda-a<;).  Applied  to  the  sky  in  Matt, 
xvi.  3 ;  lowering.  The  word  paints  forcibly  the  gloom  which 
clouded  his  face. 

25.  Needle  (pac^tSo?).  A  word  stigmatized  by  the  gram- 
marians as  unclassical.  One  of  them  (Phrynichus)  says,  "  As 
for  pa^k,  nobody  would  know  what  it  is."  Matthew  also  uses 
it.  See  on  Matt.  xix.  24.  Luke  uses  /SeXoi^T^?,  the  surgical 
needle.     See  on  Luke  xviii.  25. 

30.  Houses,  etc.  These  details  are  peculiar  to  Mark.  'Note 
especially  with  j)ersecutions,  and  see  Introduction.     "With  beau- 


Ch.  X.]  MARK.  213 

tif  ul  delicacy  the  Lord  omits  wives  ;  so  that  Julian's  scoff  that 
the  Christian  has  the  promise  of  a  hundred  wives  is  without 
foundation. 

32.  Were  amazed.     The  sudden  awe  which  fell  on  the  dis- 
ciples is  noted  by  Mark  only. 

42.  Which  are  accounted  to  rule.  Wye,  that  seem  to 
have  prmceheacl  on  folks. 

43.  Minister.     See  on  ix.  35. 

45.  For  many  [ovtI  ■n-oXXwv).  For,  in  the  sense  of  over 
against,  instead  of  ,•  not  on  iehalfof. 

46.  Son  of  Timaeus.  Mark,  as  usual,  is  particular  about 
names. 

Blind.  Diseases  of  the  eye  are  very  common  in  the  East. 
Thomson  says  of  Kamleh,  "  The  ash-heaps  are  extremely  mis- 
chievous ;  on  the  occurrence  of  the  slightest  wind  the  air  is 
filled  with  a  fine,  pungent  dust,  which  is  very  injurious  to  the 
eyes.  I  once  walked  the  streets  counting  all  that  were  either 
blind  or  had  defective  eyes,  and  it  amounted  to  about  one-half 
the  male  population.  The  women  I  could  not  count,  for  they 
are  rigidly  veiled  "  ("  Land  and  Book  ").  Palgrave  says  that 
ophthalmia  is  fearfully  prevalent,  especially  among  children. 
"It  would  be  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  one  adult  out  of 
every  five  has  his  eyes  more  or  less  damaged  by  the  conse- 
quences of  this  disease  "  ("  Central  and  Eastern  Arabia  "). 

Beggar.     See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

49,  50.  Peculiar  to  Mark,  and  adding  greatly  to  the  vividness 
of  the  narrative. 

50.  Rose  (dvaa-Ta^).  The  best  texts  read  dvairi^Brja-a'},  leaped 
up,  or,  as  Kev.,  sprang  up. 


214  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XX 


CHAPTER  XL 

2.  Colt.  Only  Matthew  adds  the  ass.  Mark  and  Luke  have 
colt  only. 

4.  In  a  place  where  two  ways  met  (kin,  tov  afi(f)6Sov). 
"AfjLcpoSov  is  literally  any  road  which  leads  round  (a/i<f)i)  a  place 
or  a  block  of  buildings.  Hence  the  windvng  way.  The  word 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Key.,  in  the  open  st/reet, 
which  in  an  Eastern  town  is  usually  crooked.  Perhaps,  by  con- 
trast with  the  usual  crookedness,  the  street  in  Damascus  where 
Paul  lodged  was  called /lS;(7'l^^p'A^  (Acts  ix.  11).  "It  is  a  topo- 
graphical note,"  says  Dr.  Morison,  "  that  could  only  be  given  by 
an  eye-witness."  The  detail  of  ver.  4  is  peculiar  to  Mark.  Ac- 
cording to  Luke  (xxii.  8),  Peter  was  one  of  those  sent,  and  his 
stamp  is  probably  on  the  narrative. 

8.  In  the  way.  Both  Matthew  and  Luke  have  ev,  in ;  but 
Mark,  el<s,  into.  They  threw  their  garments  into  the  way  and 
spread  them  there. 

Branches.  Matthew,  Mark,  and  John  use  each  a  different 
word  for  iranches.  Matt.,  kXclBov^,  from  «Xaa>,  to  break  •  hence 
a  young  slip  or  shoot,  such  as  is  broken  off  for  grafting — a  twig, 
as  related  to  a  branch.  Mark,  crn^dSa<;,  from  cnei^w,  to  tread 
or  beat  down  /  hence  a  mass  of  straw,  rushes,  or  leaves  beaten 
together  or  strewed  loose,  so  as  to  form  a  bed  or  a  carpeted  way. 
A  Utter  of  branches  and  leaves  cut  from  the  fields  (only  Mark) 
near  by.  John,  fiata,  strictly  palm-branches,  the  feathery 
fronds  foi'ming  the  tufted  crown  of  the  tree. 

Hosanna.    'M.e&mng,  0  save! 

11.  When  he  had  looked  round.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  As^ 
the  master  of  the  house,  inspecting.  "  A  look  serious,  sorrow- 
ful, judicial "  (Meyer).     Compare  iii.  5,  34. 


Ch.  XI.]  MARK.  215 

13.  Afar  off.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

Having  leaves.     An  unusual  thing  at  that  early  season. 

If  haply  {el  apa).  If,  suchheing  the  case,  i.e.,  the  tree  having 
leaves — he  might  find  fruit,  which,  in  the  tig,  precedes  the  leaf. 
Mark  alone  adds,  "  for  the  time  of  figs  was  not  yet." 

14.  His  disciples  heard  it.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

15.  Money-changers  {icoWv/Sia-Twv).  Another  unclassical 
word,  but  used  also  by  Matthew.  "  Snch  words  as  these  might 
naturally  find  their  place  in  the  mongrel  Greek  of  the  slaves 
and  freedmen  who  formed  the  first  congiegations  of  the  church 
in  Rome"  (Ezra  Abbott,  Art.  "  Gospels,"  in  Encyc.  Britannica). 
See  on  Matt.  xxi.  12. 

16.  Vessel  (cr/cet)o9).     See  on  Matt.  xii.  29 ;  Mark  iii.  27. 

Temple  (lepov).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  5.  The  temple  enclosure, 
not  the  vao:;,  or  sanctuary.  People  would  be  tempted  to  carry 
vessels,  etc.,  through  this,  in  order  to  save  a  long  circuit.  The 
court  of  the  Gentiles,  moreover,  was  not  regarded  by  the  Jews  as 
entitled  to  the  respect  due  to  the  other  part  of  the  enclosure. 
This  our  Lord  rebukes. 

17.  Of  all  nations.  Which  rendering  implies,  shall  be  called 
hy  all  nations.  But  render  with  Rev.,  a  house  of  prayer  for 
all  the  nations  (vaaiv  rot?  e^veuiv). 

Thieves  (^rja-Tosv).  Rev.,  correctly,  robbers.  See  on  Matt. 
xxi.  13;  xxvi.  55;  John  x.  1,  8.  From  Xrjk  or  \eia,  booty.  In 
classical  usage  mostly  of  cattle.  The  robber,  conducting  his 
operations  on  a  large  and  systematic  scale,  and  with  the  aid  of 
bands,  is  thus  to  be  distinguished  from  the  KXeirTrj';,  or  thief 
who  purloins  or  pilfers  whatever  comes  to  hand.  A  den  would 
be  appropriate  to  a  band  of  robbers,  not  to  thieves.  Thus  the 
traveller  to  Jericho,  in  Christ's  parable  (Luke  x.  30),  fell  among 
robbers,  not  thieves. 


216  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XH 

19.  When  evening  was  come  (orav).  Lit.,  whenever  even- 
ing came  on  ;  not  ou  the  evening  of  the  purging  of  the  temple 
merely,  bnt  each  day  at  evening. 

20-24.  All  the  details  are  peculiar  to  Mark.  Compare  Matt, 
xxi.  20-22. 

23.  Shall  come  to  pass  {jiveTai).  Kather  comethtopass,  as 
Eev. 

24.  Receive  (eXa/Sere).  More  lit.,  received.  Eev.,  ha/ve  re- 
ceived. 

26.  Trespasses.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  14. 

27.  Walking.     An  addition  of  Mark. 


CHAPTER  XIL 
1-11.  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  33-46. 

1.  Wine-fat  {vTroKriviov).  Rev.,  wine-press.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  The  wine-press  was  constructed  in  the  side 
of  a  sloping  rock,  in  which  a  trough  was  excavated,  which  was 
the  wine-press  proper.  Underneath  this  was  dug  another 
trough,  with  openings  communicating  with  the  trough  above, 
into  which  the  juice  ran  from  the  press.  This  was  called  by 
the  Romans  lacus,  or  the  lake.  The  word  here  used  for  the 
whole  structure  strictly  means  this  trough  underneath  {viro)  the 
press  {Xrjvo^).  This  is  the  explanation  of  Wye's  translation, 
dalf  (delved),  a  lake. 

Went  into  a  far  country  {aireS'^fj^c-ev).  But  this  is  too 
strong.  The  word  means  simply  went  abroad.  So  Wye,  went 
forth  in  pilgrimage  /  and  Tynd.,  into  a  st/range  country.  Rev., 
another  coxmtry.     See  ou  Matt.  xxv.  14. 


Ch.  xh]  mark.  217 

Of  the  fruits.  Or,  literally,  from  {dirb)  the  fruits,  showing 
that  the  rent  was  to  be  paid  in  kind. 

6.  Therefore.     The  best  texts  omit. 
Last.     Mark  only. 

7.  Those  husbandmen.  Lit,  they  the  hicsiandmen.  Wye, 
tencmts. 

10.  Scripture  (ypa^^i/).  A  j)assage  oi  scripture :  hence  fre- 
quently t/iis  scripture  ;  another  scripture  ;  the  same  scripture. 
Luke  iv.  21 ;  John  xix.  37 ;  Acts  i.  16. 

11.  The  Lord's  doing  (Tro/ja  Kvpiov).    Lit., yrom  the  Lord. 
13-17.  Compare  Matt.  xxii.  15-22. 

13.  Catch  (ar/pevcraia-iv) .  From  ar/pa,  hunting,  the  chase. 
Hence  the  picture  in  the  word  is  that  of  hunting,  while  that  in 
Matthew's  word,  Trar/iSevaaxriv,  is  that  of  catching  in  a  trap. 
See  on  Matt.  xxii.  15. 

14.  Tribute.    See  on  Matt.  xxii.  19. 
Person  {irpoa-coirov).     JAt.,face. 

Shall  we  give,  etc.     A  touch  peculiar  to  Mark. 
16.  Penny.    See  on  Matt.  xx.  2. 

16.  Image  and  superscription.    See  on  Matt.  xxii.  20. 

17.  They  marvelled  (i^eSavfui^ov).  The  preposition  e'f, 
out  of,  indicates  great  astonishment.  They  marvelled  out  of 
measure.  Hence  Kev.,  marvelled  greatly.  The  A.  V.  follows 
another  reading,  with  the  simple  verb  eBavfia^op.  The  imper- 
fect denotes  corvtmuomce :  they  stood  wondering. 


218  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Xn. 

18.  Who  {oi:Tive<s).  This  pronoun  marks  the  Sadducees  as  a 
doss :  of  that  party  characterized  by  their  denial  of  the  resur- 
rection. 

Asked  {e-Tn^pcoTcov).     Stronger.     They  questioned. 

24.  Therefore  {Bia  tovto).  A  rendering  which  obscures  the 
meaning.  The  woi-ds  point  forward  to  the  next  two  clauses. 
The  reason  of  your  error  is  your  ignorance  of  the  scriptures  and 
of  the  power  of  God.  Hence  Eev.,  correctly,  Is  it  not  for  this 
cause  that  ye  err  f 

Err  (ifXavaa-Se).  Lit.,  wander  out  of  the  way.  -Compare 
Latin  errare.  Of  the  wandering  sheep.  Matt,  xviii.  12  ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  25.  Of  the  martyrs  wandering  in  the  deserts,  Heb.  xi.  38. 
Often  rendered  in  the  New  Testament  deceive.  See  Mark  xiii. 
5,  6.  Compare  aa-Tepe<;  irXavrJTai,  wandering  stars  (Jude  13), 
from  which  our  word^^Me^. 

26.  How  in  the  bush  God  spake.  An  utterly  wrong  ren- 
dering. In  the  hush  (eTrl  tov  fidrov),  refers  to  a  particular  sec- 
tion in  the  Pentateuch,  Exod.  iii.  2-6.  The  Jews  were  accus- 
tomed to  designate  portions  of  scripture  by  the  most  noteworthy 
thing  contained  in  them.  Therefore  Rev.,  rightly,  in  theplace 
concerning  the  hush.  Wye,  in  the  hooh  of  Moses  on  the  hush. 
The  article  refers  to  it  as  something  familiar.  Compare  Rom. 
xi.  2,  611  'HXia ;  i.e.,  in  the  section  of  scripture  which  tells  of 
Elijah.  There,  however,  the  Rev.  retains  the  A.  V.  of  Mijah, 
and  puts  in  in  the  margin. 

27.  Ye  do  greatly  err.  An  emphatic  close,  peculiar  to 
Mark. 

28.  Well  {jcdkSi';').     Lit.,  heautifully,  finely,  ad/mi/rdbly. 

What  {TToia).     Rather,  of  what  nature. 

30.  With  all  thy  heart  (e^  oXt;?  t^9  KapBia^  aov).  Lit.,  out 
of  thy  whole  heaH.     The  heart,  not  only  as  the  seat  of  the 


Ch.  XII.]  MARK.  219 

affections,  but  as  the  centre  of  our  complex  being — physical, 
moral,  spiritual,  and  intellectual. 

Soul  {■yjrvxv';).  The  word  is  often  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment in  its  original  meaning  of  life.  See  Matt.  ii.  20  ;  xx.  28  ; 
Acts  XX.  10  ;  Kom.  xi.  3  ;  John  x.  11.  Hence,  as  an  emphatic 
designation  of  the  man  himself.  See  Matt.  xii.  18  ;  lieb.  x.  38 ; 
Luke  xxi.  19.  So  that  the  word  denotes  "  life  in  the  distinct- 
ness of  individual  existence  "  (Cremer).  See  farther  on  ■xjrvx'-ico'i, 
spiritual,  1  Cor.  xv.  44. 

Mind  (Stai/ot'as).  The  faculty  of  thought:  understanding, 
especially  the  moral  understanding. 

31.  Neighbor.     See  on  Matt.  v.  43. 
32-34.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

32.  Well,  Master,  thou  hast  said  the  truth  ;  for  there  is 
one  God.     All  the  best  texts  omit  God. 

Well  («a\ft)?).  Exclamatory,  as  one  says  good!  on  hearing 
something  which  he  approves. 

The  truth  (eV  aXi^^eta?).  Incorrect.  The  phrase  is  ad- 
verbial; of  a  truth,  in  truth,  t/ruthfuUy,  and  qualifies  the  suc- 
ceeding verb,  thou  hast  said. 

For  {oTi).  The  A.  V.  begins  a  new  and  explanatory  sentence 
with  this  word  ;  but  it  is  better  with  Kev.  to  translate  that,  and 
make  the  whole  sentence  continuous  :  Thou  hast  truthfully  said 
that  he  is  one. 

33.  Understanding  (crweo-eo)?).  A  different  word  from  that 
in  ver.  30.  From  crwlrjfii,  to  send  or  bring  together.  Hence 
awein<;  is  a  union  or  bringing  together  of  the  mind  with  an 
object,  and  so  used  to  denote  the  faculty  of  quick  comprehen- 
sion, intelUgence,  sagacity.  Compare  on  o-vveT&v,  the  jpru- 
dent,  Matt.  xi.  25. 


220  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XD. 

34.  Discreetly  [vowexm).  From  1/01)9,  mind,  and  exfo,  to 
home.  Having  his  mind  in  possession :  "  having  his  wits  about 
him."    The  word  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

37.  The  common  people  (o  iroXixs  oxlwi).  Not  indicating 
a  social  distinction,  bat  the  great  mass  of  the  people  :  the  crowd 
at  large. 

38.  Desire  {^eXovTav).     See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

39.  Uppermost  rooms  (TTpwTOKXtcrta?).  More  correctly, <Ae 
chief  couches.     So  Rev.,  chief  places. 

40.  Widows'  houses.  People  often  left  their  whole  for- 
tune to  the  temple,  and  a  good  deal  of  the  temple-money 
went,  in  the  end,  to  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.  The  Scribes 
were  universally  employed  in  making  wills  and  conveyances  of 
property.     They  may  have  abused  their  influence  with  widows. 

41.  The  treasury.  In  the  Court  of  the  Women,  which 
covered  a  space  of  two  hundred  feet  square.  All  round  it  ran 
a  colonnade,  and  within  it,  against  the  wall,  were  the  thirteen 
chests  or  "  trumpets  "  for  charitable  contributions.  These  chests 
were  narrow  at  the  mouth  and  wide  at  the  bottom,  shaped  like 
trumpets,  whence  their  name.  Their  specific  objects  were  care- 
fully marked  on  them.  Nine  were  for  the  receipt  of  what  was 
legally  due  by  worshippers,  the  other  four  for  strictly  voluntary 
gifts.     See  Edersheim,  "  The  Temple." 

Beheld  (eSrewpet).     Observed  thoughtfully. 

Cast.    Note  the  graphic  present  tense :  are  casting. 

Money  (xaXKov).    Lit.,  copper,  which  most  of  the  people 


Cast  in  {e^aXXov).    Imperfect  tense :  were  casting  in  as  he 

looked. 


Ch.  Xra.]  MABK.  221 

Much  {iroXXd).  Lit.,  many  things  ;  possibly  many  pieces  of 
current  copper  coin, 

42.  A  certain  (jMia).  N'ot  a  good  translation.  Lit.,  one  as 
distinguished  from  the  many  rich.  Better,  simply  the  indefi- 
nite article,  as  Kev. 

Poor  {tttcoxv)-    See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

IVl  ites  (^TTTa).  From  Xem-To^,  peeled,  husked ;  and  thence 
thin  ovfine.     Therefore  of  a  very  small  or  thin  coin. 

Farthing  {KoSpdvrTj'i).  A  Latin  word,  quadrans,  or  a  quarter 
of  a  Roman  as  /  quadrans  meaning  a  fourth,  as  farihi/ng  is 
fouTthimjg. 

43.  This  poor  widow  (r]  XVP"-  <^vTr)  rj  TrTrnxv)-  The  Greek 
order  is  very  suggestive,  forming  a  kind  of  climax :  this  widow, 
the  poor  one,  or  amd  she  poor. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1.  Stones.  The  spring-stones  of  the  arches  of  the  bridge 
which  spanned  the  valley  of  Tyropoeon  (the  cheese-makers),  and 
connected  the  ancient  city  of  David  with  the  royal  porch  of  the 
temple,  measured  twenty-four  feet  in  length  by  six  in  thick- 
ness. Yet  these  were  by  no  means  the  largest  in  the  masonry 
of  the  temple.  Both  at  the  southeastern  and  southwestern 
angles  stones  have  been  found  measuring  from  twenty  to  forty 
feet  long,  and  weighing  above  one  hundred  tons  (Edersheim, 
"Temple"). 

2.  Thrown  down  (icaTdXv^).  Eather,  loosened  down.  A 
very  graphic  word,  implying  gradual  demolition. 

3.  Note  the  particularity  of  detail  in  Mark.  He  adds,  over 
against  the  temple,  and  the  names  of  the  four  who  asked  the 
question.     With  the  following  discourse  compare  Matt.  xxiv. 


222  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XHL 

6.  In  my  name  (cTri)-  Lit.,  v{pon.  Basing  their  claims  on 
the  use  of  my  name. 

7.  Rumors  of  wars.  "Wye,  opvaions  of  lattles.  Such  as 
would  be  a  cause  of  terror  to  the  Hebrew  Christians ;  as  the 
three  threats  of  war  against  the  Jews  by  Caligula,  Claudius, 
and  Nero.  There  were  serious  disturbances  at  Alexandria, 
A.D.  38,  in  which  the  Jews  were  the  especial  objects  of  persecu- 
tion ;  at  Seleucia  about  the  same  time,  in  which  more  than  fifty 
thousand  Jews  were  killed  ;  and  at  Jamnia,  near  Joppa. 

Troubled  {^poela^e).     Opoeco  is,  literally,  to  cry  aloud. 

Earthquakes.  Between  the  prophecy  and  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  (a.d.  70)  occurred :  A  great  earthquake  in  Crete, 
A.D.  46  or  47:  at  Rome,  on  the  day  on  which  Nero  entered  his 
majority,  a.d.  51 :  at  Apameia,  in  Phrygia,  a.d.  53 ;  "  on  ac- 
count of  which,"  says  Tacitus,  "  they  were  exempted  from 
tribute  for  five  years : "  at  Laodicea,  in  Phrygia,  a.d.  60 :  in 
Campania,  a.d.  63,  by  which,  according  to  Tacitus,  the  city  of 
Pompeii  was  largely  destroyed. 

Famines.  During  the  i-eign  of  Claudius,  a.d.  41-54,  four 
famines  are  recorded  :  One  at  Rome,  a.d.  41,  42  ;  one  in  Judaea, 
A.D.  44 ;  one  in  Greece,  a.d.  50  ;  and  again  at  Rome,  a.d.  52,  when 
the  people  rose  in  I'ebellion  and  threatened  the  life  of  the  em- 
peror. Tacitus  says  that  it  was  accompanied  by  frequent  earth- 
quakes, which  levelled  houses.  The  famine  in  Judaea  was  prob- 
ably the  one  prophesied  by  Agabus,  Acts  xi.  28.  Of  the  year 
65  A.D.,  Tacitus  says:  "  This  year,  disgraced  by  so  many  deeds 
of  horror,  was  further  distinguished  by  the  gods  with  storms 
and  sicknesses.  Campania  was  devastated  by  a  hurricane  which 
overthrew  buildings,  trees,  and  the  fruits  of  the  soil  in  every 
direction,  even  to  the  gates  of  the  city,  within  which  a  pestilence 
thinned  all  ranks  of  the  population,  with  no  atmospheric  disturb- 
ance that  the  eye  could  trace.  The  houses  were  choked  with 
dead,  the  roads  with  funerals:  neither  sex  nor  age  escaped. 
Slaves  and   freemen   perished   equally   amid  the   wailings  of 


Ch.  Xm.]  MARK.  223 

their  wives  and  children,  who  were  often  hurried  to  the  pyre 
by  which  they  had  sat  in  tears,  and  consumed  together  witli 
them.  The  deaths  of  knights  and  senators,  promiscuous  as  they 
were,  deserved  the  less  to  be  lamented,  inasmuch  as,  falling  by 
the  common  lot  of  mortality,  they  seemed  to  anticipate  the 
prince's  cruelty  "  ("  Annals,"  xvi.,  10-13). 

9.  Sorrows  (mBivav).  Rev.,  rightly,  travail ,'  for  the  word 
is  used  especially  of  bi/fth-throes. 

Shall  ye  be  beaten  {Sapi^a-ea-Se).  The  verb  literally  means 
to  skin  ov  flay,  and  by  a  slang  usage,  like  our  phrase  to  tan  or 
hide,  comes  to  mean  to  cudgel  or  heat. 

11.  They  lead  {ar/acrit').  Present  subjunctive;  better  per- 
haps, may  ie  leading.  While  you  are  going  along  in  custody  to 
the  judgment-seat,  do  not  be  worrying  about  your  defences. 

Take  no  thought  beforehand  (ji^  Trpo/iepiiivaTe).  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  25. 

14.  Abomination.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  15. 

15.  Housetop.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  17. 

19.  The  creation  which  God  created.  'Note  the  peculiar 
amplification,  and  compare  ver.  20,  the  elect  or  chosen  whom  he 
chose. 

20.  Shortened.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  22. 

22.  Shall  shew  (Scoo-ovo-ti').  Lit,  shall  ghe.  A  few  editors, 
however,  read  iroirjaova-iv,  shall  make  or  do. 

24.  Light  {(peyyo^).  The  word  is  used  in  the  New  Testament 
wherever  the  light  of  the  moon  is  referred  to.  Compare  Matt. 
xxiv.  29,  the  only  other  instance.  It  occurs  also  in  Luke  xi.  33, 
but  meaning  the  light  of  a  lamp. 


224  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Cu.  XIII. 

25.  The  stars  of  heaven  shall  fall.  A  rendering  which 
falls  very  far  short  of  the  graphic  original :  ol  d<rTepe<;  ecrovrai 
etc  Tov  ovpavov  iriiTTovTe'i :  the  stars  shall  he  falling  from  heaven. 
So  Kev.,  thus  giving  the  sense  of  contmuousness,  as  of  a  shower 
of  falling  stars. 

27.  From  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  to  the  utter- 
most part  of  heaven  {air  aKpov  yrji;  eco?  aKpov  ovpavov).  From 
the  outermost  border  of  the  earth,  conceived  as  a  flat  surface,  to 
where  the  outermost  border  of  the  heaven  sets  a  limit  to  the 
earth.  Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  31.  Mark's  expression  is  more 
poetical. 

28.  Parable.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  32. 
Branch.     See  on  Mark  xi.  8. 

29.  Come  to  pass  {jLvofieva).  The  present  participle,  and 
therefore  better  as  Kev. ,  coming  to  pass  /  in  process  offulfil- 
metn. 

33.  Watch  (a7/3K7n'etT6).  The  word  is  derived  fromoypeuo), 
to  hunt,  and  inrvo<;,  sleep.  The  picture  is  of  one  in  pursuit  of 
sleep,  and  therefore  wakeful,  restless.  Wye's  rendering  of  the 
whole  passage  is  striking ;  See  !  wake  ye  and  pray  ye  ! 

34.  A  man  taking  afar  journey  {av^pwiro'i  aTr6^fio<i).  The 
A.  V.  is  incorrect,  since  the  idea  is  not  that  of  a  man  ahout  to 
go,  as  Matt.  xxv.  14  ;  but  of  one  already  gone.     So  Wye,  gone 

far  in  pilgrimage ,'  and  Tynd.,  which  is  gone  into  a  strange 
country.  The  two  words  form  one  notion — a  man  abroad.  Kev., 
sojourning  in  another  country. 

36.  Watch  {ypi^yopeire).  A  different  word  from  that  in  ver. 
33.  See  also  ver.  34.  The  picture  in  this  word  is  that  of  a 
sleeping  man  rousing  himself.  While  the  other  word  conveys 
the  idea  of  simple  wakefulness,  this  adds  the  idea  of  alertness. 
Compare  Matt.  xiv.  38  ;  Luke  xii.  37 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8.     The  apos- 


Ch.  XV.]  MARK.  225 

ties  are  thus  compared  with  the  doorkeepers,  ver.  34 ;  and  the 
night  season  is  in  keeping  with  the  figure.  In  the  temple,  dur- 
ing the  night,  the  captain  of  the  temple  made  his  rounds,  and 
the  guards  had  to  rise  at  his  approach  and  salute  him  in  a  par- 
ticidar  manner.  Any  guard  found  asleep  on  duty  was  beaten, 
or  his  garments  were  set  on  fire.  Compare  Apoc.  xvi.  15: 
"  Blessed  is  he  that  watcketh  and  heepetk  his  garments."  The 
preparations  for  the  morning  service  required  all  to  be  early 
astir.  The  superintending  priest  might  knock  at  the  door  at 
any  moment.  The  Kabbis  use  almost  the  very  words  in  which 
scripture  describes  the  unexpected  coming  of  the  Master. 
"  Sometimes  he  came  at  the  cockcrowing,  sometimes  a  little 
earlier,  sometimes  a  little  later.  He  came  and  knocked  and 
they  opened  to  him  "  (Edersheim,  "  The  Temple"). 

37.  Watch.     The  closing  and  summary  word  is  the  stronger 
word  of  ver.  36 :    Be  awake  and  on  guard. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  The  feast  of  the  passover  and  the  unleavened  bread 

{to  'irdiT'xa  Kal  to,  a^vfia).    Lit.,  the  passover  and  the  urdeamened. 
It  was  really  one  and  the  same  festival. 

Sought  (efi^Tow).  Imperfect  tense :  wereall  this  while  seek- 
mg. 

3-9.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  6-13. 

3.  Alabaster  box.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  7. 

Spikenard  {vdpBovTna-TiKfj^).  The  meaning  of  Trto-rt/c^yis 
greatly  disputed.  The  best  authorities  define  it  genuine  or 
unadulterated:  pure  nard. 

Brake.  Possibly  by  striking  the  brittle  neck  of  the  flask. 
This  detail  is  peculiar  to  Mark. 


226  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIY 

4.  To  what  purpose,  etc.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  8. 

5.  Murmured  (ive^pifiSivTo).     See  on  Mark  i.  43. 

6.  Good.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  10. 

7.  And  whensoever  ye  will,  etc.  Note  Mark's  amplifica- 
tion. 

8.  She  hath  done  what  she  could  (o  eo-^ev  eTrolrja-ev).  Lit., 
what  she  had  she  did.     Peculiar  to  Mark. 

She  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  {irpoeka^ev  fivpla-ai). 
Lit.,  she  anticipated  to  anoint.  Eev.,  hath  anointed  iefarehand. 
The  verb  fivpi^co  is  found  only  here. 

11.  Money.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  15. 

He  sought  (e'^'^ret).  Imperfect  tense.  He  kept  seekingi : 
busied  himself  continuously  from  that  time. 

Conveniently  {evKaipco'i).  Might  find  a  good  opportunity 
(/catpos). 

13.  A  man.  A  slave  probably,  whose  business  it  was  to 
draw  water.     See  Deut.  xix.  11. 

Pitcher.  Oi  earthenwa/re :  Kepdfiiov,  from  Kepa/jLo<;,  potter's 
clay. 

14.  My  guest-chamber  {KaTaXv/id  fiov).  Luke  xxii.  11. 
The  word  is  not  classical,  and  as  used  by  an  oriental  signifies 
a  hham  or  ca/ra/oanserai.  Hence  inn  at  Luke  ii.  7.  My  cham- 
ber. It  was  a  common  practice  that  more  than  one  company 
partook  of  the  paschal  supper  in  the  same  apartment ;  but 
Christ  will  have  his  chamber  for  himself  and  his  disciples  alone. 

15.  And  he  (airros).  The  Greek  is  more  emphatic.  "He 
will  Atmse^  show  you."  So  Rev.  Probably  the  owner  of  the 
house  was  a  disciple. 


Ch.  XIV.]  MARK.  227 

Furnished  {ia-rpcofievov).  Lit.,  strewed  with  carpets,  and 
with  couches  properly  spread. 

20.  Dish  {Tpv^Cov).     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  23. 

23.  The  cup.  The  wine  was  the  ordinary  one  of  the  coun- 
try, only  red.  It  was  mixed  with  water,  generally  in  the  pro- 
portion of  one  part  to  two  of  water. 

24.  Covenant.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  28. 

Is  shed  {to  eK-xyvvofievov).  Lit.,  is  hemg  shed.  This  present 
participle  is  significant.  To  the  Lord's  mind  the  sacrifice  is 
already  being  offered. 

25.  New.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29. 

26.  Sung  an  hymn.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  30. 
28.  Go  before.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  32. 

30.  Cocl<  crow.  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  34.  Mark  alone  adds 
twice. 

Deny  (aTrapvjyo-j?).    The  compound  verb  signifies  utterly  deny. 

31.  I  will  not  deny  {ov  yJ)  a-e  airapv^a-ofiai).  The  double 
negative  with  the  future  forms  the  strongest  possible  assertion. 

32.  Gethsemane.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  36. 

33.  To  be  sore  amazed  (eiel^a/i^eia-Sai).  A  word  peculiar 
to  Mark.     Compare  ix.  15  ;  xvi.  5,  6. 

35.  Prayed  {-n-poa-TitixeTo).     Imperfect  tense :  5e^<m  to  pray. 

40.  Heavy  (Kara^apwofievoi).  Lit.,  weighed  down:  very 
heavy. 


228  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIV. 

il.  It  is  enough  {aTrixei).  Peculiar  to  Mark.  In  this  im- 
personal sense  the  word  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    Expositors  are  utterly  at  sea  as  to  its  meaning. 

43.  One  of  the  twelve.  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  47;  as  also  on 
muliititde. 

44.  Token  (a-va-crrjfiov).  A  later  Greek  compound  used  only 
by  Mark  in  this  passage.  Compare  a-rjfieiov,  Matt.  xxvi.  48. 
The  <7vv,  with,  gives  the  force  of  a  mutual  token  :  a  concerted 
signal. 

45.  Kissed.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  49. 

47.  The  servant.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  51. 

Ear  {mTcbpiov).  A  word  found  only  here  and  at  John  xviii. 
10.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  51. 

48.  A  thief.  Eev.,  better,  robber.  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  55, 
and  Mark  xi.  17. 

51,  52.  The  incident  is  related  by  Mark  only.  There  is  no 
means  of  knowing  who  the  youth  may  have  been.  Conjecture 
has  named  Mark  himself,  John,  James  the  Just,  Lazarus,  the 
brother  of  Martha  and  Mary,  and  St.  Paul ! 

51.  Linen  cloth  (aivBova).  The  probable  derivation  is  from 
'IvS6<;,  an  Indian :  India  being  the  source  from  which  came 
this  fine  fabric  used  for  wrapping  dead  bodies,  and  in  which 
Christ's  body  was  enveloped.  See  Matt,  xxvii.  59  ;  Mark  xv. 
46  ;  Luke  xxiii.  53. 

54.  Palace  {avXr)v).  Eather,  court,  as  Rev.,  the  quadrangle 
roimd  which  the  chambers  were  built.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  3. 

Sat  with  {^v  a-vyKoS^p.evo'}).  The  verb  with  the  participle 
denoting  continuousness.  What  occurred  after  occurred  while 
he  was  sitting.     So  Rev. 


Ch.  XIV.]  MARK.  229 

Servants.     Eev.,  officers.     See  on  Matt.  v.  25. 

At  the  fire  (7rpo?To  ^w?).  $w?  is  never  used  of  iheji/re  it- 
self, but  of  the  light  of  the  fire  ;  and  this  is  the  point  to  which 
the  evangelist  directs  attention  :  that  the  firelight,  shining  on 
Peter's  face,  called  forth  the  challenge  of  the  maid  (ver.  66). 

56.  Their  witness  agreed  not.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  Lit., 
thei/r  testimonies  were  not  equal.  Hence  the  difficulty  of  fulfill- 
ing the  requirement  of  the  law,  which  demanded  two  witnesses. 
See  Deut.  xvii.  6 ;  and  compare  Matt,  xviii.  16  ;  1  Tim.  v.  19  ; 
Heb.  X.  28. 

58.  Made  with  hands.  Mark  adds  this  detail;  also  vnade 
without  hcmds,  and  the  following  sentence. 

62.  I  am.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  64. 

64.  Guilty  of  death.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  66. 

65.  Buffet.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  67. 

Palms  of  their  hands  {pairlfffiaariv).  An  unclassical  word, 
but  used  also  by  John  (xix.  3).     The  word  means  hlows. 

Did  strike.  Following  the  old  reading,  e/3aXKov.  The  cor- 
rect reading  is  eka^ov,  reoei/ued.  So  Kev.  Received  him  into 
custody. 

66.  Beneath.  In  relation  to  the  chambers  round  the  court 
above. 

68.  Porch  (w/joavXtov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
vestibule,  extending  from  the  outside  gate  to  the  court. 

71.  Curse  {ava^efiarit/SLv).  Compare  on  Matt.  xxvi.  74; 
where  the  word  is  KaTa3efiaTi^etv,  to  call  doum  (Kara)  curses  on 


230  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Oh.  XV. 

himself  if  lie  were  not  telling  the  truth.     The  words  are  synony- 
mous. 

72.  When  he  thought  thereon  (eVtySaXmi/).     From  eVt, 
upon,  and  ^aXXxo,  to  throw.     When  he  threw  his  thought  ujpon  it. 


CHAPTER  XT. 
Compare  vv.  1-5  with  Matt,  xxvii.  1,  2,  11-14. 

7.  Them  that  had  made  insurrection  with  him  {ava-racn- 
aa-Twv).  Fellow-rioters.  But  the  better  texts  read  a-Taenaa- 
rmv,  rioters,  omitting  the  aw,  with  (fellow) :  and  the  Rev.  ac- 
cordingly omits  with  him. 

Who  {o'iTtv£<;).     Denoting  a  class  of  criminals. 

The  insurrection.  Note  the  article:  the  insurrection  for 
which  Barabbas  and  his  fellows  had  been  imprisoned. 

8.  Crying  aloud  {ava0oija-a<;).  But  the  best  texts  read  ava- 
/3as,  ha/ving  gone  ujp.     So  Kev.,  went  up. 

Ever  (aei).     Omitted  by  the  best  texts. 

11.  Moved  {aveaeiffav).  A  feeble  translation.  Xeita  is  to 
shake.  Hence  aeiafio';,  an  earthquahe.  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  8. 
Better  as  Rev.,  stirred  up.  'Wye, The  hishops  stirred  the  com- 
pany of  people. 

15.  To  content  (to  'iKavov  irotrjcrat).  Lit.,  to  do  the  sufficient 
thing.  Compare  the  popular  phrase,  Do  the  right  thing.  A 
Latinism,  and  used  by  Mark  only.     Wye,  to  do  enough  to  the 

people. 

16.  into  the  hall  called  Pretorium.  Mark,  as  usual,  ampli- 
fies.   Matthew  has  simply  the  Pretorium.    The  courtyard,  sur- 


Ch.  XV.]  MARK.  231 

rounded  by  the  buildings  of  the  Pretoriura,  so  that  the  people 
passing  through  the  vestibule  into  this  quadrangle  found  them- 
selves in  the  Pretorinm. 

Band  {tjirelpav).  Originally  anything  wov/nd  or  wrapped 
round;  as  a  ball,  the  coils  of  a  snake,  a  knot  or  curl  in  wood. 
Hence  a  body  of  men-at-arms.  The  same  idea  is  at  the  bottom 
of  the  Latin  manvpulus,  which  is  sometimes  (as  by  Josephus) 
used  to  translate  airelpa.  Manipulus  was  originally  a  bpndle 
or  handful.  The  ancient  Pomans  adopted  a  pole  with  a  hand- 
ful of  hay  or  straw  twisted  about  it  as  the  standard  of  a  com- 
pany of  soldiers ;  hence  a  certain  number  or  body  of  soldiers 
under  one  standard  was  called  manipulus. 

IT.  Purple.  See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  28.  Matthew  adds  the  word 
for  soldier's  cloak.     Mark  has  simply  purple. 

21.  Compel.  Better  impress,  as  Pev.  in  margin.  See  on 
Matt.  V.  41.     Note  the  accuracy  in  designating  Simon. 

22.  Golgotha.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  33. 

23.  They  gave  {iSlSow).  The  imperfect  tense  is  used  in  the 
same  sense  as  in  Matt.  iii.  14  (Pev.),  "  John  would  have  hin- 
dered." They  were  for  giAiing ;  attempted  to  gime.  So  Pev., 
excellently,  offered. 

Wine  mingled  with  myrrh  {iafivpvia-iMevov  olvov).  Lit., 
myrrhed  wine.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  34. 

24.  What  each  should  take  (tw  ti  aprj).  Lit.,  who  should 
taJce  what.     An  addition  of  Mark. 

26.  The  superscription  of  his  accusation.  Matthew, 
simply  accusation  y  Luke,  superscription  ;  John,  Utle.  See  on 
Matt,  xxvii.  37. 

27.  Thieves.     Pev.,  rollers.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  38. 


232  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV 

29.  Ah  !  {ovet).    The  Latin  vah  ! 

Destroyest.    The  same  word  as  at  xiii.  2. 

32.  The  Christ.  See  on  Matt.  ii.  1.  Referring  to  the  con- 
fession before  the  high-priest  (xiv.  62). 

King  of  Israel.  Referring  to  the  confession  before  Pilate 
(xv.  2). 

36.  Vinegar.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  48. 

38.  The  veil.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  51. 

39.  Son  of  God.  Not  the  Son  of  God,  which  Rev.  has  re- 
tained, but  a  son  of  God.  To  the  centurion  Christ  was  a  hero 
or  demigod.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  64. 

40.  Magdalene.    See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  56. 

41.  Followed — ministered  {^ko>mv^ovv — Bitjkovow).  Both 
imperfects  :  were  m  the  habit,  accustomed  to. 

42.  Even.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  57. 

The  day  before  the  Sabbath  {yrpoad^^aTov).  ITie  fore- 
Sabbath.     Peculiar  to  Mark,  and  only  here. 

43.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea('Ia)cr^^oa7ro'.4pt/ia.9auz?).  Lit., 
Joseph,  he  from  Arimathaea :  the  article  indicating  a  man  well 
known. 

Honorable  (evayriiiMiv).  Compounded  of  eS,  well,  and  tryrnui, 
form,  shape,  figure.  On  the  latter  word,  see  on  Matt.  xvii.  2. 
In  its  earlier  use  this  adjective  would,  therefore,  emphasize  the 
dignified  external  appearance  and  deportment.  So  Plato,  noble 
hearing  ("  Republic,"  413).  Later,  it  came  to  be  used  in  the 
sense  of  noble  ;  honorable  in  rank.    See  Acts  xiii.  50 ;  xvii.  12. 


Ch.  XVI.]  MARK.  233 

Counsellor.  A  member  of  the  Sanhedrim,  as  appears  from 
Luke  xxiii.  51. 

Went  in  boldly  {roKiM'qa-ai  eUr^X^ev).  Lit.,  ha/vmg  dared 
went  in.     Daring  all  possible  consequences. 

44.  Wondered.  This  query  and  the  asking  the  centurion 
are  peculiar  to  Mark. 

45.  Body  {irrmfia).  Better,  Eev.,  corpse ;  as  the  word  is 
used  only  of  a  dead  body.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  28. 

46.  Stone.    See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  60. 

47.  Beheld  {H^edpow).  Imperfect  tense.  Were  looking  on 
meoMwhile.  The  verb  also  implies  steady  and  cartful  contem- 
plation.    They  took  careful  note. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

2.  At  the  rising  of  the  sun  {avareCXavTo<i  rod  ^Xt'ow).  More 
correctly,  as  Kev.,  when  the  stm  was  risen. 

3.  Peculiar  to  Mark. 

5.  Affrighted.  See  ix.  15,  and  Introduction.  Eev.,  better, 
amazed.    It  was  wonder  rather  \!a&-a.  fright. 

8.  Quickly.     Omitted  by  best  texts. 

Astonishment  {^K<na<Ti,<i).     See  on  Mark  v.  42. 

Afraid  {e^o^ovvro).     The  wonder  merges  into/ear. 

By  a  large  number  of  the  ablest  modern  critics  the  remainder 
of  this  chapter  is  held  to  be  from  some  other  hand  than  Mark's. 
It  is  omitted  from  the  two  oldest  manuscripts. 


234  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVX 

9.  The  first  day  of  the  week  {Trpmrrj  a-a^fidrov).  A 
phrase  which  Mark  does  not  use.  In  ver.  2  of  this  chapter  it 
is  /nd<s  aa^^drcov. 

Out  of  whom  he  had  cast  seven  devils.  With  Mark's 
well-known  habit  of  particularizing,  it  is  somewhat  singular 
that  this  circumstance  was  not  mentioned  in  either  of  the  three 
previous  allusions  to  Mary  (xv.  40,  47 ;  xvi.  1). 

Out  of  whom  (a<^'  ^?).  An  unusual  expression.  Mark 
habitually  uses  the  preposition  e'«  in  this  connection  (i.  25,  26 ; 
V.  8  ;  vii.  26,  29  ;  ix.  25).  Moreover,  aTro,  from,  is  used  with 
iK^aXk€iv,  cast  out,  nowhere  else  in  the  ISew  Testament.  The 
peculiarity  is  equally  marked  if  we  read  with  some,  irap  ■^y. 

10.  She  {eKeivrj).  An  absolute  use  of  the  pronoun  unex- 
ampled in  Mark.  See  also  vv.  11,  13.  It  would  imply  an  em- 
phasis which  is  not  intended.  Compare  iv.  11 ;  xii.  4,  6,  7; 
xiv.  21. 

Went  (7ro/jei/.^6ta-a).  So  in  vr.  12, 15.  Went,  go.  This  verb 
for  to  go  occurs  nowhere  else  in  this  Gospel  except  in  com- 
pounds. 

Them  that  had  been  with  him  {rol<;  fier  avrov  <y€vonivoi<s). 
A  circumlocution  foreign  to  the  Gospels. 

12.  After  these  things  (/iera  ravra).  An  expression  never 
used  by  Mark. 

Another  form  (erepa  p,op<f)fi).  More  correctly,  a  different 
form. 

14.  Afterward  {iiffTepov).  Not  found  elsewhere  in  Mark. 
Often  in  Matthew. 

15.  To  every  creature  (ttoo-j;  rfj  KT^aei).  Rightly,  as  Eev., 
to  the  whole  creation. 


Ch.  XVI.]  MARK.  235 

16.  Shall  be  damned  {Karaicpt^a-eraC).  A  most  unfortu- 
nate rendering.  The  word  is  a  judicial  term,  and,  as  Dr.  Mo- 
rison  truthfully  says,  "determines,  by  itself,  nothing  at  all 
concerning  the  nature,  degree,  or  extent  of  the  penalty  to  be 
endured."  See  on  the  kindred  noun,  Kplfia,  judgment,  rendered 
by  A.  V.  damnation,  1  Cor.  xi.  29.     Eev.,  rightly,  condemned. 

17.  Shall  follow  (irapaKoXovSTjcrei).  The  preposition  irapd, 
alongside  of,  gives  the  sense  of  accompany. 

18.  The  sick  {appmarovs).     See  on  Mark  vi.  5. 

20.  Following  (e7ra«o\ou.9oui'TO)i^).  Following  cZos«Zy  .•  force 
of  evrt.  Both  this  and  the  word  for  follow,  in  ver.  IT,  are 
foreign  to  Mark's  diction,  though  he  frequently  uses  the  sim- 
ple verb. 

A  manuscript  of  the  eighth  or  ninth  century,  known  as  L, 
has,  at  the  close  of  ver.  8,  these  words :  "  In  some  instances 
there  is  added  as  follows."  Then  we  read  :  "  But  all  the  things 
enjoined  they  announced  without  delay  to  those  who  were 
around  Peter  {i.e.,  to  Peter  and  those  who  were  with  him). 
And  afterward  Jesus  himself,  from  the  east  unto  the  west, 
sent  forth  through  them  the  sacred  and  incorruptible  message 
of  eternal  salvation." 

The  subject  of  the  last  twelve  verses  of  this  Gospel  may  be 
found  critically  discussed  in  the  second  volume  of  Westcott  and 
Hort's  Greek  Testament ;  by  Dean  John  W.  Burgon  in  his  mono- 
graph, "  The  Last  Twelve  Verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St. 
Mark  Yindicated  against  Kecent  Objectors  and  Established ;  " 
Frederick  Henry  Scrivener,  LL.D.,  "Introduction  to  tlie  Criti- 
cism of  the  New  Testament ;  "  James  Morison,  D.D.,  "  Prac- 
tical Commentary  on  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Mark ; " 
Samuel  Davidson,  D.D.,  "  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the 
New  Testament ; "  Philip  Schaff,  D.D.,  "  History  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church ;  "  Canon  F.  C.  Cook  in  "  Speaker's  Commentary 
on  Mark  ; "  Samuel  P.  Tregelles,  LL.D.,  "  On  the  Printed  Text 
of  the  Greek  Testament ; "  also  in  the  commentaries  of  Alford 
and  Meyer. 


LIST  OF  GEEEK  WORDS  USED  BY  MAEK  ONLY. 


aypevto,  catch,  zii.,  13 

SKs,  salt,  ix.,  49 

SKoKos,  dxunb,  vii.,  37  ;  ix.,  17,  25 

oKcuTpo^avia,  cockcrowing,  xiii.,  35 

aiitpoSov,  a,  place  where  two  ways 

meet,  xi.,  4 
a^(^t/3aX\(ii,  cast,  i.,  16 
araXor,  saltless,  ix.,  50 
dvaTnjSao),  leap  up,  x.,  50 
drao-rerafo),  sigh  deeply,  viii.,  12 
diTf'xfi,  it  is  enough,  xiv.,  41 
diroSriiioc,  abroad,  xiii.,  34 
aTTooTfydfo),  uncover,  ii. ,  4 
acppi^a,  foam,  ix.,  18,  20 
Boavepyh,  sons  of  thunder,  iii.,  17 
ya/wVico/iai,  to  be  given  in  marriage, 

xii.,  25 
yva(j)evs,  fuller,  ix.,  3 
fiio-X"Xto4,  two  thousand,  v.,  13 
Suo-KoXof,  hard,  x.,  24 
ft,  if  (in  swearing),  viii. ,  12 
cKtafi^em,   to  be  amazed,  ix.,  15 ; 

xiv.,  S3;  xvi.,  5,  6 
f'lcSau/iafo),  to  marvel,  xii.,  17 
eWtpio-o-ms,  exceeding  vehemently, 

xiv.,  31 
ivayKoKi^ojim,  take  in  the-arms,  ix., 

36 ;  X.,  16 
fVeiXe'o),  wrap,  XV.,  46 
tvvvxov,  in  the  night,  i.,  35 
i^amva,  suddenly,  ix.,  8 
i^ovhivom,  set  at  naught,  ix.,  12 
fVi^iiXXo)  (neuter),  beat,  iv.,  37 
enippdiTTo,  sew  upon,  ii.,  21 


fm<TvvTpcx<'>  come  running  togetheii 

ix.,  25 
caxaTttts,  at  the  point  of  death,  iv., 

23 
ij<f>i€v,  suffered  (permitted),  i.,  34; 

xi.,  16 
iavaa-ipjis,  deadly,  xvi.,  18 
3avndfeii'  8ta,  to  wonder  because  of, 

vi.,  6 
%vyaTpi.ov,   little  daughter,  v.,  23 ; 

vii.,  25 
TO  htavbv  noiiiv,  to  content,  XV.,  15 
Kara^a,  come  down,  xv.,  30 
KaTo^apivio,  Weigh  down,  xiv.,  40 
KaraSiuKo),  follow  after,  i.,  36 

KaraKonra),  cut,  v.,  5 
Karevkoyca,  bless,  X.,  16 
KaroUrjais,  dwelling,  v.,  3 
KfVTvpiav,  centurion,  xv.,  39,  44,  45 
Kecf>a\ai6co,  to  wound  in  the  head, 

xii.,  4 
KvXioiiat,  wallow,  ix.,  20 
Koj/tidwoXtr,  village-town,  i.,  38 
fji^opia,  borders,  vii.,  24 
ItriKvvopai,  grow,  iv.,  27 
fioyiXdXor,  having  an  impediment  in 

speech,  vii.,  32 
pvpl^u),  anoint,  xiv.,  8 
vovvexS'i,  discreetly,  xii.,  34 
^etmjs,  pot,  vii.,  4 
op.p.a,  eye,  viii.,  23 
ova,  ah!  ha!  xv.,  29 
TraiStdSei',  from  a  child,  ix.,  21 
napojioios,  like,  vii.,  8,  13 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  MARK  ONLY. 


237 


TrepiTpixai,  run  round  about,  vi.,  55 
jrpao-id,  a  garden-plat,  vi.,  40 
Trpoav\iov,  porch  orforeoourt,  xiv.,  68 
TTpofifpifivaa,  take  thought  before- 
hand, xiii.,  11 
jrpoo-a^/SaToc,  day  before  the   Sab- 
bath, XV.,  42 
iTpo(Tcyyl^a>,  come  nigh  unto,  ii.,  4 
7rpoarK((j)aKaiov,  cushion,  iv.,  38 
irpocropfil^ofuu,  moor  to  the  shore, 

vi.,  53 
wpoa-iropcvopiai,  come  unto,  X.,  35 
iTvyprj,  with  the  fist,  vii.,  3 
o-Ka>Xi)f,  worm,  ix.,  44,  46,  48 
o-jTEKoi/Xdrmp,  executioner,  vi.,  27 
<Tp.vpvi^a,  mingle  with  myrrh,  xv.,  23 
a-Taa-iapTrjs,  insurrectionist,  xv.,  7 
o-TiX/So),  to  be  glistering,  ix.,  3 


o-Ti/3ar,  branch,  or  layer  of  leaves, 

xi.,  8 
(Tvfmoaiov,  a  table-party,  vi.,  39 
o-wSXi/Sco,  to  throng  or  crowd,  v., 

24,  31 
avKKviteoiiai,  to  be  grieved,  iii.,  5 
'S.vpa^oiv'i.KKTaa,    a    Syxo-phoenician 

woman,  vii.,  26 
a-va-trritiov,  countersign,  token,  xiv., 

44 
Tri\avya>s,  clearly,  viii.,  25 
Tpi'fo),  gnash,  ix.,  18 
vir(pT}<l>avia,  pride,  vii.,  22 
iirepTrcpta-a-ms,  beyond  measure,  vii., 

37 
viToKrjvLov,  wine-fat    or  wine-press, 

xii.,  1 
XoKkIov,  brazen  vessel,  vii.,  4 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE. 


mTRODUCTION  TO  THE  WRITINGS  OF  LUKE. 

Legend  has  been  busy  with  the  name  of  Luke.  The  Greek 
Church,  in  which  painting  is  regarded  as  a  religious  art,  readily 
accepted  the  tradition  which  represented  him  as  a  painter,  and 
the  Greek  painters  carried  it  into  Western  Europe.  A  rude 
drawing  of  the  Yirgin,  discovered  in  the  Catacombs,  with  an 
inscription  to  the  effect  that  it  was  one  of  seven  painted  by 
Xnica,  confirmed  the  popular  belief  that  Luke  the  Evangelist 
was  meant.  According  to  the  legend,  he  carried  with  him  two 
portraits  painted  by  himself — the  one  of  the  Saviour  and  the 
other  of  the  Virgin — and  by  means  of  these  he  converted  many 
of  the  heathen. 

When  we  apply  to  historical  sources,  however,  we  find  very 
little  about  this  evangelist.  He  never  mentions  himself  by 
name  in  the  Gospel  or  in  the  Acts,  and  his  name  occurs  in  only 
three  passages  of  the  New  Testament :  Col.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv. 
11;  Philem.  24. 

That  he  was  an  Asiatic-Greek  convert  of  Antioch,  though  rest- 
ing upon  no  conclusive  evidence,  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  he 
gives  much  information  about  the  church  there  (Acts  xi.  19, 
30 ;  xiii.  1-3  ;  xv.  1-3,  22,  35) ;  that  he  traces  the  origin  of  the 
name  "  Christian  "  to  that  city,  and  that,  in  enumerating  the 
seven  deacons  of  Jerusalem,  he  informs  us  of  the  Antiochian 
origin  of  Nicholas  (Acts  vi.  5)  without  reference  to  the  nation- 
ality of  any  of  the  others.  That  he  was  a  physician  and  the 
companion  of  Paul  are  facts  attested  by  Scripture,  though  his 
connection  with  Paul  does  not  definitely  appear  before  Acts  xvi. 


240  mTKODTJCTION  TO  LUKE. 

10,  where  he  uses  the  first  person  plural.  He  accompanied 
Paul  from  Caesarea,  through  the  shipwreck  at  Malta,  to  Eome, 
and  remained  there  until  his  liberation.  Tradition  makes  him 
to  have  died  in  Greece,  and  it  was  believed  that  his  remains 
were  transferred  to  Constantinople. 

It  has  been  assumed  that  he  was  a  freedman,  from  the  large 
number  of  physicians  who  belonged  to  that  class,  the  Greeks 
and  E.omans  being  accustomed  to  educate  some  of  their  domes- 
tics in  the  science  of  medicine,  and  to  grant  them  freedom  in 
requital  of  services.  Physicians  often  held  no  higher  rank  than 
slaves,  and  it  has  been  noticed  that  contractions  in  as,  like 
Lucas  for  Lucomus,  were  peculiarly  common  in  the  names  of 
slaves. 

His  connection  with  Paul  gave  rise  in  the  church,  at  a  very 
early  period,  to  the  opinion  that  he  wrote  his  Gospel  under 
the  superintendence  of  that  apostle.  While  his  preface  says 
nothing  about  the  Pauline  sanction  of  his  Gospel,  the  work, 
nevertheless,  presents  remarkable  coincidences  with  Paul's 
epistles,  both  in  language,  ideas,  and  spirit.  The  Gospel  itself 
sets  forth  that  conception  of  Christ's  life  and  work  which  was 
the  basis  of  Paul's  teaching.  He  represents  the  views  of  Paul, 
as  Mark  does  of  Peter.  "  There  is  a  striking  resemblance  be- 
tween the  style  of  Luke  and  of  Paul,  which  corresponds  to  their 
spiritual  sympathy  and  long  intimacy."  Some  two  hundred 
expressions  or  phrases  may  be  found  which  are  common  to 
Luke  and  Paul,  and  more  or  less  foreign  to  other  New  Testa- 
ment writers.     Such,  for  instance,  are : 

Luke.  Pauii. 

dScTfii',  reject,  vii.  30 ;  x.  16.  Gal.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  15  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  8. 

axxtidkan^iiv,  lead  captive,  xxi.  24.  Bom.  vii.  23  ;  2  Cor.  x.  5. 
AvayKT),  xiv.  18  ;  in  the  phrase  ?;(<» 

dvdyKrjv,  I  must  needs.  1  Cor.  vii.  37. 

In  the  sense  of  distress,  xxi.  23.  1  Cor.  vii.  26  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  4 ;  xii.  10  ; 

1  Thess.  iii.  7,  and  not  elsewhere. 

avaKpivetv,     to    examine  judicially,  1  Cor.  ii.    15 ;    iv.   3 ;   ii.   3 ;    ten 

xxiii.  14 ;  Acts  xii.  19 ;  xxviii.  18.         times  in  all  in  that  epistle, 

ajro  Toi  vvv,  from  henceforth,  i.  48 ;  2  Cor.  v.  16. 

V.  10 ;  xii.  52 ;  xxii.  69. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE. 


241 


LUKB. 

an  alwvos,  since  the  world  began,  i. 

70  ;  Acts  iii.  21 ;  xv.  18. 
iyKaaeiv,  to  faint,  xviii.  1. 

Siepfiriveveiv,    expound  or   interpret, 

xxiv.  27;  Acts  ix.  36. 
tvdiaatriai,    endue,  clothe,  xxiv.  49, 

in  the  moral  sense. 
(I  firjTt,  except,  ix.  13. 
fjri<f>aivetv,  to  give  light,  shine,  i.  79  ; 

Acts  xivii.  20. 
KaTapyelv,  cumber,    xiii.  7. 


fifyaXvvfiv,    exalt,   magnify,    i.  46, 
58  ;  Acts  V.  13 ;  x.  46  ;  xix.  17. 


Pattl. 
Col.  i.  26  ;  Eph.  iii.  9. 

2  Cor.  iv.  1,  16 ;  Gal.  vi.  9 ;  Eph. 

iii.  13;  2  Thess.  iii.  13. 
1  Cor.  xii.  30 ;  xiv.  5,  13,  27. 

Eom.  xiii.  12,  14;  1  Cor.  xv.  53; 
2  Cor.  V.  3,  etc. 

1  Cor.  vii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5. 
Titus  ii.  11 ;  iii.  4. 

Bom.  iii.  3,  make  without  effect; 
make  void;  destroy;  do  away; 
bring  to  naught ;  twenty-six  times 
in  Paul. 

2  Cor.  X.  15 ;  Philip,  i.  20. 


Both  are  fond  of  words  characterizing  the  freedom  and  uni- 
versality of  gospel  salvation.  For  example,  %a/3t9,  grace,  favor, 
occurs  eight  times  in  the  Gospel,  sixteen  in  the  Acts,  and  ninety- 
five  in  Paul.  "JS\eo?,  mercy,  six  times  in  the  Gospel  and  ten 
in  Paul.  Uia-Ti,^,  faith,  twenty-seven  times  in  the  Gospel 
and  Acts,  and  everywhere  in  Paul.  Compare,  also,  StKaioa-vvrj, 
righteousness,'  SiKaio?,  righteous/  TrveOfia  ajiov,  HoIt/ Spirit / 
yv&a-K,  knowledge. 

They  agree  in  their  report  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  both  giving  "This  cup  is  the  new  covenant  in  my 
blood,"  for  "  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  covenant,"  and  both 
adding,  "  in  remembrance  of  me." 

A  few  of  the  numerous  instances  of  parallelism  of  thought 
and  expression  may  also  be  cited  : 


Luke. 

iv.  22. 
iv.  32, 
vi.  36. 
vi.  39. 
vi.  48. 
viii.  15. 


Patjii. 

Col.  iv.  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  29. 

1  Cor.  ii.  4. 

2  Cor.  i.  3  ;  Kom.  xii.  1. 
Kom.  ii.  19. 

1  Cor.  iii.  10. 
Col.  i.  10,  11. 


16 


242  INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE. 

LcKB.  Paul. 

ix.  56.  2  Cor.  x.  8. 

X.  8.  1  Cor.  X.  27. 

X.  20.  Philip,  iv.  3. 

X.  21.  1  Cor.  i.  19,  27. 

xi.  41.  Tit.  i.  15. 

xii.  35.  Eph.  vi.  14. 

XX.  17,  18.  Bom.  ix.  33. 

Luke's  long  residence  in  Greece  makes  it  probable  that  he  had 
Greek  readers  especially  in  mind.  The  same  humanitarian  and 
Gentile  character  of  his  writings,  as  distinguished  from  Jew- 
ish writings,  appears  in  the  Acts  as  in  the  Gospel.  Of  the 
Acts,  although  attempts  have  been  made  to  assign  its  composi- 
tion to  Timothy  and  to  Silas,  and  to  identify  Silas  with  Luke, 
the  universal  testimony  of  the  ancient  church,  no  less  than  the 
identity  of  style,  declare  Luke  to  be  the  author.  About  fifty 
words  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  are  common 
to  both  books. 

From  a  purely  literary  point  of  view  Luke's  Gospel  has  been 
pronounced,  even  by  Renan,  to  be  the  most  beautiful  book  ever 
written.  He  says :  "  The  Gospel  of  Luke  is  the  most  literary  of 
the  gospels.  Everywhere  there  is  revealed  a  spirit  large  and 
sweet ;  wise,  temperate,  sober,  and  reasonable  in  the  irrational. 
Its  exaggerations,  its  inconsistencies,  its  improbabilities,  are 
true  to  the  very  nature  of  parable,  and  constitute  its  charm. 
Matthew  rounds  a  little  the  rough  outlines  of  Mark.  Luke 
does  better  :  he  writes.  He  displays  a  genuine  skill  in  compo- 
sition. His  book  is  a  beautiful  narrative,  well  contrived,  at  once 
Hebraic  and  Hellenic,  uniting  the  emotion  of  the  drama  with 
the  serenity  of  the  idyl.  ...  A  spirit  of  holy  infancy,  of 
joy,  of  fervor,  the  gospel  feeling  in  its  primitive  freshness,  dif- 
fuse all  over  the  legend  an  incomparably  sweet  coloring." 

Luke  is  the  best  writer  of  Greek  among  the  evangelists.  His 
construction  is  i-hythmical,  his  vocabulary  rich  and  well  selected, 
considerably  exceeding  that  of  the  other  evangelists.  He  uses 
over  seven  hundred  words  which  occur  nowhere  else  in  the  T^ew 
Testament.  He  substitutes  classical  words  for  many  which  are 
used  by  Matthew  and  Mark,  as  Xifivj],  lake,  for  ^aXaa-a-a,  sea, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE.  243 

when  describing  the  lake  of  Galilee.  He  uses  three  distinct 
words  for  hed  in  the  description  of  the  healing  of  the  paralytic 
(vv.  18-25),  avoiding  the  vulgar  Kpa^^aro^  of  Mark.  The  lat- 
ter word,  it  is  true,  occurs  in  two  passages  in  the  Acts  (v.  15  ; 
ix.  33),  but  both  these  passages  are  Petrine.  So,  too,  we  find 
eTrto-Tarij?,  master,  instead  of  Rabbi  j  vofiiKoi,  lawyers,  for 
o/pafijiaTeh,  scribes  ;  val,  oXtj^Sx},  iir  o\9j5e^as,  yea,  truly,  of  a 
truth,  for  d/M'qv,  verily  ;  <f>6po';,  tribute,  for  the  Latin  form, 
Kfjva-o<;,  census.  He  uses  several  Latin  words,  as  hrjvdpiov,  de- 
narius /  Xeryemv,  legion  /  aovddpiov,  napkin  /  dacrdpiov,  far- 
thing, though  he  avoids  KohpdvTt]';,  fa/rthing,  in  xxi.  2  (compare 
Mark  xii.  42) ;  fjL6Bio<;,  bushel.  He  is  less  Hebraic  than  the 
other  evangelists,  except  in  the  first  two  chapters — the  history 
of  the  infancy — which  he  derived  probably  from  Aramaic  tra- 
ditions or  documents,  and  where  his  language  has  a  stronger 
Hebrew  coloring  than  any  other  portion  of  the  New  Testament. 
"  The  songs  of  Zacharias,  Elizabeth,  Mary,  and  Simeon,  and  the 
anthem  of  the  angelic  host,  are  the  last  of  Hebrew  psalms,  as 
well  as  the  first  of  Christian  hymns.  They  can  be  literally  trans- 
lated back  into  the  Hebrew  without  losing  their  beauty  "  (Schaff). 

His  style  is  clear,  animated,  picturesque,  and  unpretentious. 
Where  he  describes  events  on  the  authority  of  others,  his  man- 
ner is  purely  historical ;  events  which  have  come  under  his  own 
obsei-vation  he  treats  in  the  minute  and  ciftjumstantial  style  of 
an  eye-witness.  Compare,  for  instance,  the  detailed  narrative 
of  the  events  at  Philippi  with  that  of  the  occurrences  at  Thessa- 
lonica.  The  change  of  style  at  Acts  xvi.  10,  from  the  histori- 
cal to  the  personal  narrative,  coincides  with  the  time  of  his  join- 
ing Paul  at  the  first  visit  to  Macedonia,  and  a  similar  change 
may  be  noted  at  Acts  xx.  4-6. 

But  the  style  of  Luke  also  acquires  a  peculiar  flavor  from  his 
profession.  His  language,  both  in  the  Gospel  and  in  the  Acts, 
indicates  a  familiarity  with  the  terms  used  by  the  Greek  medi- 
cal schools,  and  furnishes  an  incidental  confirmation  of  the  com- 
mon authorship  of  tlie  two  books.  As  we  have  seen,  Luke  was 
probably  a  Greek  of  Asia  Minor  ;  and,  with  the  exception  of 
Hippocrates,  all  the  extant  Greek  medical  writers  were  Asiatic 
Greeks.     Hippocrates,  indeed,  can  hardly  be  called  an  excep- 


24:4:  INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE. 

tion,  as  he  was  born  and  lived  in  the  island  of  Cos,  off  the  coast 
of  Caria.  Galen  was  of  Pergamus  in  Mysia;  Dioscorides,  of 
Anazarba  in  Cilicia ;  and  Aretaeus,  of  Cappadocia. 

The  medical  peculiarities  of  Luke's  style  appear,  first,  in  words 
and  phrases  used  in  descriptions  of  diseases  or  of  miracles  of 
healing.  His  terms  are  of  the  technical  character  peculiar  to  a 
medical  man.  Thus,  in  the  account  of  the  healing  of  Simon's 
wife's  mother  (Luke  iv.  38,  39),  we  read  that  she  was  taken 
{(Tvve'xpiJbevri)  with  a  great  fever  {TrvpeTw  /xeyaXq)).  The  word 
taken  is  used  nine  times  by  Luke,  and  only  three  times  in  the 
rest  of  the  New  Testament.  It  occurs  frequently  in  this  sense 
in  the  medical  writers,  as  does  also  the  simple  verb  e%&),  to  have 
or  hold.  Moreover,  according  to  Galen,  the  ancient  physicians 
were  accustomed  to  distinguish  between  great  and  little  fevers. 
In  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus  (Luke  xvi.  19-26), 
we  find  ei\iccofievo<;,ftdl  of  sores,  the  regular  medical  term  for 
to  he  ulcerated:  ohw5>iJ,ai,  to  he  in  pain,  occurs  four  times  in 
Luke's  writings,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament,  but 
frequently  in  Galen,  Aretaeus,  and  Hippocrates.  'E^iifrv^e, 
ga^e  up  the  ghost  (Acts  v.  5, 10),  is  a  rare  word,  used  by  Luke 
only,  and  occurring  only  three  times  in  the  New  Testament.  It 
seems  to  be  almost  confined  to  medical  writers,  and  to  be  used 
rarely  even  by  them.  In  the  proverb  of  "  the  camel  and  the 
needle's  eye,"  Matthew  and  Mark  use  for  needle  the  vulgar  word 
pa(j)l<;,  while  Luke  alone  uses  ^eXovrj,  the  surgical  needle. 

These  terms  will  be  pointed  out  in  the  notes  as  they  occur. 

Second,  the  ordinary  diction  of  the  evangelist,  when  dealing 
with  unprofessional  subjects,  has  often  a  medical  flavor,  which 
asserts  itself  in  words  peculiar  to  him,  or  more  common  in  his  writ- 
ings than  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  and  all  of  which  were 
in  common  use  among  the  Greek  physicians.  Thus  Matthew 
(xxiii.  4)  says  that  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  will  not  move 
(Kivfjaai)  tbe  burdens  they  impose,  with  one  of  their  fingers. 
Luke,  recording  a  similar  saying  (xi.  46),  says,  "ye  yourselves 
touch  {Trpoa-^aveTe)  not  the  burdens,"  using  a  technical  term 
for  gently  feeling  the  pulse,  or  a  sore  or  tender  part  of  the  body. 
The  word  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  "  No 
mean  city  "  {da-rjfio'i,  Acts  xxi.  39).     The  word  mean,  peculiar 


INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE.  245 

to  this  passage,  is  the  professional  term  for  a  disease  without 
distinctive  symptoms,  and  is  applied  by  Hippocrates  to  a  city. 
'^  Delivered  the  letter"  {avaS6vTe<;,  Acts  xxiii.  33).  The  verb 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  is  a  medical  term 
for  the  d/istribution  of  blood  through  the  veins,  or  of  nourish- 
ment through  the  body.  Hippocrates  uses  it  of  a  messenger  de- 
li vering  a  letter.  In  the  parable  of  the  sower,  Matthew  and 
Mark  have  piljav,  "they  have  no  root."  Luke  (viii.  6)  has 
(x/jidBa,  moisture,  the  medical  term  ior  the  juices  of  the  body,  of 
plants,  and  of  the  earth.  In  the  same  parable,  for  sprung  up 
Matthew  and  Mark  have  i^avereiXe,  while  Luke  has  (f)vev — avfi- 
<f>veicrai  (vv.  6,  7),  it  grew — grew  with  it  (Eev.).  These  latter 
words  are  used  by  medical  writers  to  describe  the  growth  of 
parts  of  the  body,  of  diseases,  of  vegetation,  etc.  Hippocrates 
uses  together  iKfid'i,  moisture,  and  ^veaSat,  to  grow,  comparing 
the  juices  of  the  body  with  those  of  the  earth.  Svfi^vea^M, 
to  grow  together,  was  the  professional  word  for  the  closing  of 
wounds  and  ulcers,  the  uniting  of  nerves  and  of  bones,  and  is  used 
by  Dioscorides  precisely  as  here,  of  plants  growing  together  in 
the  same  place. 

Such  peculiarities,  so  far  from  being  strange  or  anomalous, 
are  only  what  might  naturally  be  expected.  It  is  an  every-day 
fact  that  the  talk  of  specialists,  whether  in  the  professions  or  in 
mechanics,  when  it  turns  upon  ordinary  topics,  unconsciously 
takes  form  and  color  from  their  familiar  calling. 

The  attempt  has  been  made  to  show  that  Paul's  style  was  in- 
fluenced by  Luke  in  this  same  direction  ;  so  that  his  intercourse 
with  his  companion  and  physician  showed  itseK  in  his  use  of 
certain  words  having  a  medical  flavor.  Dean  Plumptre  cites  as 
illustrations  of  this,  vyialveiv,  to  he  healthy,  in  its  figurative  ap- 
plication to  doctrine  as  wholesome  or  sound  (1  Tim.  i.  10  ;  vi.  3 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  13) :  jdjjpaiva,  canker  (2  Tim.  ii.  17) :  rv^toSeh, 
lifted  wp  with  pride  ;  Eev.,  puffed  up  (1  Tim.  iii.  6  ;  vi.  4) : 
mKavri)pia(jyi,kv(i>v,  seared ;  Eev.,  'branded  (1  Tim.  iv.  2) :  kvi)- 
^ofievoi,  itching  (2  Tim.  iv.  3) :  airoKo^ovTM,  out  themsel/ues  off 
(Gal.  V.  12). 

Luke  is  also  circumstantial,  as  well  as  technical,  in  his  de- 
scriptions of  diseases ;  noting  their  duration  and  symptoms,  and 


246  INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE. 

the  stages  of  the  patient's  recovery,  etc.  See  Acts  iii.  1-8 ;  ix. 
40,  41.  The  successive  stages  of  Elymas'  blindness  are  noted 
at  Acts  xiii.  11 ;  and  the  process  of  Saul's  restoration  to  sight 
at  ix.  18.  He  also  exhibits  traces  of  professional  sensitiveness^, 
as  in  his  omission  of  Mark's  implied  reflection  upon  the  physi- 
cians who  had  treated  the  woman  with  the  issue  of  blood  (Luke 
viii.  43 ;  Mark  v.  26). 

Luke's  accurate  observation  and  memory  appear  especially 
in  the  Acts,  in  his  allusions,  and  in  his  descriptions  of  nauti- 
cal and  political  matters.  With  nautical  details,  he  exhibits 
the  acquaintance  often  displayed  by  a  landsman  who  has  been 
much  at  sea  and  in  frequent  intercourse  with  seamen.  It  has 
been  conjectured  that  at  some  period  of  his  professional  life  he 
may  have  served  as  a  surgeon  on  shipboard.  In  his  political 
allusions  he  is  precise  in  the  use  of  terms.  Thus,  in  Acts  xiii. 
7,  his  accuracy  in  naming  the  civil  magistrates  is  noteworthy. 
He  speaks  of  Sergius  Paulus  as  the  jproconsul  of  Cyprus. 
Consuls  were  called  by  the  Greeks  viraToi ;  and  hence  a  ^o- 
consul  was  avl^vvaro';,  one  who  acts  instead  of  {avrl)  a  consul. 
Roman  provinces  were  of  two  classes,  senatorial  and  imperial  y 
and  the  proper  title  of  the  governor  of  a  senatorial  province 
was  dvSvTraTo<;.  The  governor  of  an  imperial  province  was 
called  dvTia-rpa.TTjyo'i,  or  propraetor.  Evidently,  therefore,  Luke 
regarded  Cyprus  as  a  senatorial  province,  governed  by  a  pro- 
consul ;  and  we  find  that  Augustus,  though  at  first  he  reserved 
Cyprus  for  himself,  and  consequently  governed  it  by  a  pro- 
pruetor,  afterward  restored  it  to  the  senate  and  governed  it  by 
a  proconsul — a  fact  confirmed  by  coins  of  the  very  time  of 
Paul's  visit  to  Cyprus,  bearing  the  name  of  the  emperor  Clau- 
dius, and  of  the  provincial  governor,  with  the  title  avS^inraroi;. 
So  Luke  speaks  of  Gallio  (Acts  xviii.  12)  as  proconsul  (A.  Y., 
deputy)  of  Achaia,  which  was  a  senatorial  province.  When  he 
comes  to  Felix  or  Festus,  who  were  only  deputy-governors  of 
the  propraetor  of  Syria,  he  calls  them  by  the  general  term 
Tjyeficov,  governor  (Acts  xxiii.  24;  xxvi.  30).  Similarly  accurate 
is  his  designation  of  Philippi  as  a  colonia  (Acts  xvi.  12),  and 
his  calling  its  magistrates  a-TpaTTjjol  or  praetors,  a  title  which 
they  were  fond  of  giving  themselves.     So  the  city  authorities 


INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE.  247 

of  Thessalonica  are  styled  TT-oXiTcip'x^ai,  rulers  of  the  city  (Acts 
xvii.  8) ;  for  Thessalonica  was  a  free  city,  having  the  right  of 
self-government,  and  where  the  local  magistrates  had  the  power 
of  life  and  death  over  the  citizens.  Luke's  accnracy  on  this 
point  is  home  out  hy  an  inscription  on  an  archway  in  Thessa- 
lonica, which  gives  this  title  to  tlie  magistrates  of  the  place, 
together  with  their  number — seven — and  the  very  names  of  some 
who  held  the  office  not  long  before  Paul's  time.  This  short  in- 
scription contains  six  names  which  are  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament.  We  may  also  note  the  Asiarohs,  chiefs  of  Asia,  at 
Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  31),  who,  like  the  aediles  at  Rome,  defrayed 
the  charge  of  public  amusements,  and  were,  as  presidents  of  the 
.games,  invested  with  the  character  of  priests. 

A  similar  accuracy  appears  in  the  Gospel  in  the  dates  of 
more  important  events,  and  in  local  descriptions,  as  of  the 
Loi'd's  coming  to  Jerusalem  across  the  Mount  of  Olives  (xix. 
37-41).  Here  he  brings  out  the  two  distinct  views  of  Jeru- 
salem on  this  route,  an  irregularity  in  the  ground  hiding  it  for 
a  time  after  one  has  just  caught  sight  of  it.  Verse  37  marks 
the  first  sight,  and  41  the  second. 

In  the  narrative  of  the  voyage  and  shipwreck,  the  precision  of 
detail  is  remarkable.  Thus  there  are  fourteen  verbs  denoting 
the  progression  of  a  ship,  with  a  distinction  indicating  the  pecu- 
liar circumstances  of  the  ship  at  the  time.  Seven  of  these  are 
compounds  of  -rrXeo),  to  sail.  Thus  we  have  aireTfKevaav,  sailed 
away  (xiii.  4) ;  BpahmkoovvTe^;,  sailing  slovily  (xxvii.  7) ; 
vireifKeva-afiev,  sailed  under  (the  lee).  So,  also,  irapaXej6fji,evot, 
hardly  passing  (xxvii.  8) ;  ei^vSpo/j^Tja-a/xev,  ran  with  a  straight 
course  (xvi.  11),  etc.  l^ote  also  the  technical  terms  for  lighten- 
ing the  ship  by  throwing  overboard  the  cargo  :  eK^oXrjv  CTrot- 
ovvTo ;  literally,  made  a  casting  out  (xxvii.  18)  ;  Ikov^i^ov, 
lightened  (xxvii.  38) ;  and  the  names  of  various  parts  of  the 
vessel. 

Luke's  Gospel  is  the  gospel  of  contrasts.  Thus  Satan  is 
constantly  emphasized  over  against  Jesus,  as  binding  a  daughter 
of  Abraham  ;  as  cast  down  from  heaven  in  Jesus'  vision ;  as 
entering  into  Judas ;  as  sifting  Peter.  The  evangelist  portrays 
the  doubting  Zacharias  and  the  trusting  Mary ;   the  churlish 


24:8  INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE. 

Simon  and  the  loving  sinner;  the  bustling  Martha  and  the 
quiet,  adoring  Mary ;  the  thankful  and  the  thankless  lepers ; 
the  woes  added  to  the  blessings  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ; 
the  rich  man  and  Lazarus  ;  the  Pharisee  and  the  Publican  ;  the 
good  Samaritan  and  the  priest  and  Levite ;  the  prodigal  and 
his  elder  brother  ;  the  penitent  and  impenitent  thieves. 

Luke's  is  the  unmersal  gospel.  His  frequent  use  of  words 
expressing  the  freedom  and  universality  of  the  Gospel  has  al- 
ready been  noted.  His  Gospel  is  for  the  Gentiles.  The  gene- 
alogy of  Christ  is  traced  back  to  the  common  father  of  the  race, 
Adam,  instead  of  to  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
as  by  Matthew.  He  records  the  enrolment  of  Christ  as  a  citi- 
zen of  the  Roman  empire.  Simeon  greets  him  as  a  light  for 
revelation  to  the  Gentiles.  The  Baptist  cites  concerning  him 
Isaiah's  prophecy  that  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God. 
Luke  alone  records  tlie  mission  of  the  seventy,  who  represent  the 
seventy  Gentile  nations,  as  the  twelve  represent  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel.  He  alone  mentions  the  mission  of  Elijah  to  the 
heathen  widow,  and  Naaman's  cleansing  by  Elisha.  He  con- 
trasts the  gratitude  of  the  one  Samaritan  leper  with  the  thank- 
lessness  of  the  nine  Jewish  lepers.  He  alone  records  the  refusal 
to  call  down  fire  on  the  inhospitable  Samaritans,  and  the  parable 
of  the  Good  Samaritan  is  peculiar  to  him.  He  notes  the  com- 
mendation of  the  humble  Publican  in  contrast  with  the  self- 
righteous  Pharisee,  and  relates  how  Jesus  abode  with  Zacchaeus. 
He  omits  all  reference  to  the  law  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 

Luke's  is  the  gospel  of  the  poor  and  outcast.  As  a  phase  of 
its  universality,  the  humblest  and  most  sinful  are  shown  as  not 
excluded  from  Jesus.  The  highest  heavenly  honor  is  conferred 
on  the  humble  Mary  of  Nazareth.  Only  in  Luke's  story  do  we 
hear  the  angels'  song  of  "  Peace  and  good-will,"  and  see  the 
simple  shepherds  repairing  to  the  manger  at  Bethlehem.  It  ia 
Luke  who  gives  the  keynote  of  Keble's  lovely  strain : 

"The  pastoral  spirits  first 

Approacli  thee,  Babe  divine, 
For  they  in  lowly  thoughts  are  nurs'd. 
Meet  for  thy  lowly  shrine : 
Sooner  than  they  should  miss  where  thou  dost  dwell, 
Angels  from  lieaveu  will  stoop  to  guide  them  to  thy  cell." 


INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE.  249 

He  pictures  poor  Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom,  and  the  call- 
ing of  the  poor  and  maimed  and  halt  and  blind  to  the  great 
supper.  It  is  the  gospel  of  the  publican,  the  harlot,  the  prodi- 
gal, the  penitent  thief. 

Luke's  is  the  gospel  of  womanhood.  Woman  comes  promi- 
nently into  view  as  discerning  God's  promises.  The  songs  of 
Mary  and  Elizabeth,  and  the  testimony  of  'Anna,  are  full  of  a 
clear  spiritual  perception,  no  less  than  of  a  living  and  simple 
faith.  She  appears  as  ministering  to  the  Lord  and  as  the 
subject  of  his  ministries.  Mary  of  Magdala,  Joanna,  Susan- 
na, Mary  and  Martha,  with  others,  lavish  upon  him  their  ten- 
der care;  while  the  daughter  of  Abraham  whom  Satan  had 
bound,  the  sorrowful  mother  at  Nain,  she  who  touched  the  hem 
of  his  garment,  and  the  weeping  daughters  of  Jerusalem  on  the 
road  to  Calvary  knew  the  comfort  of  his  words  and  the  healing 
and  life-giving  virtue  of  his  touch.  The  word  yui/^,  woman, 
occurs  in  Matthew  and  Mark  together  forty-nine  times,  and  in 
Luke  alone  forty-three.  "He  alone,"  says  Canon  Farrar, 
"  preserves  the  narratives,  treasured  with  delicate  reserve  and 
holy  reticence  in  the  hearts  of  the  blessed  Virgin  and  of  the 
saintly  Elizabeth — narratives  which  show  in  every  line  the  pure 
and  tender  coloring  of  a  woman's  thoughts." 

Luke's  is  the  prayer-gospel.  To  him  we  are  indebted  for  the 
record  of  our  Lord's  prayers  at  his  baptism ;  after  the  cleansing 
of  the  leper ;  before  the  call  of  the  twelve ;  at  his  transfigura- 
tion ;  and  on  the  cross  for  his  enemies.  To  him  alone  belong 
the  prayer-parables  of  the  Friend  at  Midnight,  and  the  Unjust 
Judge. 

Luke's  is  the  gospel  of  song.  He  has  been  justly  styled  "the 
first  Christian  hymnologist."  To  him  we  owe  the  Benedietnis, 
the  song  of  Zacharias ;  the  Magnificat,  the  song  of  Mary ;  the 
JTwic  Dimittis,  the  song  of  Simeon ;  the  Ave  Maria,  or  the 
angel's  salutation;  and  the  Gloria  in  JExcelsis,  the  song  of 
the  angels. 

And,  finally,  Luke's  is  the  gospel  of  infancy.  He  alone  tells 
the  story  of  the  birth  of  John  the  Baptist ;  he  gives  the  mi- 
nuter details  of  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  the  accounts  of  his 
circumcision  and  presentation  in  the  temple,  his  subjection  to 


250  INTRODUCTION  TO  LUKE. 

his  parents  and  the  questioning  with  the  doctors.  His  Gospel 
"  sheds  a  sacred  halo  and  celestial  charm  over  infancy,  as  per- 
petuating the  paradise  of  innocence  in  a  sinful  world.  The 
first  two  chapters  will  always  be  the  favorite  chapters  for  chil- 
dren, and  all  who  delight  to  gather  around  the  manger  of 
Bethlehem,  and  to  rejoice  with  shepherds  in  the  field  and 
angels  in  heaven  "  (Schaff). 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  LUKE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

PEOLOGTJE. 


1.  Forasmuch  as  (eTreiBi^Trep).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. A  compound  conjunction :  eTret,  since,  Sjj,  as  is  well 
known,  and  irep,  giving  the  sense  of  certainty. 

Have  taken  in  harld  {i-jrexeiprjo-av).  Used  by  Luke  only. 
A  literal  translation.  The  word  carries  the  sense  of  a  difficult 
undertaking  (see  Acts  xix.  13),  and  implies  that  previous  at- 
tempts have  not  been  successful.  It  occurs  frequently  in  medi- 
cal language.  Hippocrates  begins  one  of  his  medical  treatises 
very  much  as  Luke  begins  his  gospel.  "  As  many  as  have 
taken  im  hcmd  (iirexelpria-av)  to  speak  or  to  write  concerning  the 
healing  art." 

To  set  forth  in  order  {avard^aa^ai).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  A.  V.  is  true  to  the  core  of  the  word,  which 
is  Toa-a-o),  toj)ut  in  order,  or  arrange.  Rev.  happily  gives  the 
force  of  the  preposition  ava,  up,  by  the  rendering  d/raw  vp. 

A  declaration  {Si^ynaiv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
From  Sta,  through,  and  '^eofiai,  to  lead  the  way.  Hence  some- 
thing which  leads  the  reader  through  the  mass  of  facts :  a  nar- 
rative, as  A.  v.,  with  the  accompanying  idea  of  thoroughness. 
Note  the  singular  number.  Many  took  in  hand  to  draw  up, 
not  nofrratmes,  but  a  na/rratime,  embracing  the  whole  of  the 


252  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Oh.  L 

evangelic  matter.  The  word  was  particularly  applied  to  a 
niedieal  treatise.  Galea  applies  it  at  least  seventy-three  times 
to  the  writings  of  Hippocrates. 

Which  are  most  surely  believed  {t&v  irevXripoi^opriiievcov). 
From  ifKrjpri'i,  full,  and  ^opka>,  the  frequentative  form  of  i^kpa, 
to  iring,  meaning  to  bring  frequently  or  habitualh/.  Hence,  to 
'bring  full  measure  ;  to  fulfil.  Compare  2  Tim.  iv.  5, 17.  Also 
otfull  assurance.  Applied  to  persons.  Kom.  iv.  21 ;  Heb.  x. 
22.  As  applied  to  things,  therefore,  the  sense  of  the  A.  V.  is 
inadmissible.  Render  as  Rev.,  have  heen  fulfilled.  The  word 
is  chosen  to  indicate  that  these  events  happened  in  accordance 
with  a  preconceived  design.     Wye,  heenfiUed  in  us. 

Among  us.  Explained  by  the  words  in  the  next  sentence, 
who  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers. 

2.   Even  as.    ■  Referring  to  the  composition  of  the  narrative. 

Delivered  (TrapiSoa-av).  Not  necessarily  excluding  written 
traditions,  but  referring  mainly  to  oral  tradition.  Note  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  many  who  attempted  to  draw  up  a  na/rra- 
ti/ve  and  the  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  who  handed  down  the 
facts. 

From  the  beginning  (aTr'  dpxm).  The  official  beginning, 
the  commencement  of  Jesus'  ministry.  Compare  Acts  i.  1,  21, 
22 ;  John  xv.  27. 

Eye-witnesses  and  ministers.  Personal  knowledge  and 
practical  experience  were  necessary  elements  of  an  apostle. 
JEye-witnesses  {avroirrai).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Peter 
uses  another  word,  eVoTTTat  (2  Pet.  i.  16).  Frequent  in  medi- 
cal writers,  of  a  personal  examination  of  disease  or  of  the  parts 
of  the  body.  Compare  the  modern  medical  term  autopsy. 
Ministers  {virrtpirai).  See  on  Matt.  v.  25.  In  medical  lan- 
guage denoting  the  attendants  or  assistants  of  the  principal 
physician. 


Ch.  I.]  LUKE.  263 

3.  Having  had  perfect  understanding  {-TraprjKoXovSriKOTi). 
Incorrect.  The  verb  means  to  follow  closeh/,  and  hence  to 
trace  accwrately.  See  2  Tim.  iii.  10,  where  Rev.  reads  thou 
didst  follow  for  thou  hast  fully  known.  Eev.  renders  here 
having  traced  the  course.  The  word  occurs  frequently  in  medi- 
cal writings,  and  sometimes,  as  here,  with  uKpi^m,  accurately. 
Tynd.,  ha/oing  sea/rched  out  diligently. 

From  the  very  first  {dvm^ev).  Lit,  from  above;  the  events 
being  conceived  in  a  descending  series. 

Accurately  (a«/3tj8w?)  From  uKpov,  the  highest  or  farthest 
point.     Hence  to  trace  down  to  the  last  and  minutest  detail. 

In  order  («a^ef»7?).     Used  by  Luke  only. 

4.  Mightest  know  {eirir/vuxi).  See  on  Matt.  vii.  16.  With 
the  idea  oifuU  knowledge ;  or,  as  regards  Theophilus,  of  more 
accurate  knowledge  than  is  possible  from  the  many  who  have 
undertaken  the  narration. 

Certainty  {dcrtfxiXeiav).  From  a,  not,  and  cr^aXKojjbai,  to 
faU.     Hence  steadfastness,  stability,  security  against  error. 

Wast  instructed  {kuti^xV'^^)-  From  Karrixeco,  to  resoimd/ 
to  teach  by  word  of  mouth  ;  and  so,  in  Christian  writers,  to  in- 
struct orally  in  the  elements  of  religion.  It  would  imply  that 
Theophilus  had,  thus  far,  been  orally  instructed.  See  on  de- 
livered,  ver.  2.     The  word  catechumen  is  derived  from  it. 

Things  (Xoycov).  Properly  words  (so  Wye.),  which  Eev. 
gives  in  margin.  If  the  word  can  mean  thing  at  all,  it  is  only 
in  the  sense  of  the  thing  spoken  of ;  the  subject  or  matter  of 
discourse,  in  which  sense  it  occurs  often  in  classical  Greek. 
Some  render  it  accounts,  histories;  others,  doctrines  of  the 
faith.  Godet  translates  instruction,  and  claims  that  not  only 
the  facts  of  the  gospel,  but  the  exposition  of  the  facts  with  a 
view  to  show  their  evangelical  meaning  and  to  their  appropria- 


254  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

tioii  by  faith,  are  included  in  the  word.  There  is  force  in  this 
idea;  and  if  we  hold  to  the  mea.mng  histories,  or  even  words, 
this  sense  will  be  implied  in  the  context.  Luke  has  drawn  up 
his  account  in  order  that  Theophilus  may  hsLve  fuller  knowledge 
concerning  the  accounts  which  he  has  heard  by  word  of  mouth.  , 
That  his  knowledge  may  go  on  from  the  facts,  to  embrace  their 
doctrinal  and  evangelical  import ;  that  he  may  see  the  facts  of 
Jesus'  life  and  ministry  as  the  true  basis  of  the  Gospel  of 
salvation. 

THE   NAERATIVE. 

5.  King.  A  title  decreed  to  Herod  by  the  Roman  Senate 
on  the  recommendation  of  Antony  and  Octavius.  The  Greek 
style  now  gives  place  to  the  Hebraized  style.    See  Introduction. 

Course  {i<^fiepia<;).  Lit.,  daily  service.  The  college  of 
priests  was  divided  into  twenty-four  courses.  Each  of  these 
did  duty  for  eight  days,  from  one  Sabbath  to  another,  once 
every  six  months.  The  service  of  the  week  was  subdivided 
among  the  various  families  which  constituted  a  course.  On  Sab- 
baths the  whole  course  was  on  duty.  On  feast-days  any  priest 
might  come  up  and  join  in  the  ministrations  of  the  sanctuary; 
and  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  all  the  twenty-four  courses  were 
bound  to  be  present  and  officiate.  The  course  of  Abijah  was 
the  eighth  of  the  twenty-four.     See  1  Chron.  xxiv.  10. 

6.  Before  God.  A  Hebrew  expression.  Compare  Gen.  vii. 
1 ;  Acts  viii.  21. 

7.  Well  stricken  {■n-po^e^rfKore';).  Lit.,  advcmced.  Wye, 
had  gone  far  in  their  days. 

9.  His  lot  was  (eXaxe).  Four  lots  were  drawn  to  determine 
the  order  of  the  ministry  of  the  day :  the  first,  before  day- 
break, to  designate  the  priests  who  were  to  cleanse  the  altar 
and  prepare  its  fires  ;  the  second  for  the  priest  who  was  to  offer 
the  sacrifice  and  cleanse  the  candlestick  and  the  altar  of  incense ; 


Ch.  I.]  LUKE.  255 

the  third  for  the  priest  who  should  burn  incense  ;  and  the  fourth 
appointing  those  who  were  to  lay  the  sacrifice  and  meat-offering 
on  the  altar,  and  pour  out  the  drink-offering.  There  are  said 
to  have  been  twenty  thousand  priests  in  Christ's  time,  so  that 
no  priest  would  ever  offer  incense  more  than  once. 

Temple  {vahv).    The  sanctuary.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 

Burn  incense  {S-vfJuaa-at).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
The  incensing  priest  and  his  assistants  went  first  to  the  altar 
of  burnt-offering,  and  filled  a  golden  censer  with  incense,  and 
placed  burning  coals  from  the  altar  in  a  golden  bowl.  As  they 
passed  into  the  court  from  the  Ploly  Place  they  struck  a  large 
instrument  called  the  Jtfagrephah,  which  summoned  all  the  min- 
isters to  their  places.  Ascending  the  steps  to  the  holy  place,  the 
priests  spread  the  coals  on  the  golden  altar,  and  arranged  the 
incense,  and  the  chief  officiating  priest  was  then  left  alone  within 
the  Holy  Place  to  await  the  signal  of  the  president  to  burn  the 
incense.  It  was  probably  at  this  time  that  the  angel  appeared 
to  Zacharias.  When  the  signal  was  given,  the  whole  multitude 
withdrew  from  the  inner  court,  and  fell  down  before  the  Lord. 
Silence  pervaded  the  temple,  while  within,  the  clouds  of  incense 
rose  up  before  Jehovah.  (For  a  more  detailed  account  see 
Edersheim,  "  The  Temple,  its  Ministry,"  etc.). 

13.  Is  heard  {ela-r^Kova-^).  If  we  render  the  aorist  literally, 
wm  heard,  we  avoid  the  question  as  to  what  prayer  is  referred 
to.  The  reference  is  to  the  prayer ^ysr  offspring,  which,  owing 
to  his  extreme  years,  Zacharias  had  probably  ceased  to  offer, 
and  which  he  certainly  would  not  be  preferring  in  that  public 
and  solemn  service.  Hence  the  aorist  is  appropriate,  referring 
back  to  the  past  acts  of  prayer.  "  That  prayer,  which  thou  no 
longer  offerest,  was  heard." 

John.    Meaning  God  is  fa/vorahle,  or  Jehovah  showeth  grace. 

14.  Joy  and  gladness  {x"'P"'  '^"'''  op(aXKia<Tt,<;).  The  latter 
word  expresses  exultant  joy.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  6. 


256  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

15.  Strong  drink  (aiKepa).  A  Hebrew  word,  meaning  any- 
kind  of  intoxicating  liquor  not  made  from  grapes.     Wye,  sydzr. 

Even  from  his  mother's  womb.  "Eti,  yet,  still,  means 
while  yet  unborn.  Tynd.,  emen  vn  his  mother's  womh.  Compare 
ver.  41. 

17.  Wisdom  {(ppov^erei).  Wjc, prudence.  This  is  a  lower 
word  than  crocfiia,  wisdom  (see  on  Jas.  iii.  13).  It  is  an  atiri- 
hute  or  result  of  wisdom,  and  not  necessarily  in  a  good  sense, 
though  mostly  so  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare,  however,  the 
use  of  the  kindred  word  ^poi't/Ao?  in  Rom.  xi.  25  ;  xii.  16 :  wise 
in  your  own  conceits  /  and  the  adverb  ^povifjiax;,  wisely,  of  the 
unjust  steward,  Litke  xvi.  8.  It  is  practical  intelligence,  which 
may  or  may  not  be  applied  to  good  ends.  Appropriate  here  as 
a  practical  term  corresponding  to  disobedient. 

Prepared* {KaraaKevaa-fiivov).  A djusted,  disposed, placed  m 
the  right  moral  state. 

18.  Whereby  {KaTo,  ti).  Lit.,  according  to  what?  It  de- 
mands a  standard  of  knowledge,  a  sign. 

For.     I  require  a  s\^,for  I  am  old. 

19.  Gabriel.  Meaning  wiaw  o/" C'^oc?.  In  Jewish  tradition  the 
guardian  of  the  sacred  treasury.  Michael  (see  on  Jude  9)  is 
the  destroyer,  the  champion  of  God  against  evU,  the  minister 
of  wrath.  Gabriel  is  the  messenger  of  peace  and  restoration. 
See  Dan.  viii.  16  ;  ix.  21.  "  The  former  is  the  forerunner 
of  Jehovah  the  Judge ;  the  latter  of  Jehovah  the  Saviour " 
(Godet). 

20.  Thou  shalt  be  silent  (eo-j;  auoTrmv).  Lit.,  thou  shalt  le 
being  silent.     The  finite  verb  and  participle  denote  continuance. 

Not  able  to  speak.  Showing  that  the  silence  would  not  be 
voluntary. 


Ch.  I.]  L0KE.  257 

My  words  which  (oiVti/e?).  The  pronoun  is  qualitative,  de- 
noting a  class.  "  My  words,  which,  incredible  as  they  seem  to 
you,  are  of  a  Tcind  which  shall  be  fulfilled. 

In  their  season  (et?  rov  Kaipov).  The  preposition  implies 
exactness:  at  the  completion  of  the  appointed  time.  ThejPTO- 
cess  of  fulfilment,  beginning  now,  will  go  on,  ek,  tij)  to,  the  ap- 
pointed time,  and  at  the  time  will  be  consummated.  Kaipov, 
season,  is  more  specific  than  'xpovo^,  time.  It  is  an  ajp^ointed, 
fitting  Mvae :  the  right  ^o«W  of  time  when  circumstances  shall 
concur. 

21.  Waited  {fjv  irpocrhoKoiv).  The  finite  verb  and  participle, 
AeTiotingprotracted  waiting.  Hence,  better  as  liev.,  were  wait- 
ing.    Wye,  was  abiding. 

Marvelled.  According  to  the  Talmud,  the  priests,  especially 
the  chief  priests,  were  accustomed  to  spend  only  a  short  time  in 
the  sanctuary,  otherwise  it  was  feared  that  they  had  been  slain 
by  God  for  unworthiness  or  transgression. 

22.  They  perceived  {eTreyvojcrav).  Clearly  perceived.  See 
on  Matt.  vii.  16,  and  ver.  4. 

He  beckoned  (rjv  Siavevav).  Better  ^ev.,contimiedmaMng 
signs.  Again  the  participle  with  the  finite  verb,  denoting  fre- 
quent repetition  of  the  same  signs.     Wye,  was  beckoning. 

23.  Ministration  (\etTov/37wx?).  From  \eiTo<;,ielonging  to  the 
people,  public,  and  epyov,  a  worlc.  Hence  service  of  the  state  in 
a  public  office.  Trench  observes  that  "  when  the  Christian 
Church  was  forming  its  terminology,  which  it  did  partly  by 
shaping  new  words,  and  partly  by  elevating  old  ones  to  higher 
than  their  previous  uses,  of  the  latter  it  more  readily  adopted 
those  before  employed  in  civil  and  political  life,  than  such  as 
had  played  their  part  in  religious  matters."  Hence  it  adopted 
this  word,  already  in  use  in  the  Septuagint,  as  the  constant  word 
for  performi/ng  priestly  and  ministerial  functions  ;  and  so  in 

17 


358  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

the  ISTew  Testament  of  the  ministry  of  the  a{postles,  prcyphets, 
and  teachers. 

24.  Conceived  {aweka^ev).  Mr.  Hobart  ("Medical  Lan- 
triiage  of  Luke  ")  says  that  the  number  of  words  referring  to 
pregnancy,  barrenness,  etc.,  used  by  Luke,  is  almost  as  large  as 
that  used  by  Hippocrates.  Compare  i.  31 ;  i.  24 ;  ii.  5 ;  i.  7 ; 
XX.  28.  All  of  these,  except  i.  24,  are  peculiar  to  himself,  and 
all,  of  course,  in  common  use  among  medical  writers. 

Hid  {vepteKpv^ev).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Ilepi 
signifies  com/pletely  ;  entire  seclusion. 

25.  Neither  A.  Y.  nor  Eev.  render  ori, ;  taking  it,  as  fre- 
quently, merely  as  recitative  or  equivalent  to  quotation  marks. 
Eut  it  means  hecause.  Elizabeth  assigns  the  reason  for  her 
peculiar  seclusion.  Her  pi'egnancy  was  God's  work,  and  she 
would  leave  it  to  him  also  to  announce  it  and  openly  to  take 
away  her  reproach.  Hence  the  specification  oifive  months,  after 
which  her  condition  would  become  apparent.  Fully  expressed, 
the  sense  would  be  ;  She  hid  herself,  saying  (I  have  hid  myself) 
hecause,  etc. 

Looked  upon  (eVetSei').     Used  by  Luke  only. 

26.  Gabriel.  The  annunciation  and  the  angel  Gabriel  are 
favorite  themes  with  Dante,  and  he  pictures  them  with  exqui- 
site beauty.  Thus  both  appear  on  the  sculptured  wall  which 
flanks  the  inner  side  of  the  purgatorial  ascent. 

"  The  angel  wbo  came  down  to  earth  with  tidings 
Of  peace  that  had  been  wept  for  many  a  year, 
And  opened  heaven  from  its  long  interdict, 
In  front  of  us  appeared  so  truthfully 
There  sculptured  in  a  gracious  attitude, 
He  did  not  seem  an  image  that  is  silent. 
One  would  have  sworn  that  he  was  saying  Ave ! 
For  she  was  there  in  effigy  portrayed 
Who  turned  the  key  to  ope  the  exalted  love, 
And  in  her  mien  this  language  had  impressed, 
Ecee  andlln  Dei  f  as  distinctly 
As  any  figure  stamps  itself  in  wax." 

Purgatory,  x.,  34-45. 


Ch.  I.]  LUKE.  259 

In  Paradise  Gabriel  appears  as  a  light  circling  round  the  Yir- 
gin  and  singing : 

"I  am  angelio  love,  that  circle  round 
The  joy  sublime  which  breathes  out  from  the  womb 
That  was  the  hostelry  of  our  desira  ; 
And  I  shall  circle,  Lady  of  heaven,  while 
Thou  foUowest  thy  Son,  and  mak'st  diviner 
The  sphere  supreme,  because  thou  enterest  there." 

Paradise,  xxiii.,  103-108. 


And  again : 


'  And  the  same  love  that  first  descended  then, 
Am  Maria  gratia  plena  singing, 
In  front  of  her  his  wings  expanded  wide. " 

Paradise,  xxxii. ,  94r-96. 


28.  Thou  that  art  highly  favored  (KexapiTwfievr)).  Lit.,  as 
Eev.  in  margin,  endued  with  grace.  Only  here  and  Eph.  i.  6. 
The  rendering  full  of  gfrace,Yn\ga,te,  Wye,  and  Tynd.,  is  there- 
fore wrong. 

All  the  best  texts  omit  blessed  art  thou  among  women. 

Cast  in  her  mind  {BieXoyi^ero  ).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  4.  The 
imperfect  tense,  "  began  to  reason." 

30.  Grace  {■)(apiv).  From  the  same  root  as  ;;^a/pa),  to  rejoice. 
I.  Primarily  that  which  gi/vesjoy  or  pleasure  /  and  hence  out- 
wa/rd  beauty,  loveliness,  something  which  delights  the  beholder. 
Thus  Homer,  of  Ulysses  going  to  the  assembly :  "  Athene  shed 
down  manly  grace  or  beauty  upon  him  "  ("  Odyssey,"  ii.,  12) ; 
and  Septuagint,  Ps.  xlv.  3,  "  grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips." 
See  also  Prov.  i.  9 ;  iii.  22.  Substantially  the  same  idea, 
agreeahleness,  is  conveyed  in  Luke  iv.  22,  respecting  the  gra- 
cious  words,  lit.,  words  of  grace,  uttered  by  Christ.  So  Eph. 
iv,  29.  II.  As  a  beautiful  or  agreeable  sentiment  felt  and  ex- 
pressed towa/rd  another ;  kvndness,  famor,  good-wiU.  2  Cor. 
viii.  6,  7,  9 ;  ix.  8 ;  Luke  i.  30 ;  ii.  40 ;  Acts  ii.  47.  So  of  the 
responsive  sentiment  of  iha/nhfuT/ness.  See  Luke  vi.  32,  33,  34  ; 
xvii.  9 ;  but  mostly  in  the  formula  thcmhs  to  God ;  Rom.  vi. 
17;  1  Cor.  xv.  57;  2  Cor.  ii.  14;  2  Tim.  i.  3.   III.  Tsis,  mibstan- 


260  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch,  I. 

tial  expression  of  good-will;  a  boon,  a f amor,  a  gift;  bnt  not 
in  New  Testament.  See  Rom.  v.  15,  where  the  distinction  is 
made  between  %a/3ts,  grace,  and  Smpea  eV  x^P'''''h  *  9¥^  *^  grace. 
So  a  gratification  or  delight,  in  classical  Greek  only  ;  as  the  de- 
light in  battle,  in  sleep,  etc.  IV.  The  higher  Christian  signi- 
fication, based  on  the  emphasis  oifreeness  in  the  gift  or  favor, 
and,  as  commonly  in  New  Testament,  denoting  the  free,  spon- 
taneous, absolute  loving-kindness  of  God  toward  men,  and  so 
contrasted  with  debt,  law,  works,  sin.  The  word  does  not  occur 
either  in  Matthew  or  Mark. 

31.  Thou  shalt  conceive.     See  on  ver.  24 

Jesus.     See  on  Matt.  i.  21. 

35.  Shall  overshadow.  "Denoting  the  mildest  and  most 
gentle  operation  of  divine  power,  that  the  divine  fire  should 
not  consume  Mary,  but  make  her  fruitful "  (Bengel).  Compare 
Exod.  xxxiii.  22 ;  Mark  ix.  7.  Compare  the  classical  legend  of 
Semele,  who,  being  beloved  of  Jove,  besought  him  to  appear  to 
her  as  he  appeared  in  heaven,  in  all  the  terrors  of  the  thun- 
derer,  and  was  consumed  by  his  lightning.  The  metaphor  in 
the  word  is  taken  from  a  cloud,  in  which  God  had  appeared 
(Exod.  xl.  34  ;  1  Kings  viii.  10). 

36.  Cousin  {a-vyyev^'s).  The  nature  of  the  relationship, 
however,  is  unknown.  The  word  is  a  general  term,  meaning 
of  the  same  family.  The  best  texts  substitute  for  it  a  feminine 
form,  trtr/yevk,  which  is  condemned  by  the  grammarians  as  un- 
classical,  but  rightly  rendered  by  Kev.,  Hnswoman.  Wye, 
cosyness,  i.e.,  cousiness. 

37.  With  God  nothing  shall  be  innpossible  {ovk  aSw- 
arqcrei  irapa  tov  6eov  ttuv  prjfio).  'Pijfia,  word,  as  distinguished 
from  X6709,  word,  in  classical  Greek,  signifies  a  constituent  part 
of  a  speech  or  writing,  as  distinguished  from  the  contents  as  a 
whole.  Thus  it  may  be  either  a  word  or  a  saying.  Some- 
times a  phrase,  as  opposed  to  6vofia,  a  single  word.     The  dis- 


Ch.  I.]  LUKE.  261 

tinction  in  the  New  Testament  is  not  sharp  throughout.  It  is 
maintained  that  pfum  in  the  New  Testament,  like  the  Hebrew 
gahar,  stands  sometimes  for  the  subject-matter  of  the  word ; 
the  thing,  as  in  this  passage.  But  there  are  only  two  other 
passages  in  the  New  Testament  where  this  meaning  is  at  all  ad- 
missible, though  the  word  occurs  seventy  times.  These  are 
Luke  ii.  15  ;  Acts  v.  32.  "  Kept  all  these  things  "  (Luke  ii.  19), 
should  clearly  be  sayings,  as  the  A.  V.  itself  has  rendered  it  in 
the  almost  identical  passage,  ver.  51.  In  Acts  v.  32,  Eev.  gives 
sayings  in  margin.  In  Luke  ii.  15,  though  A.  V.  and  Rev. 
render  thing,  the  sense  is  evidently  saying,  as  appears  both  from 
the  connection  with  the  angelic  message  and  from^  the  following 
words,  which  has  come  to  pass :  the  saying  which  has  become 
a  fact.  The  Eev.  rendering  of  this  passage  is,  therefore,  right, 
though  a  little  stilted ;  No  word  of  God  shall  he  void  of 
power ;  for  the  A.  V.  errs  in  joining  ovk  and  irav,  not  every, 
and  translating  nothing.  The  two  do  not  belong  together.  The 
statement  is,  Eoery  {ttuv)  word  of  God  shall  not  {ovk)  he  power- 
less. The  A.  V.  also  follows  the  reading,  irapa,  tw  0ec3,  with 
God;  but  all  the  later  texts  read  'irapa  tov  ©eov,  from  God, 
which  fixes  the  meaning  beyond  question. 

40.  Entered  into  the  house.  "This  detail,"  says  Godet, 
*'  serves  to  put  the  reader  in  sympathy  with  the  emotion  of 
Mary  at  the  moment  of  her  arrival.  With  her  first  glance  at 
Elizabeth  she  recognized  the  truth  of  the  sign  that  had  been 
given  her  by  the  angel,  and  at  this  sight  the  promise  she  had 
herself  received  acquired  a  startling  reality." 

41.  The  babe  {to  ^pe^o<;).     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  2. 

42.  She  spake  out  with  a  loud  voice  {ave^mvrjcre  ^covy  fie- 
joXtj).  For  <f)a}vr},  voice,  read  Kpavyjj,  cry :  inarticulate,  though 
^o)j/jj  may  also  be  used  of  inarticulate  utterance.  Eev.,  rightly. 
She  lifted  up  her  voice  with  a  loud  cry ;  thus  rendering  in  the 
verb  the  force  of  ava,  up,  besides  picturing  the  fact  more  natur- 
ally. Elizabeth's  sudden  and  violent  emotion  at  the  appearance 
of  Mary,  and  the  movement  of  the  child,  prompted  an  exclama- 


262  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

tion  which  was  followed  by  words  {elirev,  said).  The  verb  ava- 
^mveo)  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  It  was  a  med- 
ical term  for  a  certain  exercise  of  the  voice. 

44.  For  joy  (eV  dyaWida-ei).    Lit.,  in  joy.    See  on  ver.  14. 

45.  For  (oTt).  Many,  however,  prefer  that,  referring  to  the 
substance  of  her  belief :  "  She  believed  that  there  shall  be  a 
fulfilment,"  etc.  It  is  urged  that  the  conception,  which  was 
the  principal  point  of  faith,  had  already  taken  place,  so  that  the 
fulfilment  was  no  longer  future.  On  the  other  hand,  the  angel's 
announcement  to  Mary  included  more  than  the  fact  of  concep- 
tion ;  and  Elizabeth,  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  may  have  alluded 
to  what  is  predicted  in  w.  32,  33. 

46.  Said  {eiTrev).  Simply.  Compare  ver.  42.  "  Elizabeth's 
salutation  was  full  of  excitement,  but  Mary's  hymn  breathes  a 
sentiment  of  deep  inward  repose  "  (Godet).  Compare  the  song 
of  Hannah  (1  Sam.  ii.).  Hannah's  song  differs  from  Mary's  in 
its  sense  of  indignation  and  personal  triumph  compared  with 
Mary's  humility  and  calmness. 

My  soul^ — spirit  {-^uxv — "Jrvev/Ma).  See  onMarkxii.  30.  The 
soul  is  the  principle  of  individuality,  the  seat  of  personal  in)- 
pressions,  having  a  side  in  contact  with  the  material  element  of 
humanity,  as  well  as  with  the  spiritual  element.  It  is  thus 
the  mediating  organ  between  the  spirit  and  the  body,  receiving 
impressions  from  without  and  from  within,  and  transmitting 
them  by  word  or  sign.  Spirit  is  the  highest,  deepest,  noblest 
part  of  our  humanity,  the  point  of  contact  between  God  and 
man. 

47.  God  my  Saviour  {rwOea  rai  a-mrfjpi  fiov).  Note  the  two 
articles.  "  27ie  God  who  is  the  or  my  Saviour."  The  title  Sav- 
iour is  often  applied  to  God  in  the  Old  Testament.  See  Septua- 
gint,  Deut.  xxxii.  15 ;  Ps.  xxiv.  5 ;  xxv.  5 ;  xcv.  1. 

48.  Regarded  {e7re^e\jrev).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  3.  Compare  1 
Sam.  i.  11 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  7 ;  cxix.  132,  Sept. 


Ch.  L]  LUKE.  263 

50.  Mercy  (eXeo?).  The  word  emphasizes  the  misery  with 
which  grcLce  (see  on  ver.  30)  deals  ;  hence,  peculiarly  the  sense 
of  human  wretchedness  coupled  with  the  impulse  to  relieve  it, 
which  issues  in  gracious  ministry.  Bengel  remarks,  "Grace 
takes  away  \kiQ  fault,  mercy  the  misery.'''' 

From  generation  to  generation  (et?  yevea?  koI  yevea,';). 
Lit.,  as  Kev.,  unto  generations  and  generations. 

Fear  {<f>o0ovfMevoi;).  The  word  is  used  in  both  a  good  and  a 
bad  sense  in  the  New  Testament.  For  the  latter,  see  Matt. 
xxi.  46  ;  Mark  vi.  20  ;  xi.  32  ;  Luke  xii.  4.  For  the  former,  as 
here,  in  the  sense  of  godly  reverence.  Acts  x.  2,  22,  35  ;  Col.  iii. 
22  ;  Apoc.  xiv.  7  ;  xv.  4. 

51.  Shewed  strength  (i-n-oirja-ev  KpaTa).  Lit., made  strength. 
So  Wye,  made  might.  A  Hebrew  form  of  expression.  Com- 
pare Ps.  cxviii.  15,  Sept.:  "  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth 
valiantly  "  {eirolrjae  Svva/xiv,  made  strength). 

In  the  imagination  (hiavoia).  The  faculty  of  thought,  un- 
derstanding, especially  moral  understanding.  Wye.  refers  the 
word  here  to  God :  with  mind  of  his  heart.  Some  prefer  to 
render  "  by  the  imagination,"  thus  making  the  proud  the  instru- 
ment of  their  own  destruction.     Compare  2  Cor.  x.  5. 

54.  Hath  holpen  {avreXa^ero).  The  verb  means  to  lay  hold 
on :  thence  to  grasp  helpfully  or  to  help.  To  lay  hold  in  the 
sense  oi partaking  (1  Tim.  vi.  2),  carries  us  back  to  the  primi- 
tive meaning  of  the  word  according  to  its  composition  :  to  re- 
ceive instead  of,  or  in  return  {avrl),  and  suggests  the  old  phrase 
to  take  up  for,  espouse  the  cause  of.  Wye,  has  took  up,  but  prob- 
ably not  in  this  sense. 

Servant  {-jtmBo'}).  Often  child,  son  or  daughter,  but  here  ser- 
vant, in  allusion  to  Isa.  xli.  8.  Meyer  truthfully  says  that  the 
theocratic  notion  of  sonship  is  never  expressed  by  ttuk.  See 
Eev.,  Acts  iii.  13,  26;  iv.  27>  30. 


264  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

58.  Had  shewed  great  mercy  upon  her  {i/j,eyaXvvev  to 
eX.eo9  avTov  fier  avrfi'i).  Lit.,  magnified  his  mercy  with  her. 
So  "Wye.     A  Hebrew  expression.     See  1  Sam.  xii.  24,  Sept. 

59.  They  called  (IkoKovv).  The  imperfect  tense  signifies,  as 
Rev.,  theywould  have  called:  they  were  about  to  call :  or,  as 
Bishop  Lightf oot  has  happily  suggested,  they  were  for  callvng. 

62.  They  made  signs  {kvkveuov).  Imperfect  tense.  While  the 
colloquy  between  Elizabeth  and  her  friends  was  going  on,  they 
were  consulting  Zacharias  by  signs. 

63.  Writing-table  (^ivaKlZiov).  Table  was  formerly  used 
in  the  sense  of  tablet.     Thus  Shakspeare : 

"  Yea,  from  the  toMe  of  my  memory, 
I'll  wipe  away  all  trivial  fond  records." 

Samlet,  i.,  5. 

Tynd.,  writing-tables.  The  meaning  is  a  little  writing-tablet, 
probably  covered  with  wax.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Used  by  medical  writers  of  a  physician's  note-book.  Wye.  has 
aj}oyntel,  i.e.,  a  style  for  writing. 

Wrote,  saying.  A  Hebrew  form  of  expression.  See  2 
Kings  X.  6. 

64.  immediately  (•Trapop^/io).  Occurring  nineteen  times  in 
the  New  Testament,  and  seventeen  of  these  in  Luke.  Thirteen 
of  the  seventeen  are  in  connection  with  miracles  of  healing,  or 
the  iniiiction  of  disease  or  death.  Used  in  a  similar  way  by 
medical  writers. 

65.  Were  noised  abroad  (StaXeXetTo).  Were  mutually  {Bid) 
talked  of. 

69.  Horn.     Compare  Ps.  exxxii.  17. 


Ch.  I.]  LUKE.  265 

70.  That  have  been  since  the  world  began  {wir  aiwi/os). 
A  needlessly  verbose  rendering,  retained  .by  Eev.  The  Ameri- 
can Eev.  insists  on  of  old. 

74  Serve  (Xarpeveiv).  Originally  to  serve  y<?r  hire,  from 
XaTpov,  hire.     Plato  uses  it  of  the  service  of  God. 

75.  Holiness  and  righteousness  (oo-toVijrt  koI  Siicaioa-vvy). 
The  adjective  oo-tos,  hoh/,  is  properly  what  is  confirmed  Jnj  a/n- 
cient  sanction  and  precept.  'Oaia  is  used  in  classical  Greek  to 
denote  the  everlasting  princvples  of  right,  not  constituted  hy  the 
laws  or  customs  of  men,  hut  antedating  them  /  such  as  the  pay- 
ing of  the  proper  rites  of  sepulture.  Compare  the  fine  passage 
in  the  "Antigone"  of  Sophocles  (453-55) : 

"  Nor  did  I  deem  thy  edicts  strong  enough. 
That  thou,  a  mortal  man,  shouldst  overpass 
The  unwritten  laws  of  God  that  know  not  change. 
They  are  not  of  to-day  nor  yesterday, 
But  live  forever,  nor  can  man  assign 
When  first  they  sprang  to  being." 

Hence  oo-toTTj^iis  concerned  primarily  with  the  eternal  laws  of 
God.  It  is  "  the  dimne  consecration  and  inner  truth  of  right- 
eousness" (Meyer).  Throughout  the  New  Testament  its  look 
is  godward.  In  no  case  is  it  used  of  moral  excellence  as  re- 
lated to  men,  though  it  is  to  be  carefully  noted  that  SiKaioavvrj, 
righteousness,  is  not  restricted  to  righlmess  towa/rd  men.  Com- 
pare Eph.  iv.  24: ;  true  holvness  ;  literally,  holiness  of  the  truth. 

77.  Knowledge  of  salvation.  "Wye.  has  the  science  of 
health. 

78.  Tender  mercy  {a-'irXdyxva  eXeou?).  Lit.,  lowels  of 
mercy.  See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  8  ;  Jas.  v.  11.  Eev.  gives  heart  of 
mercy  in  margin.     Wye,  frightfully,  entrails  of  mercy. 

The  day-spring  from  on  high  (amroX^  e'f  v\^ou?).  Lit., 
the  rising.     The  word  occurs  in  the  Septuagint  as  a  rendering 


266  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  II. 

of  hranch,  as  something  rising  or  springing  wp,  by  which  the 
Messiah  is  denoted  (Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  Zech.  vi.  12).  Also  of  the 
rising  of  a  hemenly  hody  (Isa.  Ix.  19,  Sept.).  Compare  the 
kindred  verb  arise  {dvaTeXKco)  in  Isa.  Ix.  1 ;  Mai.  iv.  2.  This 
latter  is  the  sense  here.  See  on  Matt.  ii.  2.  Wye.  has  he 
springing  upfront  on  high. 

Hath  visited  {itrecrKeyJraTo).  See  on  Matt.  xxv.  36  ;  1  Pet.  ii. 
12.     Some,  however,  read  i-TruTKeyfreTab,  shall  visit.     So  Kev. 

79.  To  guide  (Karevl^vai).  From  evSv';,  straight.  "Wye. 
has  dress,  which  is  formed  through  the  old  French  dresser,  to 
arrange,  from  the  Latin  dirigere,  to  set  in  a  straight  line,  draw 
ujp.     Hence  the  military  term  dress  for  arranging  a  line. 

80.  The  deserts  (rat?  eprjixoK).  The  article  indicating  a 
well-known  place. 

Shewing  (avaSeifeo)?).  The  word  was  used  of  the  public 
announcement  of  an  official  nomination ;  hence  of  the  public 
inauguration  of  John's  ministry. 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  Decree  {86yfia).  Wye,  mandment.  From  Boxeio,  to  thimJc. 
Hence,  strictly,  a  personal  ojdnion  /  and,  as  the  opinion  of  one 
who  can  impose  his  opinion  authoritatively  on  others,  a  decree. 

The  world  {rrjv  oiKovfiev7)v).  Lit.,  the  inhabited  (land).  The 
phrase  was  originally  \ised  by  the  Greeks  to  denote  the  land 
inhabited  by  themselves,  in  contrast  with  barbarian  countries; 
afterward,  when  the  Greeks  became  subject  to  the  Romans, 
the  entire  Roman  world ;  still  later,  for  the  whole  inhabited 
world.  In  the  New  Testament  this  latter  is  the  more  common 
usage,  though,  in  some  cases,  this  is  conceived  in  the  mould  of 
the  Roman  empire,  as  in  this  passage,  Acts  xi.  28  ;  xix.  27. 
Christ  uses  it  in  the  announcement  that  the  Gospel  shall  be 


Ch.  IL]  LUKE.  267 

preached  in  all  the  world  (Matt.  xxiv.  14) ;  and  Paul  in  the 
prediction  of  a  general  judgment  (Acts  xvii.  31).  Once  it  is 
used  of  the  world  to  come  (Heb.  ii.  5). 

Be  taxed  {a7roypd<j>ecrBai).  The  word  means  properly  to 
register  or  enter  in  a  list.  Commentators  are  divided  as  to 
whether  it  refers  to  an  enrolment  for  taxation,  or  for  ascer- 
taining the  population.  Rev.,  enrolled,  which  may  be  taken  in 
either  sense. 

2.  And  this  taxing  was  first  made  {avrrj  rj  aTroypa^ 
irpcoTT]  iyevsTo).  Hather,  this  occurred  as  the  first  enrolment  / 
or,  as  Rev.,  this  was  the  first  enrolment  made  ;  with  reference 
to  a  second  enrolment  which  took  place  about  eleven  years 
later,  and  is  referred  to  in  Acts  v.  37. 

3.  Went  (iTTopevovTo).  The  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  alike  miss  the 
graphic  force  of  the  imperfect  tense,  were  going.  The  prepara- 
tion and  bustle  and  travel  were  in  progress. 

To  his  own  city.  The  town  to  which  the  village  or  place 
of  their  birth  belonged,  and  where  the  house  and  lineage  of 
each  were  registered. 

4.  House  and  lineage.  According  to  the  Jewish  mode  of 
registration  the  people  would  be  enrolled  by  tribes,  families  or 
clans,  and  households.  Compare  Josh.  vii.  16-18.  Rev.,  house 
andfamihj. 

5.  To  be  taxed  with  Mary.  We  may  read  either,  went  wp 
with  Ma/ry,  denoting  merely  the  fact  of  her  accompanying  him ; 
or,  to  enrol  himself  with  Ma/ry,  implying  that  both  their  names 
must  be  registered. 

Espoused.  Not  merely  letrothed.  See  Matt.  i.  20,  24,  25  ; 
also  on  Matt.  i.  18. 

Great  with  child  {eyKvtp).  See  on  Ch.  i.  24.  Only  here  in 
Wew  Testament. 


268  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

7.  Her  first-born  son.  The  Greek  reads  literally,  her  son, 
the  Ji/rstrborn. 

Wrapped  in  swaddling-clothes  {ia-irapydvaxrev).  Only 
here  and  ver.  12.  Naturally  found  often  in  medical  writings. 
Swaddle  is  swathel,  from  the  verb  to  swathe. 

In  a  manger  {iv  ^d-rvrj).  Used  by  Luke  only,  here  and 
xiii.  15.  Wye.  has  a  cracche,  spelt  also  cratch.  Compare 
French  creche,  a  manger.  Quite  possibly  a  rock-cave.  Dr. 
Thomson  says :  "  I  have  seen  many  such,  consisting  of  one  or 
more  rooms,  in  front  of  and  including  a  cavern  where  the  cattle 
were  kept"  ("Land  and  Book"). 

In  the  inn  {iv  too  KaraXt/fiaTi).  Only  here,  ch.  xxiii.  11; 
Mark  xiv.  14,  on  which  see  note.  In  both  these  passages  it  is 
rendered  guest-cJianiber,  which  can  hardly  be  the  meaning  here, 
as  some  have  maintained.  (See  Geikie,  "  Life  and  Words  of 
Christ,"  i.,  121.)  In  that  case  the  expression  would  be,  they 
found  no  KaraXvfjia,  guest-chamber.  The  word  refers  to  the  ordi- 
nary Mian,  or  caravanserai.  Tynd.,  hostrey.  "  A  Syrian  Jchan 
is  a  fort  and  a  mart ;  a  refuge  from  thieves ;  a  shelter  from 
the  heat  and  dust;  a  place  where  a  man  and  his  beast  may 
lodge ;  where  a  trader  may  sell  his  wares,  and  a  pilgrim  may 
slake  his  thirst.  .  .  .  Where  built  by  a  great  sheikh,  it 
would  have  a  high  wall,  an  inner  court,  a  range  of  arches  or 
lewans,  an  open  gallery  round  the  four  sides,  and,  in  many  cases, 
a  tower  from  which  the  watcher  might  descry  the  approach  of 
marauding  bands.  On  one  side  of  the  square,  but  outside  the 
wall,  there  is  often  a  huddle  of  sheds,  set  apart  from  the  main 
edifice,  as  stables  for  the  asses  and  camels,  the  buffaloes  and 
goats.  In  the  centre  of  the  khan  springs  a  fountain  of  water, 
the  first  necessity  of  an  Arab's  life ;  and  around  the  jets  and 
troughs  in  which  the  limpid  element  streams,  lies  the  gay  and 
picturesque  litter  of  the  East.  Camels  wait  to  be  unloaded ; 
dogs  quarrel  for  a  bone ;  Bedaween  from  the  desert,  their  red 
zannars  choked  with  pistols,  are  at  prayer.  In  the  arcliwaj's 
squat  the  merchants  with  their  bales  of  goods.     .     .     .     Half- 


Ch.  II.]  LUKE.  269 

naked  men  are  cleansing  their  bands  ere  sitting  down  to  eat. 
Here  a  barber  is  at  work  upon  a  shaven  crown  ;  there  a  fellah 
lies  asleep  in  the  shade.  .  .  .  Each  man  has  to  carry  his 
dinner  and  his  bed  ;  to  litter  his  horse  or  camel ;  to  dress  his 
food ;  to  draw  his  water ;  to  light  his  fire,  and  to  boil  his  mess 
of  herbs  "  (Hepworth  Dixon,  "  The  Holy  Land  "). 

8.  Shepherds.  Luke's  Gospel  is  the  gospel  of  the  poor  and 
lowly.  This  revelation  to  the  shepherds  acquires  additional 
meaning  as  we  remember  that  shepherds,  as  a  class,  were  under 
the  Rabbinic  ban,  because  of  their  necessary  isolation  from  re- 
ligious ordinances,  and  their  manner  of  life,  which  rendered 
strict  legal  observance  wellnigh  impossible. 

Keeping  watch  (<^vKdaaovTe<i  <^vKaKa<;).  ^vKaicri  is  some- 
times used  of  a  watch  as  a  measure  of  time,  as  in  Matt.  xiv. 
25 ;  Mark  vi.  48  ;  Luke  xii.  38.  So  possibly  here.  See  Eev. 
in  margin,  night-watches.  There  is  a  play  upon  the  words : 
watching  watches.  There  was  near  Bethlehem,  on  the  road  to 
Jerusalem,  a  tower  known  as  Migdal  Eder,  or  the  watch-tower 
of  the  flock.  Here  was  the  station  where  sliepherds  watched 
the  flocks  destined  for  sacrifice  in  the  temple.  Animals  stray- 
ing from  Jerusalem  on  any  side,  as  far  as  from  Jerusalem  to 
Migdal  Eder,  were  offered  in  sacrifice.  It  was  a  settled  con- 
viction among  the  Jews  that  the  Messiah  was  to  be  born  in 
Bethlehem,  and  equally  that  he  was  to  be  revealed  from  Mig- 
dal Eder.  The  beautiful  significance  of  the  revelation  of  the 
infant  Christ  to  shepherds  watching  the  flocks  destined  for 
sacrifice  needs  no  comment. 

Their  flock  {ttjv  iroiiivqv).  May  not  the  singular  number 
fall  in  with  what  has  just  been  said  ? — the  flock,,  the  temple- 
flock,  specially  devoted  to  sacrifice.  The  pronoun  their  would 
furnish  no  objection,  since  it  is  common  to  speak  of  the  fiock 
as  belonging  to  the  shepherd.     Compare  John  x.  3,  4. 

9.  Behold.     Omitted  by  the  best  texts. 


1370  WORD  STUDIES  EST  THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  II. 

The  angel.    More  correctly  cm  cmgel,  as  Kev.     The  Greek 

has  no  article. 

Came  upon  {eirearTri).  The  word  is  used  in  this  sense  in 
classical  Greek,  as  well  as  in  that  of  to  stand  hy,  which  Eev. 
prefers  here,  as  in  Acts  xii.  7.  In  ver.  38  of  this  chapter,  Rev. 
I'enders  coming  up.  The  rendering  to  come  upon  has  a  hostile 
flavor,  as  properly  in  Acts  xvii.  5,  where  the  verb  is  rendered 
assaulted  j  so  that  the  Eev.  rendering  here  is  preferable. 

They  were  sore  afraid.     lAt.,  feared  vnth  great  fea/r. 

10.  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy  {evayyeXi^ofiat 
vfilv  xapai/  /jLeyaXtjv).  Wye.  is  strictly  literal :  J  evangeUse  to 
you  a  great  joy. 

Which  (^Tw).     Of  a  class  or  character  which,  etc. 

People  (t&)  Xaw).  Eev.,  rightly,  "the  people;"  the  article 
pointing  specially  to  the  people  of  Israel. 

11.  Is  born  {irix^).  It  adds  to  the  vividness  of  the  narra- 
tive to  keep  to  the  strict  rendering  of  the  aorist,  was  horn. 

A  Saviour.     See  on  Matt.  i.  21. 

Christ.     See  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

Lord.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  3. 

12.  Sign  (crijfieiov).     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 

The  babe  (/Spe^o?).  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  2.  Eev.,  properly, 
"  a  babe."     No  article. 

13.  A  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host.  Bbst  {aTpariai) 
is  literally  army.  "  Here  the  army  announces  peace  "  (Bengel). 
Wye,  heawenly  knighthood.     Tynd.,  hea/venly  soldiers. 


ch.  n.]  LUKE.  271 

14.  Peace,  good-will  toward  men  {elp^vrj  iv  av^poifroi.'i 
evBoKia).  Both  Tischendorf  and  Westcott  and  Hort  read  evSa- 
Kla<;,  which  the  Kev.  follows.  According  to  this  the  rendering 
is,  unto  men  of  good  pleasure,  or  as  Eev.,  among  men  in  whom 
he  is  well  pleased.  Wye,  to  men  of  good-will.  For  a  similar 
construction,  see  Acts  ix.  15  ;  Col.  i.  13. 

15.  The  shepherds,  ^ome  texts  &M  oi av^pwrroi,  the  men ; 
but  the  later  texts  omit. 

Let  us  go  (SteX,So)yi46j/).  The  preposition  Sid,  through,  implies 
through  the  intervening  space. 

Thing  {pfjfj,a).  See  on  ch.  i.  37.  The  utterance  of  the  shep- 
herds contains  a  climax  :  "  Let  us  go  and  see  this  saying,  which 
has  come  to  pass  ;  which  the  Lord  made  known." 

16.  Found  (avevpav).  Only  here  and  Acts  xxi.  4.  'Avd  in- 
dicates the  discovery  of  the  facts  in  succession. 

Mary  and  Joseph  and  the  babe.  Each  has  the  article, 
pointing  to  the  several  parties  already  referred  to. 

17.  They  made  known.  See  on  ver.  8.  These  shepherds, 
having  charge  of  flocks  devoted  to  sacrifice,  would  presently  be 
in  the  temple,  and  would  meet  those  who  came  to  worship  and 
to  sacrifice,  and  so  proclaim  the  Messiah  in  the  temple. 

19.  Kept  (awer'qpei).  See  on  the  simple  verb  rijpeco,  on  1 
Pet.  i.  4.  The  word  signifies  not  merely  to  guard,  but  to  Tceep, 
as  the  result  of  guarding.  Hence  the  compound  verb  is  very 
expressive  :  kept,  o-w,  with  or  withi/n  herself:  closely.  Note  the 
imperfect  tense  :  was  keeping  all  the  while. 

Pondered  {a-vfi^dWova-a).  The  present  participle,  ponder- 
ing. Lit.,  hrvngi/ng  togeth&r :  comparing  and  weighing  facts. 
Wye,  hea/rvng  together  in  her  heart.  Vulg.,  oonferena.  Com- 
pare Sophocles,  "  Oedipus  Ooloneus,"  1472-4. 


2Y2  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H. 

"  Oedipus.  My  children,  the  heaven-ordained  end  of  life  has  come  upon 
him  who  stands  here,  and  there  is  no  avoiding  it. 

"Antigone.  How  dost  thou  know,  and  with  what  (fact)  having  compared 
(a-uiJ.$aKiiv)  thine  opinion  hast  thou  this  ?  " 

22.  The  days  of  her  purification  {al -^fjiipat,  tov  KaSapia-fiov 

avTrj<;).  The  A.  V.  follows  the  reading  auTTj?,  her :  but  all  the 
best  texts  read  avrmv,  their;  the  plural  including  Joseph  with 
Mary  as  partaking  of  the  ceremonial  defilement.  The  mother 
of  a  child  was  levitically  unclean  for  forty  days  after  the  birth 
of  a  son,  and  for  eighty  days  after  the  birth  of  a  daughter. 
Women  on  this  errand  commonly  rode  to  the  temple  on  oxen  ; 
that  the  body  of  so  large  a  beast  between  them  and  the  ground 
might  prevent  any  chance  of  defilement  from  passing  over  a 
sepulchre  on  the  road.  For  details,  see  Edersheim,  "  Life  and 
Times  of  Jesus,"  i.,  195  ;  "  The  Temple,"  p.  302  ;  Geikie,  "  Life 
and  Words  of  Christ,"  i.,  127. 

To  present  him  to  the  Lord.  The  first-born  son  of  every 
household  must  be  redeemed  of  the  priest  at  the  price  of  five 
shekels  of  the  sanctuary ;  about  two  dollars  and  fifty  cents. 
Num.  xviii.  16,  16 ;  Exod.  xiii.  2. 

23.  The  law  of  the  Lord.  The  word  law  occurs  in  this  chap- 
ter- five  times  ;  oftener  than  in  all  the  rest  of  this  Gospel  put  to- 
gether. Luke  emphasizes  the  fact  that  Jesus  "  was  made  under 
the  law  "  (Gal.  iv.  4),  and  accordingly  elaborates  the  details  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  law  by  the  parents  of  both  John  and  Jesus. 

24.  A  pair  of  turtle-doves,  or  two  young  pigeons.     The 

offering  of  the  poor.  While  the  lamb  would  probably  cost 
about  one  dollar  and  seventy-five  cents,  the  doves  would  cost 
about  sixteen  cents.  She  would  not  bring  the  creatures  them- 
selves, but  would  drop  the  price  into  one  of  the  thirteen  trum- 
pet-shaped chests  in  the  Court  of  the  Women.  Young  pigeons : 
lit.,  young  ones  of  jaigeons  {voa-aoii'i  irepia-Tep&v).  Wye.  has 
culver-Mrds  /  culver  being  an  old  English  term  for  dove.  So 
Spenser : 

"More  light  than  culver  in  the  falcon's  fist." 


Ch.  n.]  LUKE.  273 

25.  Devout  (euXo/Sij?).  Used  by  Luke  only.  The  kindred 
word,  evKa^eia,  godly-fear,  occurs  twice :  Heb.  v.  Y ;  xii.  28. 
From  eS,  well,  and  Xa/i^dveo,  to  take  hold  of.  Hence  of  a  cir- 
cumspect or  cautious  person  who  takes  hold  of  things  carefully. 
As  applied  to  morals  and  religion,  it  emphasizes  the  element  of 
ci/rcumspection,  a  cautious,  careful  observance  of  divine  law; 
and  is  thus  peculiarly  expressive  of  Old  Testament  piety,  with  its 
minute  attention  to  precept  and  ceremony.     Compare  Acts  ii.  5, 

Consolation  of  Israel.  Compare  Aq^cs o/'/sraeZ,  Acts xxviii. 
20,  and  Isa.  xl.  1.  The  Messianic  blessing  of  the  nation.  Of 
the  Messiah  himself,  Rest.  See  Isa.  xi.  10.  A  common  form 
of  adjuration  among  the  Jews  was.  So  may  I  see  the  consolation 


26.  It  was  revealed  {rjv  Ke-xprifiaTiaiJievov).  Lit.,  it  was 
homing  heen  revealed  j  i.e.,  it  stood  revealed,  while  he  waited 
for  the  fulfilment  of  the  revelation.  The  verb  means  primarily 
to  have  dealings  with  /  thence  to  consult  or  debate  about  busi- 
ness matters ;  and  so  of  an  oracle,  to  give  a  response  to  one 
consulting  it.  The  word  here  implies  that  the  revelation  to 
Simeon  had  been  given  in  answer  to  prayer.  See  on  Matt, 
ii.  12. 

27.  By  the  Spirit  (eV  tw  irvevixaTu).  Lit.,  as  Kev.,  "in  the 
Spirit:"  the  Holy  Spirit  prompting  him.  Indicating  rather 
his  spiritual  condition,  as  one  who  walked  with  God,  than  a 
special  divine  impulse. 

After  the  custom  {koto,  to  elSia-fiivov).  Lit.,  according  to 
that  which  was  wont  to  he  done.  Only  here  in  New  Testament ; 
and  the  kindred  words,  e,9o9,  custom,  and  e5-a>,  to  he  accustomed, 
occur  more  frequently  in  Luke  than  elsewhere.  Yery  common 
in  medical  writings. 

29.  Lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  (a7ro\i5et?  tot  SoOXov 
aov).     Lit.,  thou  dost  release.     The  word  is  often  used  of  manu- 
mitting or  setting  free  on  payment  of  ransom  ;  and  as  Simeon 
uses  the  word  for  hond-servant,  it  is  evident  that  his  death  is 
18 


274  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

conceived  by  him  under  the  figure   of  enfranchisement  from 
service.     Godet's  "  release  of  a  sentinel  from  duty  "  is  fanciful. 

O  Lord  (Seo-TTOToi).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

In  peace.  Eev.  properly  puts  this  in  its  emphatic  position 
at  the  end  of  the  sentence. 

31.  Of  all  people  {irdvrmv  rmv  Xawv).  The  noun  is  plural, 
the  peoples,  and  refers  equally  to  the  Gentiles.  See  Introduc- 
tion, on  the  universality  of  Luke's  Gospel.  Wye,  all  peoples; 
and  so  Rev. 

32.  A  light  ((/)e3?).  The  light  itself  as  distinguished  from 
\v'Xyo<;,  a  lamp,  which  the  A.  Y.  often  unfortunately  renders 
light.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  54. 

To  lighten  (ek  aTroKoKw^iv).  Wrong.  Eev.,  correctly,ybr 
r&velation.  Wye,  to  the  shewing.  It  may  be  rendered  the  un- 
veiling of  the  Gentiles. 

Gentiles  (iBva>v).  Assigned  to  the  same  root  as  eS-w,  to  he 
accustomed,  and  hence  of  a  people  bound  together  by  like 
habits  or  customs.  According  to  biblical  usage  the  term  is 
understood  of  people  who  are  not  of  Israel,  and  who  therefore 
occupy  a  different  position  with  reference  to  the  plan  of  salva- 
tion. Hence  the  extension  of  the  gospel  salvation  to  them  is 
treated  as  a  remarkable  fact.  See  Matt.  xii.  18,  21 ;  xxiv.  14  ; 
xxviii.  19;  Acts  x.  45;  xi.  18 ;  xviii.  6.  Paul  is  called  distinctive- 
ly an  apostle  and  teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  and  a  chosen  vessel  to 
bear  Christ's  name  among  them.  In  Acts  xv.  9  ;  Eph.  ii.  11, 
18  ;  iii.  6,  we  see  this  difference  annihilated,  and  the  expression 
at  last  is  merely  historical  designation  of  the  non-Israelitish 
nations  which,  as  such,  were  formerly  without  God  and  salva- 
tion. See  Acts  xv.  23 ;  Eom.  xvi.  4 ;  Eph.  iii.  1.  Sometimes 
the  word  is  used  in  a  purely  moral  sense,  to  denote  the  heathen 
in  opposition  to  Christians.  See  1  Cor.  v.  1 ;  x.  20  ;  1  Pet.  ii. 
12.     Zight  is  promised  here  to  the  Gentiles  and  glory  to  Israd. 


Ch.  II.]  LUKE.  275 

The  Gentiles  are  regarded  as  in  darkness  and  ignorance.  Some 
render  the  words  et?  airoKoKv^iv,  above,  for  the  imveiUng  of 
the  Gentiles,  instead  of  for  revelation.  Compare  Isa.  xxv.  7. 
Israel,  however,  has  already  received  light  by  the  revelation  of 
God  through  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  that  light  will 
expand  into  glory  through  Christ.  Through  the  Messiah, 
Israel  will  attain  its  true  and  highest  glory. 

33.  And  Joseph.  The  best  texts  read  6  iraTijp  airov,  his 
father. 

Marvelled  {^v  Sav/jLa^ovTesi).  The  Greek  construction  is 
peculiar.  Sis  father  was  and  his  mother  wondering ;  the 
finite  verb  in  the  singular  agreeing  with  the  father,  while  the 
plural  participle  agrees  with  both.  As  usual,  this  combination 
of  finite  verb  and  participle  denotes  continuance  or  progression : 
they  were  ma/rvelling  while  Simeon  was  speaking.     So  Rev. 

34.  Them.  The  parents;  the  child  being  separately  and 
specially  designated. 

Is  set  (/cetrat).  The  verb  means  primarily  to  he  laid,  and 
so  to  lie :  hence  to  be  set  forth  or  promulgated,  as  the  law  is 
said  to  be  laid  down,  and  so,  appointed  or  destined,  as  here. 

The  fall  and  rising  again  {tttuxtiv  koI  avda-Toa-iv).  Forthe 
fall,  because  he  will  be  a  stumbling-block  to  many  (Isa.  viii.  14 ; 
Matt.  xxi.  42,  44 ;  Acts  iv.  11 ;  Rom.  ix.  33 ;  1  Cor.  i.  23).  For 
the  7'isvng,  because  many  will  be  raised  up  through  him  to  life 
and  glory  (Rom.  vi.  4,  9 ;  Eph.  ii.  6).  The  A.  V.  predicates 
the  falling  and  the  rising  of  the  same  persons :  the  fall  and 
rising  agai/n  of  many.  The  Rev.,  the  falling  and  rising  up  of 
mamy,  is  ambiguous.  The  American  Revisers  give  it  correctly : 
the  falling  a/nd  the  rising. 

Which  shall  be  spoken  against  (avrtXe'/o/ttej/oi').  The  par- 
ticiple is  the  present ;  and  the  expression  does  not  voice  a 
prophecy,  but  describes  an  inherent  charaoteristric  of  the  sign  : 


276  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  U 

a  sign  of  which  it  is  the  character  to  experience  contradiction 
from  the  world.  In  the  beginning,  as  a  babe,  Jesus  experienced 
this  at  the  hands  of  Herod  ;  so  all  through  his  earthly  ministry 
and  on  the  cross ;  and  so  it  will  be  to  the  end,  until  he  shall 
have  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  Compare  Heb.  xii.  3. 
"Wye,  a  tolcen  to  whom  it  sfiall  le  gainsaid. 

35.  A  sword  {pon^aia).  Strictly,  a  large  Thracian  broad- 
sword. Used  in  Septuagint  of  the  sword  of  Goliath  (1  Sam. 
xvii.  51).  A  figure  of  Mary's  pang  when  her  son  should  be 
nailed  to  the  cross. 

36.  A  prophetess  (Tr/ao^^rt?).     Only  here  and  Apoe.  ii.  20. 

Asher.  That  tribe  was  celebrated  in  tradition  for  the  beauty 
of  its  women,  and  their  fitness  to  be  wedded  to  high-priests  or 
kings. 

Of  great  age  {irpo^e^ijKvla  iv  ■^/Mepai,<;  TroXXat?).  Lit.,  ad- 
vanced in  many  days. 

37.  Of  about  fourscore  and  four  years  (to?  erwv  oySaqKov- 
ra  rea-a-apmv).  The  A.  Y.  might  be  supposed  to  be  stating 
her  age;  but  the  best  texts  read  etu?,  until,  instead  of  &>?,  about; 
and  the  statement  refers  to  the  time  of  her  widowhood ;  a 
widow  even  for  (or  up  to)  fourscore  and  four  yea/rs.     So  Rev. 

Served  (\aT/j6vouo-a).  The  present  participle,  serymg'.  Kev., 
worshipping.     See  on  ch.  i.  74. 

38.  Coming  up  {i-jnaraffa).     See  on  ver.  9. 

Gave  thanks  {av^a>fio\oyeiTo).  The  verb  originally  means 
to  make  a  mutual  agreement ;  and  the  idea  of  reciprocity  is 
retained  in  the  expression  "  to  return  thanks"  for  something 
received.     Compare  Sept.,  Ps.  Ixxix.  13. 

Spake.  Not  a  public  utterance,  for  which  the  words,  those 
tliat  waited,  etc.,  would  be  inappropriate.  It  was  to  the  pious 
ones  who  were  with  her  in  the  temple,  waiting  for  the  Messiah. 


Ch.  n.]  LUKE.  277 

In  Jerusalem  {ev'Iepova-aXijfi).  All  the  best  texts  omit  iv, 
m.  Render,  as  Kev.,  the  redemption  of  Jerusalem.  Nearly 
equivalent  to  the  consolation  of  Israel,  ver.  25.  Compare  ch.  i. 
68,  and  see  Isa.  xl.  2. 

39.  Nazareth.     See  on  Matt.  ii.  23. 

40.  The  child  grew,  etc.  The  Jews  marked  the  stages  of  a 
child's  development  by  nine  different  terms :  the  new-born 
babe  (Isa.  ix.  6) ;  the  suckling  (Isa.  xi.  8) ;  the  suckling  begin- 
ning to  ask  for  food  (Lam.  iv.  4) ;  the  weaned  child  (Isa.  xxviii. 
9) ;  the  child  clinging  to  its  mother  (Jer.  xl.  7) ;  the  child  be- 
coming firm  and  strong  (Isa.  vii.  14,  of  the  virgin-mother) ;  the 
youth,  literally,  he  that  shakes  himself  free  ;  the  ripened  one, 
or  warrior  (Isa.  xxxi.  8). 

41.  H  is  parents.  Though  women  were  not  bound  to  present 
themselves  in  person. 

42.  Twelve  years  old.  At  which  age  he  was  known  as  a 
son  of  the  law,  and  came  under  obligation  to  observe  the  ordi- 
nances personally. 

43.  Had  fulfilled  the  days.  Not  necessarily  the  whole 
seven  days  of  the  festival.  With  the  third  day  commenced  the 
so-called  half  holidays,  when  it  was  lawful  to  return  home. 

44.  The  company  {crwoSia).  From  crvv,  with,  and  6S69,  the 
way.     The  company  that  shared  the  journey. 

Went  a  day's  journey.     Before  they  missed  him. 

They  sought  (dve^'^Tow).  From  dva,  from  the  tottom  uj>, 
and  ^rjTeoa,  to  seek.  Thus  implying  a  tlwrough  search :  they 
looked  for  him  up  and  down. 

45.  Seeking  him  {dva^TjrovvTes!).  All  the  way  as  they  went. 
Force  of  dva,  as  above. 


278  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  II. 

46.  After  three  days.     From  the  time  of  separation. 

In  the  temple.  "We  read  in  the  Talmud  that  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Temple-Sanhedrin,  who,  on  ordinary  days,  sat  as  a 
court  of  appeal  from  the  close  of  the  morning  to  the  time  of 
the  evening  sacrifice,  were  wont,  upon  Sabbaths  and  feast-days, 
to  come  out  upon  the  terrace  of  the  temple,  and  there  to  teach. 
In  such  popular  instruction  the  utmost  latitude  of  questioning 
would  be  given.  It  is  in  this  audience,  which  sat  upon  the 
ground,  surrounding  and  mingling  with  the  doctors,  and  hence 
dmrmg,  not  after,  the  feast,  that  we  must  seek  the  child  Jesus  " 
(Edersheim,  "  Life  and  Times,"  etc.,  i.  247).  From  this,  Eders- 
heim  argues  that  the  parents  set  out  for  home  before  the  close 
of  the  feast. 

Sitting.  Not  occupying  a  teacher's  place,  but  sitting  in  the 
circle  among  the  doctors  and  their  hearers.  See  above.  Com- 
pare Acts  xxii.  3. 

47.  Understanding  {aweaei).  From  avvlrj/ii,  to  hrvng  to- 
gether. Hence  that  quality  of  mind  which  corribines:  under- 
standing not  only  of  facts,  but  of  facts  in  their  mutual  relations. 
See  on  Mark  xii.  33  ;  where  there  is  meant  "  the  love  of  a  well- 
pondered  and  duly  considered  resolution  which  determines  the 
whole  person  ;  the  love  which  clearly  understands  itself"  (Cre- 
mer). 

48.  They  were  amazed  {i^errXdyrja-av).  A  very  strong  word ; 
the  verb  meaning,  literally,  to  strike  out  or  drive  away  from,' 
and  so  to  drive  out  of  one's  senses.  Hence  in  the  general  sense 
of  great  amazement.  Amaze  is  to  throw  into  a  maze  or  lab- 
yrinth ;  and  so  is  closely  akin  to  the  Greek  word  here,  and  is 
a  faithful  rendering. 

Son  {TeKvov).     Lit.,  child.     See  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

Thy  father.  "Up  to  this  time  Joseph  had  been  so  called 
by  the  holy  child  himself  ;  but  from  this  time  never  "  (Alf ord). 


Ch.  II./  LUKE.  27& 

Have  sought  {i^riTovfiev).  Imperfect  tense :  were  seehing  • 
Mary  is  going  over  in  mind  the  process  of  the  search. 

49.  And  he  said.  The  first  saying  of  Jesus  which  is  pre- 
served to  us. 

Must  (Set).  Lit.,  it  is  necessary,  or  it  iehoves.  A  word  often 
used  by  Jesus  concerning  his  own  appointed  work,  and  express- 
ing both  the  inevitable  fulfihnent  of  the  divine  counsels  and  the 
absolute  constraint  of  the  principle  of  duty  upon  himself.  See 
Matt.  xvi.  21  ;  xxvi.  54;  Mark  viii.  31;  Luke  iv.  43;  ix.  22; 
xiii.  33  ;  xxiv.  7,  26,  46  ;  John  iii.  14 ;  iv.  4 ;  xii.  34. 

About  my  Father's  business  (eVrpt?  tov  Trar/ao?).  Lit.,  m 
the  things  of  my  Father.  The  words  will  bear  this  rendering; 
but  the  Eev.  is  better,  in  my  Father's  house.  Mai'y's  question 
was  not  as  to  what  her  son  had  been  doing,  but  as  to  where  he 
had  been.  Jesus,  in  effect,  answers,  "  Where  is  a  child  to  be 
found  but  in  his  Father's  house  ?  " 

50.  The  saying  {to  frnfia).     See  on  ch.  i.  37. 

51.  Was  subject  {rjv  {nroraacrofievot;).  The  participle  and 
finite  verb,  denoting  habitual,  continuous  subjection.  "  Even  be- 
fore, he  had  been  subject  to  them  ;  but  this  is  mentioned  now, 
when  it  might  seem  that  he  could  by  this  time  have  exempted 
himself.  Not  even  to  the  angels  fell  such  an  honor  as  to  the 
parents  of  Jesus  "  (Bengel).     Compare  Heb.  i.  4-8. 

Kept  (SteTjj|06t).  Only  here  and  Acts  xv.  29.  The  preposi- 
tion Bid,  through,  indicates  close,  faithful,  persistent  keeping, 
through  all  the  circumstances  which  might  have  weakened  the 
impression  of  the  events.     Compare  Gen.  xxxvii.  11. 

52.  Stature  {ffKiKici).  Which  Eev.  rightly  retains.  The 
word  may  be  rendered  age,  which  would  be  superfluous  here. 


280  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IU. 

CHAPTER  III. 

1-18.  Compare  Matt.  iii.  1-12  ;  Mark  i.  1-8. 

1.  Pontius  Pilate.     Wye,  Pilot  of  Pounce. 
Tetrarch.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  1. 

2.  Came  {Ir^kvero).     Lit.,  arose,  or  camie  to  pass. 

John.  The  Synoptists  introduce  him  under  different  titles. 
Here,  the  son  of  Zacharias  ;  Matthew,  the  Baptist ;  Mark,  the 
Ba/ptizer. 

3.  The  country  about  Jordan.  Which  both  Matthew  and 
Mark  call  the  wilderness.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  1. 

Baptism  of  repentance.     'Wja., penaunce. 

For  {eh).  Better  as  Eev.,  unto,  denoting  the  destination  of 
the  rite. 

Remission  {ajteaiv).  See  on  Jas.  v.  15.  The  word  occurs 
in  Luke  more  frequently  than  in  all  the  other  New  Testament 
writers  combined.  Used  in  medical  language  of  the  relaxation 
of  disease.  Both  Luke  and  John  use  the  kindred  verb  ouftirj/a, 
in  the  same  sense.     Luke  iv.  39  ;  John  iv.  52. 

4.  Isaiah.  In  this  prophetic  citation  Mark  adds  to  Isaiah 
Malachi  iii.  1,  which  does  not  appear  in  either  Matthew  or  Luke. 
Luke  adds  vv.  4,  5  of  Isa.  xl.,  which  do  not  appear  in  the 
others. 

Paths  (t/sj'/Sow?).  From  rpL^a,  to  rub  or  wear.  Hence  beaten 
tracks. 


Ch.  III.]  LUKE.  281 

6.  Valley  {^dpay^).  Strictly,  of  a  chasm  or  ravine  in  a 
mountain-side. 

Shall  be  filled— brought  low.  In  allusion  to  the  practice 
of  Eastern  monarehs.  On  occasions  of  their  progress,  heralds 
were  sent  out  to  call  on  the  people  to  clear  and  improve,  the 
old  roads  or  to  make  new  ones.  "When  Ibrahim  Pacha  pro- 
posed to  visit  certain  places  in  Lebanon,  the  emirs  and  sheiks 
sent  forth  a  general  proclamation,  somewhat  in  the  style  of 
Isaiah's  exhortation,  to  all  the  inhabitants  to  assemble  along  the 
proposed  route  and  prepare  the  way  before  him.  The  same 
was  done  in  1845,  on  a  grand  scale,  when  the  Sultan  visited 
Brusa.  The  stones  were  gathered  out,  the  crooked  places 
straightened,  and  rough  ones  made  level  and  smooth.  I  had 
the  benefit  of  these  labors  a  few  days  after  his  majesty's  visit. 
The  exhortation  'to  gather  out  the  stones'  (Isa.  Ixii.  10)  is 
peculiarly  appropriate.  These  farmers  do  the  exact  reverse — 
gather  up  the  stones  from  their  fields  and  cast  them  into  the 
highway;  and  it  is  this  barbarous  custom  which,  in  many 
places,  renders  the  paths  uncomfortable  and  even  dangerous " 
(Thomson,  "  Land  and  Book  "). 

7.  He  said  {eXeyev)  to  the  multitudes  that  came  forth 

(eKTropevo/xevoi,^).  The  use  of  the  tenses  is  graphic.  Me  said, 
the  imperfect,  and  came  forth,,  the  present  participle ;  both  de- 
noting action  in  progress,  or  customary  action ;  so  that  the  sense 
is,  he  Tcept  saying,  or  he  used  to  say  to  those  who  were  coming 
out,  to  the  crowds  of  people  which  kept  pouring  out  successively. 
Compare  i^eTropevero,  went  out,  also  imperfect.  Matt.  iii.  5. 
Luke  gives  the  substance  of  the  Baptist's  preaching  summarily. 

Generation  {yevvrjiJLaTa).  Lit.,  Mrths.  Rev.,  bettei",  off- 
spring. It  has  been  observed  that  John's  figurative  language  is 
altogether  the  language  of  the  desert.  Notice  the  succession  of 
images :  Brood  of  vipers ;  fruits  (of  repentance) ;  the  axe  at 
the  root  of  the  tree  ;  the  slame-hoy  loosing  or  hearing  the  sandals  / 
the  baptism,  of  fire  /  the  winnowing f am,  the  threshmg-floor,  the 
garner,  and  the  Tmrning  of  the  chaff. 


282  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HL 

Warned  {viriBei^ev).  From  viro,  under,  and  SbIkw/jli,  to  shew. 
Hence,  literally,  to  shew  secretly.  The  word  implies  a  private 
or  confidential  hint  or  reminder.  Compare  ch.  xii.  5 ;  Acts 
ix.  16 ;  XX.  35. 

8.  Fruits  (Kapirov'i).  Matthew  has  the  singular  number, 
KapTrov,jTuit. 

Repentance  (ttj? /ierawia?).  Note  the  article :  the  repent- 
ance which  you  profess  in  coming  to  my  baptism.  Rev.,  in 
margin,  "  your  repentance."     See  on  Matt.  iii.  2. 

Begin.  With  the  first  accusing  of  your  conscience.  "He 
anticipates  even  attempt  at  excuse"  (Bengel).  Matthew  has 
thin/c  not,  indicating  a  delusive  fancy. 

Father.  The  word  stands  first  in  the  sentence,  "We  have 
Abraham  to  our  father,"  and  is  therefore  emphatic,  and  with 
reason ;  for  it  was  on  their  descent  that  the  answer  of  these 
Jews  to  John's  rebuke  turned :  "  Ovs  father  is  Abraham." 

These  stones.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  9. 

9.  See  on  Matt.  iii.  10. 

10.  Asked  (iTrrjpcoTwv).  Imperfect  tense,  indicating  the  fre- 
quent repetition  of  these  questions. 

11.  Coats  {'x^iTcova';).     See  on  Matt.  v.  40. 

11.  Publicans  (reXwi/at).  From  reKo';,  a  tax,  and  wveo/iai,  to 
buy.  The  collectors  of  Roman  imposts.  The  Romans  farmed 
out  the  direct  taxes  and  customs-duties  to  capitalists,  on  their 
payment  of  a  certain  sum  in  publicum,  into  thejpuiUc  treasury, 
whence  they  were  called  puilicani,  publicans.  Sometimes  this 
sum,  being  greater  than  any  one  person  could  pay,  was  paid  by 
a  company.  Under  these  were  the  submagistri,  living  in  the 
provinces ;  and  under  these  again  the  portAtores,  or  actual  cus- 


Ch.  ni.]  LUKE.  283 

tom-house  officers,  wlio  are  referred  to  by  the  term  reXoovai  in 
the  New  Testament.  They  were  often  chosen  from  the  dregs 
of  the  people,  and  were  so  notorious  for  their  extortions  that  they 
were  habitually  included  in  the  same  category  with  harlots  and 
sinners.  "  If  a  Jew  could  scarcely  persuade  himself  that  it  was 
right  topay  taxes,  how  much  more  heinous  a  crime  must  it 
have  been  in  his  eyes  to  become  the  questionably  honest  instru- 
ment for  collectvng  them.  If  a  publican  was  hated,  how  still 
more  intense  must  have  been  the  disgust  entertained  against  a 
publican  who  was  also  a  Jew  "  (Farrar,  "  Life  of  Christ ").  The 
word  "  publican,"  as  a  popular  term  of  reproach,  was  used  even 
by  our  Lord  (Matt,  xviii.  17).  Even  the  Gentiles  despised 
them.  Farrar  cites  a  Greek  saying,  "  All  publicans  are  rob- 
bers." 

13.  Exact  (TTjoao-ffeTe).  The  change  of  the  Eev.  to  extort  is 
unfortunate.  The  word  is  used  of  the  exaction  of  legal  tribute, 
and  excessi/oe  exaction  is  expressed  by  the  following  words : 
John  would  hardly  have  commanded  them  to  extort  in  any  case. 

14.  Soldiers  (a-rparevo/jLevot).  Strictly,  soldiers  on  service: 
hence  the  participle,  serving  as  soldders,  instead  of  the  more 
comprehensive  term  arparimTai,  soldiers  iy  profession.  Some 
explain  it  of  soldiers  engaged  in  police  inspection  in  connection 
with  the  customs,  and  hence  naturally  associated  with  the  pub- 
licans. 

What  shall  we  do?  The  wein  the  Greek  is  emphatic, 
closing  the  question.  Hence  Eev.,  very  aptly,  and  we,  what 
must  we  do  f 

Do  violence  {Suureia-ijTe).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Lit.,  to  shake  violently  /  hence  to  agitate  or  terrify  /  and  so  to 
extort  money  from  one  by  terrifying  him.  The  corresponding 
Latin  word  concutere  is  used  by  later  writers  in  the  same  sense. 
Xenophon  says  of  Socrates :  "  I  know  of  his  once  having  heard 
from  Crito  that  life  at  Athens  was  a  hard  thing  for  a  man  who 
desired  to  mind  his  own  business.     '  For,'  said  he,  '  they  bring 


284  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca  HL 

actions  against  me,  not  because  they  are  wronged  by  me,  but 
because  they  think  I  would  rather  pay  money  than  have  any 
trouble ' "  ("  Memorabilia,"  ii.,  9, 1).  For  this  process  of  black- 
mail, a-eicD,  to  shake,  was  used.     Thus  Aristophanes  ("  Knights," 

840): 

"  Thou  Shalt  make  much  money  \)j  falsely  accusing  and  frightening"  (<reltiy  re 

And  again  ("  Peace,"  639) : 

"And  of  their  allies  they  falsely  accused  {iaeiov)  the  substantial  and  rich.'' 

The  word  in  this  passage  of  Luke  has  the  later,  secondary 
meaning,  to  extort  /  and  therefore  the  American  Kevisers  rightly 
insist  on,  extort  from  no  mari  hy  violence.  It  is  used  by  medical 
writers,  as,  for  instance,  by  Hippocrates,  of  shaking  the  palsied 
or  benumbed  limbs  of  a  patient ;  or  of  a  shaking  by  which  the 
liver  was  relieved  of  an  obstruction.  Luke  also  uses  two  other 
compounds  of  the  verb  aeioj :  KaraaeCa,  to  ieohon,  Acts  xii.  IT 
(peculiar  to  Luke)  ;  and  avaa-iico,  to  stir  up,  which  occurs  also 
in  Mark  xv.  11.     Both  these  are  also  used  by  medical  writers. 

Accuse  any  falsely  {avKocpavTijcrrjTe).  The  common  ex- 
planation of  this  word  is  based  on  the  derivation  from  avKov,  a 
fig,  and  (paivo),  to  make  known/  hence  of  informing  against 
persons  who  exported  figs  from  Attica,  contrary  to  the  law,  or 
who  plundered  sacred  fig-trees.  As  informers  were  tempted  to 
accuse  innocent  persons  by  the  reward  paid  for  pointing  out 
violators  of  the  law,  the  verb  acquired  the  meaning  to  accuse 
falsely.  Such  is  the  old  explanation,  which  is  now  rejected  by 
scholars,  though  the  real  explanation  is  merely  conjectural. 
The  fig-tree  was  the  pride  of  Attica,  ranking  with  honey  and 
olives  as  one  of  the  principal  products,  and  there  is  no  authority 
for  the  statement  that  there  was  a  time  when  figs  were  scarce, 
and  required  legal  protection  against  export.  Neither  is  it 
proven  that  there  was  a  sacred  kind  of  fig.  Kettig,  in  an  in- 
teresting paper  in  the  "  Studien  und  Kritiken  "  (1838),  explains 
that,  as  tribute  in  Attica  was  paid  in  kind  as  well  as  in  money, 


Ch.  in.]  LUKE.  285 

and  as  figs  represented  a  great  deal  of  property,  there  was  a 
temptation  to  make  false  returns  of  the  amount  of  figs  to  the 
assessors ;  and  that  thus  a  class  of  informers  arose  who  detected 
and  reported  these  false  returns,  and  received  a  percentage  of 
the  fine  which  was  imposed.  These  were  known  aafig-shewers. 
Another  writer  has  suggested  that  the  reference  is  to  one  who 
brings  figs  to  light  by  shaking  the  tree  ;  and  so,  metaphorically, 
to  one  who  makes  rich  men  yield  up  the  fruits  of  their  labor  or 
rascality  by  false  accusation.  Whatever  explanation  we  may 
accept,  it  is  evident  that  the  word  had  some  original  connection 
withjS^s,  and  that  it  came  to  mean  to  slander  or  accuse  falsely. 
From  it  comes  our  word  sycophant.  The  sycophants  as  a  class 
were  encouraged  at  Athens,  and  their  services  were  rewarded. 
Socrates  is  said  by  Xenophon  to  have  advised  Crito  to  take  a 
sycophant  into  his  pay,  in  order  to  thwart  another  who  was 
annoying  him  ;  and  this  person,  says  Xenophon,  "quickly  dis- 
covered on  the  part  of  Crito's  accusers  many  illegal  acts,  and 
many  persons  who  were  enemies  to  those  accusers ;  one  of 
whom  he  summoned  to  a  public  trial,  in  which  it  would  be 
settled  what  he  should  suffer  or  pay,  and  he  would  not  let  him 
ofE  until  he  ceased  to  molest  Crito  and  paid  a  sum  of  money 
besides."  Demosthenes  thus  describes  one :  "  He  glides  about 
the  market  like  a  scorpion,  with  his  venomous  sting  all  ready, 
spying  out  whom  he  may  surprise  with  misfortune  and  ruin, 
and  from  whom  he  can  most  easily  extort  money,  by  threaten- 
ing him  with  an  action  dangerous  in  its  consequences.  . 
It  is  the  bane  of  our  city  that  it  protects  and  cherishes  this 
poisonous  brood,  and  uses  them  as  informers,  so  that  even  the 
honest  man  must  flatter  and  court  them,  in  order  to  be  safe 
from  their  machinations."  The  word  occurs  only  here  and  eh. 
xix.  8,  of  Zacchaeus,  the  publican.  The  American  Eevisers 
hold  to  the  A.  Y.,  and  render  neither  accuse  any  one  wrongfully, 
extortion  being  described  by  the  previous  word.  "Wye,  neither 
make  ye  false  challenge.  In  the  Sept.  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
to  oppress  or  deceive. 

Wages  (oyjrmvloK).  From  oi/rov,  cooTcedmeat,  and  later,  gener- 
ally, provisions.  At  Athens,  especially,  j?sA.  Compare  6-\lrdpiov, 
fsh,  John  xxi.  9, 10, 13.   Hence  o'^aiviov  is  T^v\m&v\\y  provision- 


286  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  in. 

money,  and  so  used  of  supplies  and  pay  for  an  army.  With  this 
understanding  the  use  of  the  word  at  Rom.  vi.  23,  "  the  wages 
of  sin,"  becomes  highly  suggestive. 

15.  Mused  (StaXoYt^o/ieWi/).  Better  && 'Rev.,  reasoned.  Com- 
pare ch.  i.  29  ;  and  see  on  Jas.  ii.  4. 

16.  One  mightier  (6  l(T'xvp6repo<;).  The  definite  article  points 
to  an  expected  personage.  Hence  better  as  Kev.,  he  that  is 
mightier. 

Unloose  (Xvcrai).  So  also  Mark;  but  Matthew  ^aerrdaai, 
to  bear.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  11. 

17.  Fan — floor— purge.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  12. 

18.  Other  {erepa).     Eather,  various,  different. 

Preached  (evryyyeXi^eTo).  Rev.  preserves  the  fuller  meaning 
of  the  word  according  to  its  etymology  :  preac/ied  good  tidings. 
See  on  Gospel,  Superscription  of  Matthew. 

19.  20.  Compare  Matt.  xiv.  3-5  ;  Mark  vi.  17-20. 

19.  Being  reproved  {i\€yx6fi€vo<;).     See  on  Jas.  ii.  9. 

Evils  {TTovTjpmv).  Of  several  words  in  the  New  Testament 
denoting  evil,  this  emphasizes  evil  in  its  activity.  Hence  Satan 
is  o  irovrjpo'i,  the  evil  one.  An  evil  eye  (Mark  vii.  22)  is  a  mis- 
chief-working eye.     See  on  Mark  vii.  22. 

Added  {-Trpoa-i^Kev).  Used  by  Luke  twice  as  often  as  in  all 
the  rest  of  the  New  Testament.  A  very  common  medical  word, 
used  of  the  application  of  remedies  to  the  body,  as  our  apply, 
administer.  So  Hippocrates, "  a/pply  wet  sponges  to  the  head ; " 
and  Galen,  "  a^pply  a  decoction  of  acorns,"  etc. 

In  prison.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  3. 


Ch.  IV.]  LUKE.  287 

21-23.  Compare  Matt.  iii.  13-17 ;  Mark  i.  9-11. 

21.  Was  opened  {avewx^vai).  So  Matthew,  but  Mark  o-^^tfo- 
(iivovs,  rent. 

22.  The  Holy  Ghost.     Better,  Sprnt.    Matthew  has  the 

Spirit  of  God :  Mark,  the  Spirit. 

In  a  bodily  shape.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

Thou  art  my  beloved  son.  Lit.,  Thou  aH  my  son,  the  be- 
loved.    So  Mark.     But  Matthew,  This  is  my  son,  the  beloved. 

23.  Began  to  be  about  thirty  years  of  age  {?iv  apxafievot 
m<rel  iraiv  rpiaKovra).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  A.  V.  is  wrong.  It 
should  be  as  E.ev.,  when  he  begem  (to  teach)  was  about  thirty 
years  of  age. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
1-13.  Compare  Matt.  iv.  1-11 ;  Mark  i.  12-13. 

1.  Was  led.  So  Matthew.  Mark  says,  "  The  Spirit  <^w>6^A, 
(iK^aWei)  or  thrusteth  him  forth. 

By  the  Spirit  (eV  tw  irvevfunC).  The  American  Revisers  ren- 
der in  the  spirit,  indicating  the  sphere  rather  than  the  impulse 
of  his  action. 

Into  the  wilderness.  The  A.  V.  has  followed^ the  reading 
ets,  into.  The  proper  reading  is  ev,  in.  He  was  not  only  im- 
pelled imto  the  wilderness,  but  guided  in  the  wilderness  by  the 
Spirit. 

2.  Forty  days.  This  should  be  joined  with  the  preceding 
words,  indicating  the  duration  of  his  stay  in  the  wilderness,  not 
of  his  temptation,  as  A.  Y.,  being  forty  days  tempted.  Read  as 
Rev.,  im.  the  vnlderness  during  forty  days. 


288  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

The  devil.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  1. 

He  did  eat  nothing.  Mark  does  not  mention  the  fast. 
Matthew  uses  the  word  vrja-Tevaa-;,  having  fasted,  which, 
throughout  the  New  Testament,  is  used  of  abstinence  for  re- 
ligious purposes ;    a  ritual  act  accompanying  seasons  of  prayer. 

3.  This  stone.     Matthew,  these  stones. 

Bread  (dpTo<;).  Lit.,  a  loaf.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  3.  Matthew 
has  the  plural  loaves. 

4.  It  is  written.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  4. 

By  bread  {iir'  aprai).  Lit.,  "on  bread,"  implying  depend- 
ence.    Compare,  hy  every  word  {eirl  -jravrl  prifiaTi,  Matt.  iv.  4). 

5.  The  world.     See  on  ch.  ii.  1. 

In  a  moment  of  time  (eV  a-Tir/fifj  xpo^ov).  Peculiar  to  Luke. 
^TiyfiTj  is  literally  a  marh  made  hy  a  pointed  instrument,  a  dot : 
hence  a  point  of  time.  Only  here  in  ISTew  Testament.  Com- 
pare (7TLjfjLaTa,  hrand-marks,  Gal.  vi.  17.  Tynd.,  in  the  twim,- 
Ming  of  an  eye. 

6.  Note  the  emphatic  position  of  the  pronouns :  "  To  tJiee 
will  I  give — for  to  me  it  hath  been  delivered  :  thou,  therefore, 
if  thou  wilt  worship,"  etc.  Luke,  in  his  narrative,  enlarges  upon 
Matthew.     Compare  Matt.  iv.  9. 

8.  Serve.    See  on  ch.  i.  74. 

9.  He  brought  (r;7a76i').     Eev.,  M     See  on.  irapaXa/i^dvei, 

taTceth,  Matt.  iv.  5. 

Pinnacle  of  the  temple.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 
Down  from  hence.    Matthew  has  down  only. 


Ch.  IV.]  LUKE.  28& 

10.  To  keep  {Bui<j)v\d^ai).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Better  as  Eev.,  guard.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4.  TLe  preposition 
implies  dose,  careful  guarding.  The  phrase,  to  guard  thee,  is 
wanting  in  Matthew. 

11.  In  their  hands  {iirl  x'^i'p^v).  Hev.,  correctly,  on.  See 
on  Matt.  iv.  6. 

12.  It  is  said.  For  Matthew's  it  is  written.  Matt.  iv.  7. 
Luke  omits  Matthew's  again.     See  Matt.  iv.  7. 

13.  Had  ended  all  the  temptation.  Peculiar  to  Luke.  The 
verb  avvTe\ia-a<;,  from  crw,  together,  and  reXico,  to  accomplish, 
means  to  hrvng  to  one  end  together;  hence  to  bring  to  an  end 
utterly.  Better  therefore  as  Kev.,  completed.  The  temptations 
formed  a  complete  cycle,  so  that  it  could  afterward  be  said  of 
Jesus  that  "  he  was  in  all  points  tried  like  as  we  are "  (Heb. 
iv.  15). 

All  the  temptation  {iravra  ireipaa-fiov).  Incorrect.  Kev., 
rightly,  every  temptation.     So  "Wye,  Every  temptation  ended. 

For  a  season  (a%/cit  Kaipov).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  More  strictly, 
untU  a  convenient  time ;  since  Satan  meant  to  assail  him  again, 
as  he  did  in  the  person  of  Peter  (Mark  viii.  33) ;  by  the  Phari- 
sees (John  viii.  40  sq.) ;  and  at  Gethsemane.     See  ch.  xxii.  53. 

15.  He  taught  (awTo?  eS^ao-Kev).  Lit.,  "Ae  AimseZ/" taught," 
verifying  the  favorable  reports  about  himself  in  person.  The 
imperfect  tense  denotes  a  course  of  teaching. 

16-31.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 

16.  Nazareth.  With  the  article;  that  Nazareth  where  he 
had  been  brought  up. 

Stood  up.    Not  as  a  sign  that  he  wished  to  expound,  but 
being  summoned  by  the  superintendent  of  the  synagogue. 
19 


290  WOIiD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

To  read  {avayvoovai).  Usually  in  ITew  Testament  ofjmiliG 
reading.*  After  the  liturgical  services  which  introduced  the 
worship  of  the  synagogue,  the  "minister"  took  a  roll  of  the  law 
from  the  ark,  removed  its  case  and  wrappings,  and  then  called 
upon  some  one  to  read.  On  the  Sabbaths,  at  least  seven  persons 
were  called  on  successively  to  read  portions  of  the  law,  none  of 
them  consisting  of  less  than  three  verses.  After  the  law  fol- 
lowed a  section  from  the  prophets,  which  was  succeeded  imme- 
diately by  a  discourse.  It  was  this  section  which  Jesus  read 
and  expounded.  See  Acts  xiii.  15  ;  Neh.  viii.  5,  8.  For  a  de- 
tailed account  of  the  synagogue-worship,  see  Edersheim,  "  Life 
and  Times  of  Jesus,"  i.,  430  sq. 

17.  The  book  {^b^Xiov).  A  diminutive  of  ;St/3\o9,  the  inner 
hark  of  the  jpapyrus,  used  for  writing.  Hence  a  roll.  The 
word  is  also  used  to  denote  a  division  of  a  work,  and  is  there- 
fore appropriate  here  to  mark  the  writings  of  a  single  prophet 
as  related  to  the  whole  body  of  the  prophetic  writings. 

Opened  [avaTrrv^a^).  Lit.,  unrolled.  Both  this  and  the 
simple  verb  -rrrvcraco,  to  close  (ver.  30),  occur  only  once  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  former  word  was  used  in  medical  lan- 
guage of  the  opening  out  of  various  parts  of  the  body,  and  the 
latter  of  the  rolling  up  of  bandages.  The  use  of  these  terms 
by  Luke  the  physician  is  the  more  significant  from  the  fact  that 
elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  avoiytu  is  used  for  the  opening 
of  a  book  (Apoc.  v.  2-5  ;  x.  2,  8 ;  xx.  12) ;  and  elXia-a-a,  for 
rolling  it  wp  (Apoc.  vi.  14). 

Found.  As  if  by  chance:  reading  at  the  place  where  the 
roll  opened  of  itself,  and  trusting  to  divine  guidance. 

Was  written  {?iv  jeypanfiivov).  Lit.,  was  having  been 
written  ;  i.e.,  stood  written. 

18.  Anointed.     See  on  Christ,  Matt.  i.  1. 

To  preach  good  tidings.  See  on  Gospel,  Superscription 
of  Matthew. 


*  In  piist-classicp.l  CivbIc,  aometimes  of  reading  aloud  with  comments.     This 
may  explain  the  parentUtsis  in  Matt.  xxlv.  15. 


Ch.  IV.]  LUKE.  291 

To  the  poor  (jncoxoK)-     See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

To  heal  the  broken-hearted.  The  best  texts  omit.  So 
Eev. 

To  preach  {ic^pv^ai).  Better  as  'Rgy.,  proclaim,  as  a  herald. 
See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  5. 

To  the  captives  {alypaXmroK).  From  al)Q*'%  a  spear-j>oint, 
and  aXia-KOfiat,  to  he  taken  or  conquered.  Hence,  properly,  of 
prisoners  of  war.  Compare  Isa.  xlii.  7  :  "To  bring  out  captives 
from  the  prison,  and  those  who  sit  in  darkness  from  the  house  of 
restraint."  The  allusion  is  to  Israel,  both  as  captive  exiles  and 
as  prisoners  of  Satan  in  spiritual  bondage.  Wye.  has  ca/i/tifs, 
which  formerly  signified  captives. 

To  set  at  liberty  {d-Troa-TeiXai)  Lit.,  to  send  away  in  dis- 
cha/rge.  Inserted  from  the  Sept.  of  Isa.  Iviii.  6.  See  on  ch.  iii. 
3,  and  Jas.  v.  15. 

Them  that  are  bruised  {re^pava-fievov;).  Lit.,  hroJcen  in 
pieces.  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Wye,  to  deliver  broken 
men  into  remission.  The  same  Hebrew  word  is  used  in  Isa. 
xlii.  3 :  "a  crushed  reed  shall  he  not  break,"  which  the  Sep- 
tuagint  translates  by  reSXaa-fievov,  a  word  which  does  not  occur 
in  the  New  Testament.  In  the  citation  of  this  latter  passage 
(Matt.  xii.  20,  on  which  see)  the  word  for  Iruised  is  awrpl^co, 
which  the  Septuagint  uses  for  ireak. 

19.  To  preach  (Rev., proclaim)  the  acceptable  year  of 
the  Lord.  As  on  the  first  day  of  the  year  of  Jubilee,  when 
the  priests  went  through  the  land  proclaiming,  with  sound  of 
trumpet,  the  blessings  of  the  opening  year  (Lev.  xxv.  8-17). 
Note  ver.  10,  where  liberty  is  to  be  proclaimed  to  all  in  that 
year.  Wye,  the  year  of  the  Lord pleaswnt.  A  literal  interpre- 
tation of  the  word  yea/r  gave  rise  among  some  of  the  Christian 
fathers  to  the  theory  that  our  Lord's  ministry  lasted  but  a  single 
year. 


292  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

20.  He  closed  (Trru^a?).     See  on  ver.  17. 

Minister  {virripeT'g).  See  on  Matt.  y.  25.  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  a^ 
tendant.  Minister  is  likely  to  be  misunderstood  as  referring 
to  the  president  of  the  congregation,  who,  as  the  teaching  elder, 
would  have  addressed  the  people  if  Jesus  had  not  done  so.  It 
means  the  attendant  who  had  charge  of  the  sacred  rolls.  He 
was  a  salaried  officer,  a  kind  of  chapel-clerk. 

Sat  down.  As  about  to  teach;  that  being  the  habitual 
position  of  a  Jewish  teacher. 

Were  fastened  {Tjaav  aTevi^ovTe<;).  The  participle  and  finite 
verb  denoting  continuous,  steadfast  attention.  The  verb,  from 
Teivm,  to  stretch,  denotes  fixed  attention.  Indeed,  the  word 
attention  itself,  etymologically  considered,  conveys  the  same 
idea. 

21.  He  began.  Not  necessarily  denoting  his  first  words,  but 
indicating  a  solemn  and  weighty  opening. 

22.  Bare  him  witness.  Compare  ver.  14.  They  confirmed 
the  reports  which  had  been  circulated  about  him.  Note  the 
imperfect  tense.  There  was  a  continuous  stream  of  admiring 
comment.     Similarly,  were  wondering. 

At  the  gracious  words  (\670t?  t^s  ;)^aptT09).  Literally  and 
correctly,  as  Rev.,  words  of  grace.     See  on  ch.  i.  30. 

Is  not  {oirxj).     Expecting  an  affirmative  answer. 

23.  Surely  (Travro)?).     Lit.,  Jy  all  meams.    Rev.,  dovbUess. 

Proverb  {irapa^oKrfv).  B,ey., parable.  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  3. 
Wye,  Ukeness. 

Physician,  heal  thyself.  A  saying  which  Luke  alone  re- 
cords, and  which  would  forcibly  appeal  to  him  as  a  physician. 


Ch.  IV.]  LUKE.  293 

Galen  speaks  of  a  physician  who  should  have  cured  himself 
before  he  attempted  to  attend  patients.  The  same  appeal  was 
addressed  to  Christ  on  the  cross  (Matt,  xxvii.  40,  42). 

25.  A  great  famine  was  throughout  all  the  land  {iyevero 
Xt/MO'i  fjAya'i  i-rrl  iraaav  rrjv  yrjv).  More  literally  and  correctly, 
as  Eev.,  there  ca/me  {or  arose)  a  great  fa/mine  over  all  the  land. 

27.  Lepers.  Wye.  renders  meseZis,  the  middle-English  word 
for  a  leper,  and  derived  from  misell/m,  a  diminutive  of  the 
Latin  miser,  wretched. 

29.  The  brow  {o^pvo^).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Wye,  cope,  which  is  originally  cap  or  hood.  The  word  is  used 
in  medical  language  both  of  the  eyebrows  and  of  other  pro- 
jections of  the  body.  It  would  naturally  occur  to  a  physician, 
especial]}'  since  the  same  epithets  were  applied  to  the  appear- 
ance of  the  eyebrows  in  certain  diseases  as  were  applied  to  hills. 
Thus  Hippocrates,  describing  a  deadly  fever,  says,  "  The  eye- 
brows seem  to  ha/ng  over,''"'  the  same  word  which  Homer  uses 
of  a  rock.  So  Aretaeus,  describing  the  appearance  of  the  eye- 
brows in  elephantiasis,  depicts  them  as  Trpo^SXJjTes,  projectvng, 
and ox^coSek:, like  mounds.  Stanley  says:  "Most readers  prob- 
ably from  these  words  imagine  a  town  built  on  the  summit  of  a 
mountain,  from  which  summit  the  intended  precipitation  was 
to  take  place.  This  is  not  the  situation  of  Nazareth  ;  yet  its 
position  is  still  in  accordance  with  the  narrative.  It  is  built 
upon,  that  is,  on  the  side  of  a  mountain,  but  the  brow  is  not 
beneath,  but  over  the  town,  and  such  a  cliff  as  is  here  implied  is 
found  in  the  abrupt  face  of  a  limestone  rock  about  thirty  or 
forty  feet  high,  overhanging  the  Maronite  convent  at  the  south- 
west corner  of  the  town  "  ("  Sinai  and  Palestine  "). 

Cast  him  down  headlong  {KaTa/cfyrj/ivia-ai).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament,  and  in  the  Septuagint  only  in  2  Chron.  xxv.  12. 

31-37.  Compare  Mark  i.  21-28. 


294  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

31.  Taught  {fjv  hihouTKcov).  Correctly,  as  Kev.,  was  teaehing. 
The  finite  verb  and  participle  denoting  continuance. 

On  the  Sabbath-days  (rot?  crd/3^aatv).  Kev.,  day.  The 
word  is  often  used  in  the  plural  form  for  the  single  day,  as  in 
ver.  16 ;  probably  after  the  analogy  of  plural  names  of  festi- 
vals, as  ra  d^vfm,  the  feast  of  unlea/vened  bread  ;  to,  yevia-ia,  the 
Urth-day  ;  or  perhaps  following  the  Aramaic  plural. 

32.  They  were  astonished  {l^e-iryJ^a-aovTo).  See  on  Matt, 
vii.  28. 

33.  A  spirit  of  an  unclean  devil.  Where  the  rendering 
should  be  demon.  This  is  the  only  case  in  which  Luke  adds  to 
that  word  the  epithet  unclean. 

•34.  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee  (rt  ■r)^Liv  koI  croi)  ?  Lit., 
what  is  there  to  us  and  to  thee  f  i.e.,  what  have  we  in  common  ? 
So  Wye. 

35.  Hold  thy  peace  ((/>t/a£o,9i7Tt).  JAi.,'be  muzzled  or  gagged. 
See  on  Matt.  xxii.  12. 

Had  thrown  {pi\}fav).  Used  in  connection  with  disease  by 
Luke  only,  and  only  here.  In  medical  language,  of  convulsions, 
fits,  etc. 

Hurt  him  not  (jiTjSev  pKay^av  avrov).  Lit.,  m  no  possible 
way.  Mark  omits  this  detail,  which  a  physician  would  be  care- 
ful to  note.  BiKatTTeiv,  to  injure,  occurs  but  twice  in  New 
Testament — here  and  Mark  xvi.  18.  It  is  common  in  medical 
language,  opposed  to  ut^eKeiv,  to  benefit,  as  of  medicines  or  diet 
hurting  or  benefiting. 

36.  They  were  all  amazed  {i'yiveTo  ^dfi.^o'i  evl  TrdvTa's). 
Lit.,  as  Rev.,  amazement  came  upon  all.  Qdfi^o';,  amazemsnt, 
is  used  by  Luke  only.  The  kindred  verb,  ^afji^eofjbai,  to  be 
amazed,  occurs  only  once  in  Luke  (Acts  ix.  6),  and  three  times 
in  Mark  ;  while  Mark  alone  has  the  strong  compound  e/c^a/i/Sew, 
to  be  greatly  amiazed  (Mark  ix.  15). 


Ch.  IV.]  LUKE.  295 

37.  The  fame  {^X"^)-  ^^^-^  noise.  Rev.,  rumor.  Only 
here,  ch.  xxi.  25,  where  the  correct  reading  is  tjxov;,  the  roaring, 
and  Acts  ii.  2.  Heb.  xii.  19  is  a  quotation  from  the  Septnagint. 
It  is  the  word  used  in  Acts  ii.  2  of  the  mighty  rushing  wind  at 
Pentecost.  Mark  uses  aKorj,  in  its  earlier  sense  of  a  report. 
The  same  word  occurs  in  Luke,  but  always  in  the  sense  in 
which  medical  writers  employed  it — hearing  or  the  ears.  See 
ch.  vii.  1 ;  Acts  xvii.  20 ;  xxviii.  26.  "Hxpt  was  the  medical 
term  for  sound  in  the  ears  or  head.  ELippocrates  uses  both 
words  together ;  "  the  ears  (aicoal)  are  full  of  sound  (^^of) ;  " 
and  Aretaeus  of  the  noise  of  the  sea,  as  Luke  xxi.  25. 

38-41.  Compare  Matt.  viii.  14^17 ;  Mark  i.  29-34. 

38.  Taken  (a-vvexofj-em]).  Rev.,  holden.  So  Wye.  See  on 
Matt.  iv.  24.  The  word  is  used  nine  times  by  Luke,  and  only 
three  times  elsewhere.  Paul  uses  it  of  the  constraining  of 
Christ's  love  (2  Cor.  v.  14),  and  of  being  in  a  strait  (Philip,  i. 
23).  In  Acts  xxviii.  8,  it  is  joined  with  fever,  as  here,  and  is  a 
common  medical  term  in  the  same  sense. 

A  great  fever  {irvpeTm  fieyaXat).  Another  mark  of  the 
physician.  The  epithet  great  is  peculiar  to  Luke.  The  ancient 
physicians  distinguished  fevers  into  great  and  small. 

39.  He  stood  over  her.  As  a  physician  might  do.  Peculiar 
to  Luke. 

Rebuked.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

40.  When  the  sun  was  setting.  The  people  brought  their 
sick  at  that  hour,  not  only  because  of  the  coolness,  but  because 
it  was  the  end  of  the  Sabbath,  and  carrying  a  sick  person  was 
.regarded  as  work.     See  John  v.  10. 

Diseases  (voo-ok).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  23.  Wye,  Sick  men 
with  dimers  languishi/ngs. 

Laid  his  hands  on.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 


296  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

Every  one.  "  Implying  the  solicitude  and  indefatigableness 
of  this  miraculous  ministry  of  love  "  (Meyer). 

41.  Crying  out  {Kpavyd^ovra).  The  inarticulate  demoniac 
scream. 

Saying.     The  articulate  utterance. 

Mr.  Hobart  ("Medical  Language  of  St.  Luke")  remarks  that 
the  medical  bias  of  Luke  may  be  seen  from  the  words  he  ab- 
stains from  using  as  well  as  from  those  he  does  use  in  respect 
of  disease.  Thus  he  never  uses  fiaXaKca  for  sickness,  as  Matthew 
does  (iv.  23 ;  ix.  35  ;  x.  1),  since  this  word  is  never  so  used  in 
medical  language,  but  is  confined  to  the  meaning  of  delicacy, 
effeminacy.  So,  too,  he  never  uses  ^aaavi^eiv,  to  torment,  of 
sickness,  as  Matthew  does  (viii.  6),  as  it  is  never  so  used  in 
medical  language,  the  word  there  meaning  to  examine  some 
part  of  the  body  or  some  medical  question. 

42-44.  Compare  Mark  i.  35-39. 

42.  Sought  after  (eTre^jjrow).  Imperfect  tense:  were  seek- 
ing. 

Came  unto  him  (^XJov  eo)?  avrov).  Stronger  than  came 
to;  for  e(o<!  is  even  up  to,  showing  that  they  did  not  discontinue 
their  search  until  they  found  him.  Mark's  narrative  here  is 
fuller  and  more  graphic. 


CHAPTER  Y. 
1-11.  Compare  Matt.  iv.  18-22  ;  Mark  i.  16-20. 

1.  Pressed  {eTriKela-Bai).     Lit.,  were  laid  'wpon. 

To  hear.  The  A.  Y.  is  correct  according  to  the  reading 
Tov  aKoveiv,  which  it  follows.  The  true  reading  is  «ai  ctKoveiv, 
and  heard.     So  Rev. 


Ch.  v.]  LUKE.  297 

He  stood  {avTo<!  ^v  eo-rw?).  The  pronoun  distinguishes 
him  from  the  crowd  which  pressed  upon  him :  he  on  his  pa^t 
stood.  Render  the  participle  and  finite  verb  as  Eev.,  was 
standing. 

Lake  {XCjjLvqv).  An  illustration  of  the  more  classical  style 
of  Luke  as  compared  with  Matthew  and  Mark.  They  and  John 
also  use  ^aXaaa-a,  sea.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  18. 

2.  Ships  {Tfkola).  Used  of  vessels  in  general.  Some  texts 
read  ifkoidpta,  a  diminutive  form,  meaning  little  hoots. 

Were  washing.  From  the  sand  and  pebbles  accumulated 
during  the  night's  work.  Luke  uses  four  different  words  for 
washing  or  cleansing :  ttXwo),  here,  see  also  Apoc.  vii.  14  ;  wwo- 
fidcrato,  of  wiping  the  dust  from  the  feet,  only  at  ch.  x.  11; 
€K/idaa-m,  of  the  woman  wiping  Christ's  feet  with  her  hair, 
ch.  vii.  38,  44 ;  airoXovco,  of  washing  away  sins,  Acts  xxii.  16 ; 
Xovo),  of  washing  the  prisoners'  stripes  and  the  body  of  Dorcas, 
Acts  xvi.  33 ;  ix.  37.  The  reading  diroTrXiiva)  is  rejected  by  the 
best  texts,  so  that  dnroiidcra-a  is  the  only  one  peculiar  to  Luke. 
All  the  words  were  common  in  medical  language. 

3.  Thrust  out  {eiravwyarfelv).  Kev.,  jput  out.  The  special 
nautical  word  for  putting  out  to  sea. 

Taught  {iSiSa<TKev).  The  imperfect.  He  continued  the 
teaching  he  had  begun  on  the  shore. 

4.  Launch  out.  Rev.,  put  out.  The  singular  number,  ad- 
dressed to  Peter  as  master  of  the  craft. 

Let  down  (xakdaare).  The  plural,  addressed  to  the  whole 
of  the  boat's  crew.  Originally,  to  slacken  or  loosen,  as  a  bow- 
string or  the  reins  of  horses ;  hence  to  let  sink  as  a  net.  Also 
of  unbarring  a  door.  Metaphorically,  to  be  indulgent,  topardon. 
The  word  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  seven  times,  and  five  of 
these  in  Luke.     He  uses  it  of  letting  down  Paul  in  a  basket  at 


298  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

Damascus  (Acts  ix.  25) ;  of  striking  a  ship's  sails,  and  of  letting 
down  a  boat  into  the  sea  (Acts  xxvii.  17,  30).  Matthew,  Mark, 
and  John  use  /3a\Xo)  or  a/i^tySaWw,  for  casting  a  net  (Matt,  iv, 
18  ;  xiii.  47  ;  Mark  i.  16  ;  John  xxi.  6),  which  appears  also  in 
the  compound  noun  for  a  casting-net  {dfi^i^rja-rpov,  see  on 
Matt.  iv.  18).  The  word  used  by  Luke  was  in  common  use  in 
medical  writings,  to  denote  relaxation  of  the  limbs  ;  loosening 
of  bandages ;  abatement  of  sickness ;  letting  herbs  down  into 
a  vessel  to  be  steeped. 

5.  Master  (eVto-Tara).  Used  by  Luke  only,  and  always  with 
reference  to  Jesus.  He  never  uses  Rabbi,  as  John  especially. 
Wye,  commander. 

Toiled  (KOTTi.da-avTe'i).  From  kotto';,  suffering,  weariness ; 
and  therefore  indicating  exhavstvng  toil. 

At  thy  word  (eVt').     Relying  on :   on  the  ground  of. 

The  net  (Smtvov).  A  general  term  for  a  net,  whether  for 
fish  or  fowl.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  18.  Some,  as  Rev.,  read  to,  BIk- 
rva,  the  nets. 

Brake  (SiieppijyvvTo).  Some  texts  read  BieprjaaeTo,  from  the 
later  form  of  the  verb.  The  difference  is  unimportant.  The 
A.  V.  fails  to  give  the  force  of  the  imperfect,  were  breaking,  as 
Rev. ;  or  even  better,  possibly,  began  to  break.  Trench  suggests 
were  atthe point  to  break.  The  word  occurs  also  at  ch.  viii.  29  ; 
Acts  xiv.  14,  and  only  twice  beside  in  the  New  Testament.  Luke 
alone  uses  the  two  compounds  irepipprjrfvvfjii,  of  rending  off 
clothes  (Acts  xvi.  22),  and  Trpoa-p^yvv/Mi,  to  beat  violently  (ch.  vi. 
48,  49).  See  on  those  passages.  All  the  words  occur  in  medi- 
cal writings. 

7.  They  beckoned  (Kareveva-av).  The  word  originally  means 
to  nod  assent,  and  so,  generally,  to  make  a  sign.  They  made 
signs  because  of  the  distance  of  the  other  boat;  hardly,  as 
has  been  suggested,  because  they  were  too  much  amazed  to 
speak. 


Ch.  v.]  LUKE.  299 

He\p  {(rvWa^iffSai).  Lit,  take  hold  with.  Compare  Philip. 
It.  3. 

Began  to  sink  (^v3^i^eaBai).  Only  here  and  1  Tim.  vi.  9, 
of  drowning  men  in  destruction.  From  /Su-Jo's,  the  depth. 
Wye,  they  were  ahnost  drenched. 

8.  Fell  down  at  Jesus'  knees.  Compare  Sophocles,  "  Oedi- 
pus at  Colonus,"  1605 : 

"Zeus  from  the  dark  depths  thundered,  and  the  girls 
Heard  it,  and  shuddering,  at  their  father's  knees 
Falling,  they  wept." 

9.  He  was  astonished  (.Sa/ti/So?  irepdax^v  airbv).  Lit., 
amazement  encompassed  him.     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  6. 

The  draught  (t^  arypa).  The  word  is  used  both  of  the  ae^of 
catching  and  of  that  which  is  caught.  In  ver.  4  it  has  the  former 
sense  :  "  let  down  your  net  for  catching  : "  here,  the  latter,  the 
catch  or  haul. 

10.  Partners  {KoivavoX).  In  ver.  7  the  word  rendered  j>ar^- 
ners  is  fieroxoc ;  from  fierd,  with,  and  e^o),  to  have.  The  word 
here  denotes  a  closer  association,  a  common  interest.  The  kin- 
dred noun,  Kowwvia,  fellowship,  \s,  used  of  the  fellowship  of  be- 
lievers with  Christ  (1  Cor.  i.  9) ;  the  communion  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  x.  16) ;  the  comm.union  of  the  Holy 
Grhost  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  The  persons  referred  to  in  ver.  T  might 
have  been  only  hired  workmen  (Mark  i.  20),  temporarily  asso- 
ciated with  the  principals. 

Thou  shalt  catch  {ea-y  ^myp&v).  Lit.,  thoushalt  he  catching, 
the  participle  and  finite  verb  denoting  that  this  is  to  be  his  ha- 
bitual calling.  Both  Matthew  and  Mark  make  the  promise  to  be 
addressed  to  Peter  and  his  companions ;  Luke  to  Peter  alone. 
The  verb  ^mypeco,  to  catch,  is  compounded  of  fojo'?,  living,  and 
dr/pevco,  to  catch  or  take.     Hence,  lit.,  to  take  alive :  in  war,  to 


300  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

take  oaptwe,  instead  of  killing.     Thus  Homer,  when  Menelaus 
threatens  the  prostrate  Adrastus : 

"  Adrastus  clasped  the  warrior's  knees  and  said, 
O  son  of  Atreus,  take  me  prisoner  "  (C^pfi). 

Iliad,  vi.,  45,  6  ;  compare  Iliad,  x.,  378. 

So  Herodotus :    "  The    Persians  took   Sardis,    and    captured 
Croesus  himself  alive  "  {e^daypTja-av). — I.,  86. 

There  is  certainly  a  reason  for  the  use  of  this  term,  as  indi- 
cating that  Christ's  ministers  are  called  to  win  men  to  life. 
Compare  2  Tim.  ii.  26,  where,  according  to  the  best  supported 
rendering,  the  servant  of  God  is  represented  as  taking  men  alive 
out  of  the  power  of  Satan,  to  be  preserved  unto  the  will  of  God ; 
i.e.,  as  instrunjents  of  his  will  (compare  A.  Y.  and  Rev.).  The 
word  thus  contains  in  itself  an  answer  to  the  sneering  remark 
of  the  Apostate  Julian,  that  Christ  aptly  termed  his  apostles 
fishers ;  "  for,  as  the  fisherman  draws  out  the  fish  from  waters 
where  they  were  free  and  happy,  to  an  element  in  which  they 
cannot  breathe,  but  must  presently  perish,  so  did  these." 

12-16.  Compare  Matt.  viii.  2-4  ;  Mark  i.  40-45. 

12.  Full  of  leprosy.  Matthew  and  Mark  have  simply  a 
leper.  The  expression, /"mZZ  of  leprosy,  seems  to  be  used  here 
with  professional  accuracy.  Leprosy  was  known  among  physi- 
cians under  three  forms :  the  dull  white,  the  clear  white,  and 
the  hlach.  Luke  means  to  describe  an  aggravated  case.  The 
'worA  full  in  this  connection  is  often  used  by  medical  writers, 
&&,  full  of  disease  ;  the  veins  fuU  of  blood  /  the  QuisfuU  of 
roaring. 

Make  me  clean  {Ka^apicrai).  All  three  evangelists  say 
cleanse  instead  of  heal,  because  of  the  notion  of  uncleanness 
which  specially  attached  to  this  malady. 

13.  I  will  (^eXo)).     See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

Be  thou  clean  (Ko^apia-^ijTi).  Rev.,  more  accurately,  gives 
the  force  of  the  passive  voice,  be  thou  made  clean. 


Ch.  v.]  LUKE.  301 

14.  He  charged  {7rapi]jyeiXev).  A  strong  word,  often  of 
military  orders.  Aristotle  nses  it  of  a  physician  :  to  prescribe. 
Mark  has  ifi^pi(ii]a-dfievo(i,  strictly  or  sternly  charged.  See  on 
Mark  i.  43. 

No  one  (jMnjSevt).  The  conditional  negative  :  no  one  that  he 
might  chance  to  meet. 

Go,  shew  thyself.  A  lively  change  from  the  narrative  to 
direct  address. 

15.  Went  abroad  (Sirjp'xero).  At,a,  throughout  the  region. 
"Wye,  the  word  walked  ahout. 

Came  together  {avvrjp'^ovTo).  Imperfect.  ICept  coming 
together,  or  were  coming. 

To  be  healed  {^epwjrevea-^ai).  Originally,  to  ie  an  attend- 
ant, to  do  service;  and  therefore  of  a  physician,  to  attend  upon, 
or  treat  medically.  In  classical  writers  it  has  also  the  mean- 
ing to  heal,  as  undoubtedly  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  Luke 
(xiii.  14 ;  Acts  iv.  14,  etc.).  See  on  Matt.  viii.  7,  and  compare 
Idofiai,  to  heal,  in  ver.  17. 

Infirmities  {cuy^eveimv).  A  strictly  literal  rendering ;  a,  »^o^> 
and  <tMvo<;,  strength,  exactly  answering  to  the  Latin  in,  not,  and 
prmus,  strong. 

16.  Withdrew  (^vi)7ro;y;(»/)wi/).  The  participle  with  the  imper- 
fect of  the  finite  verb  denoting  something  in  progress,  and  thus 
corresponding  to  the  imperfect  in  ver.  15.  The  multitudes 
were  corm/ng  together,  but  he  was  engaged  in  retirement  and 
prayer,  so  that  he  was  inaccessible.  The  word  occurs  only  in 
Luke,  the  usual  New  Testament  word  for  withdraw  being  ava- 
X<»/3ea).     See  Matt.  ii.  12  ;  xii.  15  ;  Mark  iii.  7. 

17-26.  Compare  Mark  ii.  1-12. 


302  WORD  STUDIES   BT  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

17.  He  was  teaching.  The  pronoun  has  a  slightly  emphatic 
force :  he  as  distinguished  from  the  Pharisees  and  teachers  of 
the  law. 

Doctors  of  the  law  (vo/iohSda-KaXoi).  Only  in  Luke  and 
1  Tim.  i.  7.  Luke  often  uses  vofUKO';,  conversant  with  the  law, 
but  in  the  other  word  the  element  of  teaching  is  emphasized, 
probably  in  intentional  contrast  with  Christ's  teaching. 

Judaea  and  Jerusalem.  The  Rabbinical  writers  divided 
Judaea  proper  into  three  parts — mountain,  sea-shore,  and  valley 
— Jerusalem  being  regarded  as  a  separate  district.  "  Only  one 
intimately  acquainted  with  the  state  of  matters  at  the  time, 
would,  with  the  Rabbis,  have  distinguished  Jerusalem  as  a  dis- 
trict separate  from  all  the  rest  of  Judaea,  as  Luke  markedly 
does  on  several  occasions  (Acts  i.  8  ;  x.  39)  "  (Edersheim,  "  Jew- 
ish Social  Life"). 

Was  present  to  heal  them.  The  A.  V.  follows  the  read- 
ing, avTov'i,  them  ^  i.e.,  the  sufferers  who  were  present,  referring 
back  to  ver.  15.  The  best  texts,  however,  read  ahrbv,  him,, 
referring  to  Christ,  and  meaning  was  present  that  he  should 
heal ;  i.e.,  in  aid  of  his  healing.     So  Rev. 

18.  Taken  with  a  palsy  {irapaXeKufiivo^).  Rev.,  more 
neatly,  palsied.  Whenever  Luke  mentions  this  disease,  he 
uses  the  verb  and  not  the  adjective  irapaXvTiKO'i,  paralytic 
(as  Matt.  iv.  24 ;  viii.  6  ;  Mark  ii.  3-10 ;  compare  Acts  viii. 
7 ;  ix.  33) ;  his  usage  in  this  respect  being  in  strict  accord 
with  that  of  medical  writers. 

19.  Tiles.     Wye.  has  sclattis,  slates. 

Couch  (/tXti/tSiw).  Luke  uses  four  words  for  the  beds  of  the 
sick :  kXIvt),  as  ver.  18,  the  general  word  for  a  bed  or  couch ; 
Kpd^PaTo<i  (Acts  V.  15 ;  ix.  33),  a  rude  pallet  (see  on  Mark  ii. 
4) ;  kXiviBiov,  a  small  couch  or  litter,  as  here,  a  couch  so  light 
that  a  woman   could   lift  and  carry  it  away.     Thus,  in  the 


Ch.  v.]  LUKE.  303 

"Lysistrata"  of  Aristophanes,  916, Myrrine  says  :  "Come  now, 
let  me  carry  our  conch  "  (icXivihov).  The  fourth  term,  KKivdpiov 
(Acts  V.  15),  cannot  be  accurately  distinguished  from  the  last. 
The  last  two  are  peculiar  to  Luke. 

Into  the  midst  before  Jesus.     See  on  Mark  ii.  4. 

21.  To  reason.  See  on  Mark  ii.  6.  Tlie  words  who  is  this 
that  s^eaketh  hlasphemy,  form  an  iambic  verse  in  the  Greek. 

22.  Perceived.     See  on  Mark  ii.  8. 

23.  Wall<  {irepiirdTeC).     Lit.,  walJc  about. 

24.  Unto  thee  (o-ot).  Standing  first  for  emphasis.  Luke 
emphasizes  the  direct  address  to  the  man :  unto  thee  I  say,  in 
contrast  with  the  apparently  less  direct,  thy  sins  he  forgiwen 
thee.  In  Jesus'  mind  the  connection  between  the  sins  and  the 
man's  personal  condition  was  assumed  ;  now  he  brings  out  the 
personal  side  of  the  connection.  In  forgiving  the  man's  sins 
he  had  healed  him  radically.  The  command  to  rise  and  walk 
was  of  the  same  piece. 

26.  They  were  all  amazed  {eKo-raa-K  eka^ev  a'Kavra';).  Lit., 
amMzement  tooh  hold  on  all,  as  Kev.  On  eKcrraa-K,  amazement, 
see  on  Mark  v.  42. 

Strange  things  {-TrapaSo^a).  From  irapd,  contrary  to,  and 
Bo^a,  opinion.  Something  contrary  to  received  opinion,  and 
hence  strange.  Compare  the  English  paradox.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament. 

27,  28.  Compare  Matt.  ix.  9  ;  Mark  ii.  13,  14. 

27.  He  saw  (eSeda-aTo).  Better,  as  Kev.,  beheld,  since  the 
verb  denotes  looking  attentively.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  7. 

A  publican.     See  on  ch.  iii.  12. 


304  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

Receipt  of  custom.     See  on  Matt.  ix.  9. 

28.  He  followed  (?;«oXov.&6t).  Imperfect.  Re  began  to  M- 
low,  and  continued  following. 

29-39.  Compare  Matt.  ix.  10-17 ;  Mark  ii.  16-22. 

29.  Feast  {^oxvv).  Only  here  and  ch.  xiv.  13.  From  the 
same  root  as  8e^o/u.at,  to  receime.     A  reception. 

31.  They  that  are  whole  (ot  v-^iaLvovTei).  Both  Matthew 
and  Mark  use  IcrxvovTe';,  the  strong.  This  use  of  the  verb  in 
its  primary  sense,  to  he  in  sound  health,  is  found  in  Luke  vii. 
10 ;  XV.  27  ;  and  once  in  John,  3  Ep.  ver.  2.  For  this  meaning 
it  is  the  regular  word  in  medical  writings.  Paul  uses  it  only  in 
the  metaphorical  sense  :  sound  doctrine,  sound  words,  sov/nd  in 
faith,  etc.     See  1  Tim.  i.  10  ;  vi.  3  ;  Tit.  i.  13,  etc. 

33.  Often  {irvKva).  Only  here,  Acts  xxiv.  26  ;  1  Tim.  v.  23. 
The  word  literally  means  close-paohed,  as  a  thicket,  or  the 
plumage  of  a  bird. 

Prayers  (Sej^o-et?).  Used  by  no  other  evangelist.  From 
hkofiai,  to  want,  and  hence  distinctively  of  petitionary  prayer. 
In  classical  Greek  the  word  is  not  restricted  to  sacred  uses,  but 
is  employed  of  requests  preferred  to  men.  Rev.,  more  correctly, 
supplications. 

34.  Children  of  the  bride-chamber.  Better,  as  Kev.,  sons 
(vioix;).     See  on  Mark  ii.  19. 

35.  But  the  days  will  come  when,  etc.  {iXeva-ovrai  Be 
rjfjbipai  Ka\  orav).  The  A.  Y.  follows  a  reading  which  omits 
Kot,  and,  which  is  inserted  in  all  the  best  texts.  The  thought 
is  broken  off.  "  The  days  shall  come — and  when  the  bride- 
groom shall  be  taken  away,  then  shall  they  fast."     So  Rev. 

36.  A  parable.  "  From  a  garment  and  from  wine,  especially 
appropriate  at  a  banquet "  (Bengel). 


Ch.  VI.]  LUKE.  305 

Putteth  a  piece  of  a  new  garment  upon  an  old  (eVt- 
^rj/j,a  ifiariov  xaivov  eTn^dWei,  ivl  i/ji,dTiov  iraXaiov).  The 
best  texts,  however,  insert  ff'xJ.aa'i,  hamvng  rent,  which  directly 
governs  eVi/3Xi;/i.a,  piece ;  so  that  the  rendering  is,  No  man 
having  rent  a  piece  from,  a  new  garment,  putteth  it,  etc.  So 
Eev.,  No  man  rendeth  a  piece  and  putteth.  Both  Matthew 
and  Mark  have  cloth  instead  of  garment,  hy  the  use  of  which 
latter  term  "  the  incongruity  of  the  proceeding  comes  more 
strongly  into  prominence "  (Meyer).  'EircpKruia,  a  piece,  is, 
literally,  a  patch,  from  eV/,  upon,  and  ^dWa,  to  throw :  some- 
thing clapped  on.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  here,  e-jn^dXKei, 
putteth  upon. 

The  new  maketh  a  rent  (to  kmvov  o-^^t^et).  The  best  texts 
read  a-)(^i<T6t,,  will  rend,  governing  the  new,  instead  of  being 
used  intransitively.     Kender,  as  Rev.,  Me  will  rend  the  new. 

Agreeth  not(ovo-i;/;t^a)m).  The  best  texts  read  o-u/i^avT^o-et, 
the  future  ;  will  ')wt  agree.     So  Kev. 

In  Matthew  and  Mark  there  is  only  a  single  damage,  that, 
namely,  to  the  old  garment,  the  rent  in  which  is  enlarged.  In 
Luke  the  damage  is  twofold  ;  first,  in  injuring  the  new  garment 
by  cutting  out  a  piece  ;  and  second,  in  making  the  old  garment 
appear  patched,  instead  of  widening  the  rent,  as  in  Matthew 
and  Mark. 

37.  Bottles  (aff/eoii?).    "^Je^ :,  wvne-shvm.    See  on  Matt.  ix.  17. 

39.  Better  (^pv^TOTepot!).  The  best  texts  read  ^piyo-ro?, 
good.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  30. 


CHAPTER   YI. 

1-5.  Compare  Matt.  xii.  1-8  ;  Mark  ii.  23-28. 

1.  The  second  after  the  first  (SevrepoTrpcoTq)).     Only  here 
in  New  Testament.     Many  high  authorities  omit  it,  and  its 
exact  meaning  cannot  be  determined.     Rev.  omits. 
20 


306  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

Went  through  {BiaTropeveaBai).  Rev.,  was  going.  Com- 
pare vapa-n-opevea-S^ai,,  went  along  ieside — Mark  ii.  23. 

Cornfields.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  1. 

Plucked  (eTtXKov).  Imperfect;  werepkicking,  as  they  walked. 
In  classical  Greek  the  word  is  used  mostly  of  pulling  out  hair  or 
feathers.     See  on  Mark  ii.  23. 

Did  eat  (ija-Siov).     Imperfect,  were  eating. 

Rubbing  {^d>xovTe<i).     The  verb  means  to  rub  small. 

•  2.  Not  lawful.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  2. 

3.  Have  ye  not  read  (ouSe  ai'e^z'WTe)  ?  The  A.  V.  misses 
the  force  of  o^Se:  "have  ye  not  so  much  as  read?"  Rev., 
"  have  ye  not  read  even  this  ? " 

4.  Did  take.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

The  shew-bread.     See  on  Mark  ii.  26. 

5.  Lord  of  the  Sabbath.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  6. 
6-11.  Compare  Matt.  xii.  9-14";  Mark  iii.  1-6. 

6.  His  right  hand  {fi  '^elp  avrov  r)  Be^ia).  A  very  precise 
mode  of  statement.  Lit.,  his  hand  the  right  one.  Luke  only 
specifies  which  hand  was  withered.  This  accuracy  is  profes- 
sional. Ancient  medical  writers  always  state  whether  the 
right  or  the  left  member  is  affected. 

Withered.     See  on  Mark  iii.  1. 

7.  They  watched  {-rrapeTripovvTo).  Imperfect.  They  kept 
watching.     See  on  Mark  iii.  2. 


Ch.  VI.  ]  LUKE.  307 

He  would  heal  {Sepaireva-ei,).  So  Rev.  Some  authorities, 
however,  read  ^e/aoTreuet,  "  whether  he  is  healing."  This  may 
mean  either  "  whether  it  is  his  habit  to  heal,"  which  is  far- 
fetched, or  "  whethei'  he  is  actually  healing." 

Find.  Peculiar  to  Luke,  and  emphasizing  the  eagerness  of 
the  Pharisees  to  discover  a  ground  of  accusation. 

8.  He  knew  (^Set).     Imperfect.     He  was  all  along  aware. 
Thoughts  {BiaKojKr/Moiis:)     See  on  Jas.  ii.  4 ;  Matt.  xv.  19. 

9.  I  will  ask(eVe/)Q)T»;(7<B).  Peculiar  to  Luke's  narrative.  The 
best  texts  read  ivepcDTw,  the  present  tense,  /  ask.     So  Rev. 

Life  {"^vxvv)-  Better  as  Rev.,  a  life.  Though  the  question 
is  a  general  one,  it  carries  a  hint  of  an  indi/oidual  life  thrown 
into  it  by  the  special  case  at  hand.  See  on  Mark  xii.  30.  Wye, 
to  maTce  a  soul  safe. 

10.  Thy  hand.     The  arm  was  not  withered. 

11.  They  were  filled  with  madness.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 
"Avoia,  ma3ness,  is,  properly,  wam,t  of  understamdvng.  The  word 
thus  implies  senseless  rage,  as  distinguished  from  intelligent  in- 
dignation. 

12-16.  Compare  Matt.  x.  2-4  ;  Mark  iii.  13-19. 

12.  A  mountain  {to  6po<s).  The  article  denotes  a  familiar 
place.     Rev.,  rightly,  the  mountain. 

Continued  ail  night  {rjv  SvawKTepevav).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Used  in  medical  language.  The  all-night  prayer 
is  peculiar  to  Luke's  narrative. 

13.  Chose  (e'/cXefayttew?).  Mark  has  ewolTjo-ev,  he  made  or 
constituted. 


308  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

He  named  apostles.    Peculiar  to  Luke. 

14.  On  the  order  of  the  names,  see  on  Mark  iii.  17. 
Andrew.     See  on  Mark  iii.  18. 

James  and  John.     See  on  Mark  iii.  17. 

Philip  and  Bartholomew.     See  on  Mark  iii.  18. 

15.  Matthew.     See  on  Superscription  of  Matthew. 

Thomas.     See  on  Mark  iii.  18. 

Simon.  Distinguished  by  Matthew  and  Mark  as  the  Ccman' 
aean.     See  on  Matt.  x.  4 ;  Mark  iii.  18. 

16.  Judas.     See  on  Thaddaeus,  Mark  iii.  18. 
Judas  Iscariot.     See  on  Matt.  x.  4. 

17.  In  the  plain  (eVi  roirov  irehivov).  There  is  no  article. 
More  literally,  and  better,  as  Eev.,  in  a  plain  or  level  place. 
There  is  a  discrepancy  in  the  two  narratives.  Matthew  says 
he  went  wp  into  the  mountain  and  sat  down.  Yy.  17-19  are 
peculiar  to  Luke. 

Judaea  and  Jerusalem.     See  on  ch.  v.  17. 

18.  Vexed  (o'xXovfievoi).  The  best  texts  read  ivo'x\ov/j,evoi, 
occurring  only  here  and  Heb.  xii.  15.  From  o)(\o<;,  a  crowd  or 
moh,  with  the  idea  of  want  of  arrangement  and  discipline,  and 
therefore  of  confusion  and  tumult.  Hence  it  is  applied  to  the 
noise  and  tumult  of  a  crowd,  and  so  passes  into  the  sense  of  the 
trouble  and  annoyance  caused  by  these,  and  of  trouble  generally, 
like  the  Latin  turiae.  Thus  Herodotus  says  of  Croesus,  when 
on  the  funeral-pile  he  uttered  the  name  of  Solon,  and  the  inter- 
preters begged  him  to  explain  what  he  meant,  "  and  as  they 


Ch.  VI.]  LTJKE.  309 

pressed  for  an  answer  and  grew  troublesome  {koX  o'xkov  vape- 
Xovrmv) " — I.,  86.  Frequent  in  medical  language.  Thus  Hip- 
pocrates, "  troubled  {ivaxXovfiivq))  with  a  spasm  or  tetanus." 

19.  Sought— went  out  {i^rtTow—i^i^pxeTo).  Both  imper- 
fects. The  A.  V.  and  Eev.  lose  in  vividness  by  not  rendering 
them  accordingly.  The  multitudes  were  all  the  while  seeking  to 
touch  him,  for  virtue  was  going  out  of  him. 

Healed  (taro).  Compare  Matt.  xiv.  36  ;  Mark  vi.  56,  where 
hieam^aav,  were  thoroughly  sawed,  and  iawi^ovro,  were  samed,  are 
used.  Luke  is  more  technical,  using  the  strictly  medical  term, 
which  occurs  twenty-eight  times  in  the  New  Testament,  seven- 
teen of  these  in  Luke.  Luke  also  uses  the  two  words  employed 
by  Matthew  and  Mark,  but  always  with  some  addition  showing 
the  nature  of  the  saving.  Thus  Luke  vii.  3,  where  Siacroxj-ri  (A. 
Y.,  heal)  is  explained  by  ver.  7,  laS^aerai,  the  technical  word, 
shall  be  healed,  and  by  ver.  10,  "found  the  servant  whole  (vyi- 
aivovra,  another  professional  word — see  on  ch.  v.  31)  that  had 
been  sick."  Compare,  also,  Luke  viii.  35,  36,  44, 47, 48.  Medi- 
cal writers  do  not  use  am^etv  or  Siacrda^etv,  to  save,  as  equivalent 
to  IdcrS-ai,  to  heal,  but  in  the  sense  of  escaping  from  a  severe  ill- 
ness or  from  some  calamity.  Luke  employs  it  in  this  sense — 
Acts  xxvii.  44 ;  xxviii.  1. 


The  Seemon  on  the  Motoit. 
20-49.  Compare  Matt.  v.  1  to  viii.  1. 

20.  Lifted  up  his  eyes.  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Compare  he 
opened  his  mouth  (Matt.  v.  1).  Both  indicate  a  solemn  and  im- 
pressive opening  of  a  discourse. 

Blessed.     See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

Ye  poor.  See  on  Matt.  v.  3.  Luke  adopts  the  style  of  di- 
rect address ;  Matthew  of  abstract  statement. 


310  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI. 

Kingdom  of  God  {rj  ^aatXela  rov  S^eov).  Matthew  has  kinff- 
dom  of  heaven,  or  of  the  heavens  {r&v  ovpavwv),  a  phrase  used 
by  him  only,  and  most  frequently  employed  by  Christ  himself 
to  describe  the  kingdom ;  though  Matthew  also  uses,  less  fre- 
quently, kingdom  of  God.  The  two  are  substantially  equiva- 
lent terms,  though  the  pre-eminent  title  was  hingdom  of  God, 
since  it  was  expected  to  be  fully  realized  in  the  Messianic  era, 
when  God  should  take  upon  himself  the  kingdom  by  a  visible 
representative.  Compare  Isa.  xl.  9,  "  Behold  your  God.''''  The 
phrase  hingdom  of  Heaven  was  common  in  the  Rabbinical  writ- 
ings, and  had  a  double  signification:  the  historical  kingdom 
and  the  spiritual  and  moral  kingdom.  They  very  often  under- 
stood by  it  divine  worship ;  adoration  of  God,'  the  sum  of 
religious  duties  ;  but  also  the  Messianic  kingdom. 

The  kingdom  of  God  is,  essentially,  the  absolute  dominion  of 
God  in  the  universe,  both  in  a  physical  and  a  spiritual  sense. 
It  is  "  an  organic  commonwealth  which  has  the  principle  of  its 
existence  in  the  will  of  God  "  (Tholuck).  It  was  foreshadowed 
in  the  Jewish  theocracy.  The  idea  of  the  kingdom  advanced 
toward  clearer  definition  from  Jacob's  prophecy  of  the  Prince 
out  of  Judah  (Gen.  xlix.  10),  through  David's  prophecy  of  the 
everlasting  kingdom  and  the  king  of  righteousness  and  peace 
(Ps.  xxii.,  Ixxii.),  through  Isaiah,  until,  in  Daniel,  its  eternity 
and  superiority  over  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  brought 
strongly  out.  For  this  kingdom  Israel  looked  with  longing,  ex- 
pecting its  realization  in  the  Messiah  ;  and  while  the  common 
idea  of  the  people  was  narrow,  sectarian,  Jewish,  and  political, 
yet  "  there  was  among  the  people  a  certain  consciousness  that 
the  principle  itself  was  of  universal  application  "  (Tholuck).  In 
Daniel  this  conception  is  distinctly  expressed  (vii.  14^27 ;  iv.  25  ; 
ii.  44).     In  this  sense  it  was  apprehended  by  John  the  Baptist. 

The  ideal  kingdom  is  to  be  realized  in  the  absolute  rule  of  the 
eternal  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  all  things  are  made  and  con- 
sist (John  i.  3 ;  Col.  i.  16-20),  whose  life  of  perfect  obedience  to 
God  and  whose  sacrificial  offering  of  love  upon  the  cross  reveal  to 
men  their  true  relation  to  God,  and  whose  spirit  works  to  bring 
them  into  this  relation.  The  ultimate  idea  of  the  kino-dom  is 
that  of  "  a  redeemed  humanity,  with  its  divinely  revealed  destiny 


Ch.  VI.]  LUKE.  311 

manifesting  itself  in  a  religious  communion,  or  the  Ohv/rch  ;  a 
social  communion,  or  the  state  ;  and  an  aes^AeiSic  communion,  ex- 
pressing itself  in  forms  of  knowledge  and  art." 

This  kingdom  is  \,oXh.  present  (Matt.  xi.  12;  xii.  28;  xvi.  19; 
Luke  xi.  20  ;  xvi.  16 ;  xvii.  21 ;  see,  also,  the  parables  of  the 
Sower,  the  Tares,  the  Leaven,  and  the  Drag-net ;  and  compare 
the  expression  "  theirs,  or  yours,  is  the  kingdom,"  Matt.  v.  3 
Luke  vi.  20)  and  future  (Dan.  vii.  27 ;  Matt.  xiii.  43 ;  xix.  28 
XXV.  34 ;  xxvi.  29  ;  Mark  ix.  47 ;  2  Pet.  i.  11 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9 
Apoc.  XX.  sq.).  As  a  present  kingdom  it  is  incomplete  and  in 
process  of  development.  It  is  expanding  in  society  like  the 
grain  of  mustard  seed  (Matt.  xiii.  31,  32) ;  working  toward  the 
pervasion  of  society  like  the  leaven  in  the  lump  (Matt.  xiii.  33). 
God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  and  the 
Gospel  of  Christ  is  the  great  instrument  in  that  process  (2  Cor. 
V.  19,  20).  The  kingdom  develops  from  within  outward  under 
the  power  of  its  essential  divine  energy  and  law  of  growth, 
which  insures  its  progress  and  final  triumph  against  all  ob- 
stacles. Similarly,  its  work  in  reconciling  and  subjecting  the 
world  to  God  begins  at  the  fountain-head  of  man's  life,  by  im- 
planting in  his  heart  its  own  divine  potency,  and  thus  giving 
a  divine  impulse  and  direction  to  the  whole  man,  rather  than 
by  moulding  him  from  without  by  a  moral  code.  The  law  ia 
written  in  his  heart.  In  like  manner  the  State  and  the  Church 
are  shaped,  not  by  external  pressure,  like  the  Roman  empire 
and  the  Romish  hierarchy,  but  by  the  evolution  of  holy  char- 
acter in  men.  The  kingdom  of  God  in  its  present  develop- 
ment is  not  identical  with  the  Church.  It  is  a  larger  movement 
which  includes  the  Church.  The  Church  is  identified  with  the 
kingdom  to  the  degree  in  which  it  is  under  the  power  of  the 
spirit  of  Christ.  "  As  the  Old  Testament  kingdom  of  God  was 
perfected  and  completed  when  it  ceased  to  be  external,  and  be- 
came internal  by  being  enthroned  in  the  heart,  so,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  perfection  of  the  New  Testament  kingdom  will  con- 
sist in  its  complete  incarnation  and  externalization ;  that  is, 
when  it  shall  attain  an  outward  manifestation,  adequately  ex- 
pressing, exactly  corresponding  to  its  internal  principle  "  (Tho- 
luck).     The  consummation  is  described  in  Apoc.  xxi.,  xxii. 


312  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

21.  Now.     Peculiar  to  Lnke. 

Shall  be  filled.     See  on  Matt.  v.  6. 

Weep  (/eXat'oi'Te?).  Strictly,  to  weep  audibly.  See  on  irev- 
3^ovvTe<;,  mourn,  Matt.  v.  4. 

Laugh  (jeXda-ere).     Matthew,  shall  be  comforted. 

22.  Compare  Matt.  v.  11. 

Son  of  Man.  The  phrase  is  employed  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  a  circumlocution  for  man,  with  special  reference  to  his 
frailty  as  contrasted  with  God  (Num.  xxiii.  19  ;  Ps.  viii.  4 ;  Job 
XXV.  6 ;  XXXV.  8  ;  and  eighty-nine  times  in  Ezekiel).  It  had 
also  a  Messianic  meaning  (Dan.  vii.  13  sq.),  to  which  our  Lord 
referred  in  Matt.  xxiv.  30;  xxvi.  64.  It  was  the  title  which 
Christ  most  frequently'  applied  to  himself ;  and  there  are  but 
two  instances  in  which  it  is  applied  to  him  by  another,  ^iz.,  by 
Stephen  (Acts  vii.  66)  and  by  John  (Apoc.  i.  13 ;  xiv.  14) ;  and 
when  acquiescing  in  the  title  "  Son  of  God,"  addressed  to  him- 
self, he  sometimes  immediately  after  substitutes  "  Son  of  Man  " 
(John  i.  50,  52 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64). 

The  title  asserts  Christ's  humanity — his  absolute  identifica- 
tion with  our  race :  "  his  having  a  genuine  humanity  which 
could  deem  nothing  human  strange,  and  could  be  touched  with 
a  feeling  of  the  infirmities  of  the  race  which  he  was  to  judge  " 
(Liddon,  "  Our  Lord's  Divinity  ").  It  also  exalts  him  as  the 
representative  ideal  man.  "  All  human  history  tends  to  liim 
and  radiates  from  him ;  he  is  the  point  in  which  humanity  finds 
its  unity  ;  as  St.  Irenaeus  says,  '  He  recapitulates  it.'  He  closes 
the  earlier  history  of  our  race;  he  inaugurates  its  future. 
Nothing  local,  transient,  individualizing,  national,  sectarian 
dwarfs  the  proportions  of  his  world-embracing  character.  He 
rises  above  the  parentage,  the  blood,  the  narrow  horizon  which 
bounded,  as  it  seemed,  his  human  life.  He  is  the  archetypal 
man,  in  whose  presence  distinction  of  race,  intervals  of  ages, 
types  of  civilization,  degrees  of  mental  culture  are  as  nothing  " 
(Liddon). 


Ch.  VI.]  LUKE.  313 

But  the  title  means  more.  As  Son  of  Man  he  asserts  the 
authority  of  judgment  over  all  flesh.  By  virtue  of  what  he  is 
as  Son  of  Man,  he  must  be  more.  "  The  absolute  relation  to 
the  world  which  he  attributes  to  himself  demands  an  absolute 
relation  to  God.  .  .  .  He  is  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Lord  of 
the  world,  the  Judge,  only  because  he  is  the  Son  of  God" 
(Luthardt).  Christ's  humanity  can  be  explained  only  by  his 
divinity.  A  humanity  so  unique  demands  a  solution.  Divested 
of  all  that  is  popularly  called  miraculous,  viewed  simply  as  a 
man,  under  the  historical  conditions  of  his  life,  he  is  a  greater 
miracle  than  all  his  miracles  combined.  The  solution  is  ex- 
pressed in  Heb.  i. 

23.  Leap  for  joy  (crKipTija-aTe).  See  ch.  i.  41, 44.  Compare 
Matthew,  he  exceeding  glad  {ar/aXXidaSe :  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  6). 

Their  fathers.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

24.  Woe.     These  woes  are  not  noted  by  Matthew. 

Have  received  (airixeTe).  In  Matt.  vi.  5,  16,  the  Eev.  has 
properly  changed  "  t/iey  have  their  reward  "  to  "  tkey  have  re- 
ceived." The  verb,  compounded  of  aTro,  off  or  jTrom,  and  e'x^eo, 
to  have,  literally  means  to  have  nothing  left  to  desire.  Thus  in 
Philip,  iv.  18,  when  Paul  says,  "/  have  all  things  {airi'xm 
TravTo),"  he  does  not  mean  merely  an  acknowledgment  of  the 
receipt  of  the  Church's  gift,  but  that  he  is  fully  furnished.  "  I 
have  all  things  to  the  full." 

Consolation  {■7rapdK\ii<n<;).  From  irapd,  to  the  side  of,  and 
KohJkw,  to  call  or  summon.  Literally,  a  calling  to  one's  side  to 
help ;  and  therefore  entreaty,  passing  on  into  the  sense  of  ex- 
hortation, and  thence  into  that  of  consolatory  exhortation  ;  and 
so  coming  round  to  mean  that  which  one  is  summoned  to  give 
to  a  sUjppUant — consolation.  Thus  it  embodies  the  call  for 
help,  and  the  response  to  the  call.  Its  use  corresponds  with  that 
of  the  kindred  verb  irapaKoKew,  to  exhort  or  console.  In  its 
original  sense  of  callmgfor  add  the  noun  appears  in  the  New 


314  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  IfBW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI. 

Testament  only  in  2  Cor.  viii.  4 :  with  tnuch  entreaty.  The 
verb  appears  frequently  in  this  sense,  rendered  ieseech,  jpray 
(Matt.  viii.  34 ;  xiv.  36  ;  Mark  i.  40 ;  v.  12,  etc.).  In  the  sense 
of  consolation  or  comfort  the  noun  occurs  in  Luke  ii.  25 ;  vi.  24  ; 
2  Cor.  i.  3 ;  vii.  4 ;  Philem.  7.  The  verb,  in  Matt.  ii.  18 ;  v.  4  ; 
Luke  xvi.  25  ;  2  Cor.  i.  4.  In  some  instances,  however,  the 
meaning  wavers  between  console  and  exhort.  In  the  sense  of 
exhortation  or  counsel,  the  noun  may  be  found  in  Acts  xiii.  15  ; 
E.om.  xii.  8  ;  Heb.  xiii.  22.  The  verb,  in  Acts  ii.  40 ;  xi.  23 ; 
xiv.  22  ;  Eom.  xii.  8 ;  Tit.  ii.  15.  Neither  the  noun  nor  the 
verb  appear  in  the  writings  of  John,  but  the  kindred  word 
Trapa.KXrjro'i,  the  Paraclete.,  Comforter,  or  Advocate,  is  peculiar  to 
him.  On  this  word,  see  on  John  xiv.  16.  It  should  be  noted, 
however,  that  the  word  comfort  goes  deeper  than  its  popular 
conception  of  soothing.  It  is  from  the  later  Latin  confortare, 
to  mahe  strong.  Thus  "Wycliffe  renders  Luke  i.  80,  "  the  child 
waxed,  and  was  comforted  in  spirit "  (A.  V.,  waxed  stronf) ;  and 
Tyndale,  Luke  xxii.  43,  "  there  appeared  an  angel  from  heaven 
comforting  him  "  (A.  Y.,  strengthening).  The  comfort  which 
Christ  gives  is  not  always  soothing.  The  Holy  Spirit,  the  Com- 
forter, is  to  convince  of  sin  and  oi  judgment.  Underlying  the 
word  is  the  sense  of  a  wise  counsel  or  admonition  which  rouses 
and  braces  the  moral  nature  and  encourages  and  strengthens  it 
to  do  and  to  endure.  When,  therefore,  Christ  says  "  they  that 
mourn  shall  be  comforted,"  he  speaks  in  recognition  of  the  fact 
that  all  sorrow  is  the  outcome  of  sin,  and  that  true  comfort  is 
given,  not  only  in  pardon  for  the  past,  but  in  strength  to  fight 
and  resist  and  overcome  sin.  The  atmosphere  of  the  word,  in 
short,  is  not  the  atmosphere  of  the  sick-chamber,  but  the  tonic 
breath  of  the  open  world,  of  moral  struggle  and  victory ;  the 
atmosphere  for  him  that  climbs  and  toils  and  fights. 

25.  Mourn  and   weep  {jrev^a-ere  xal  Kkavaere).     See  on 
Matt.  V.  4. 

26.  Well  («a\a)s).     Handsomely,  fairly. 

27.  Which  hear.     "With  the  sense  of  hearing  in  order  to 
heed :  giving  heed.     Compare  Matt.  xi.  15. 


Ch.  VI.]  LtTKE.  315 

29.  Cheek  [a-iayovd).  Lit.,  the  jaw.  The  cheek  is  irapeid. 
The  blow  intended  is  not,  therefore,  a  mere  slap,  but  a  heavy 
blow  ;  an  act  of  violence  rather  than  of  contempt. . 

Taketh  away  (alpovTo^).    Lit.,  taketh  up,  lifteth. 

Cloke — coat.     See  on  Matt.  v.  40. 

30.  Every  one.  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Augustine  remarks, 
"  omni  petenti,  non  om/nia  petenti ;  give  to  &oery  one  that  asks, 
but  not  everythi/ng  he  asks." 

Asketh  (aiTovvrt).  See  on  Matt.  xv.  23.  Compare  Matt. 
V.  42. 

Ask  again  {airaiTei).  Only  here  and  ch.  xii.  20.  Used  in 
medical  language  of  diseases  demanding  or  requiring  certain 
treatment. 

32.  What  thank  (TTota) «  "What  ki/ndoi  thanks  ?  Not  what 
is  your  reward,  but  what  is  its  quality  ?  On  thamk  (%a/3ts),  see 
on  ch.  i.  30. 

34.  Lend  (Sai/etfere).     Properly,  at  interest. 

Sinners  {oi  aiiapTwKol).  The  article  marks  them  as  a  class. 
So,  often  in  New  Testament,  as  when  classed  with  publicans. 

Love.  Not  <f)i\ova-i,  which  implies  an  instincti/oe,  affectionate 
attachment,  but  arfa-Kmaiv,  of  a  sentiment  based  on  judgment 
and  calculation,  which  selects  its  object  for  a  reason.  See, 
farther,  on  John  xsi.  15-17.  Tynd.,  the  very  sinners  love  thei/r' 
lovers. 

36.  Hoping  for  nothing  again  (jj/rihev  a,ire\m^ovTe<;).  A 
later  Greek  word,  only  here  in  New  Testament,  and  meaning 
originally  to  give  up  in  despair,  a  sense  which  is  adopted  by 
some  high  authorities,  and  by  Eev.,  nemer  despadring.     Luke 


316  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

was  familiar  with  this  sense  in  the  Septuagint.  Thus  Isa.  xxix. 
19,  "  The  poor  among  men  {oi  aTrrjXTriafievoi  r&v  avS^patvcov) 
shall  rejoice."  So  in  Apocrypha,  2  Mac.  ix.  18,  ^^  despairing  of 
his  health;  "  Judith  ix.  11,  "  A  saviour  of  them  that  are  with- 
out hope  {a-K't}K'Ki<Tyi.kv(ov)P  According  to  this,  the  sense  here 
is,  "  do  good  as  those  who  consider  nothing  as  lost."  The  verb 
and  its  kindred  adjective  are  used  by  medical  writers  to  describe 
desperate  cases  of  disease. 

Children  of  the  Highest  {vloX  ly^LaTov).  Eev.,  rightly,  sons. 
Compare  Matt.  v.  45,  48. 

Kind  {'xpTjcTTO'i).     See  on  Matt.  xi.  30. 

36.  Merciful  {oiKrlp/jiove^).     See  on  Jas.  v.  11. 

37.  Forgive  {a-TroXvere).  Lit.,  release.  So  Eev.,  Christ  ex- 
horts to  the  opposite  of  what  he  has  just  forbidden  :  "  do  not 
condemn,  but  release.''^     Compare  ch.  xxii.  68  ;  xxiii.  16,  17. 

38.  Pressed  down  (■n-eTriecTfiivov).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. A  common  medical  term  for  pressing  strongly  on  a 
part  of  the  body,  and  opposed  to  •y^aveiv,  to  touch  gently. 

Shaken  together,  running  over.  Bengel  says,  "Pressed 
down,  as  dry  articles  ;  shaken  together,  as  soft  goods  /  running 
over,  as  liquids."  But  this  is  fanciful  and  incorrect.  The 
allusion  in  every  case  is  to  a  dry  measure ;  and  the  climax  in  the 
three  participles  would  be  destroyed  by  Bengel's  interpretation. 

Bosom  {tov  KoXnrov).  The  gathered  fold  of  the  wide  upper 
garment,  bound  together  with  the  girdle,  and  thus  forming  a 
pouch.  In  the  Ea'stern  markets  at  this  day  vendors  may  be 
seen  pouring  the  contents  of  a  measure  into  the  bosom  of  a 
purchaser.  In  Euth  iii.  15,  Boaz  says  to  Euth,  "  Bring  thevail 
(the  mantle,  so  Eev.,  Old  Testament),  that  thou  hast  upon  thee, 
and  hold  it  (hold  it  open) :  and  he  measured  six  measures  of 
barley  into  it."     Compare  Isa.  Ixv.  7,  "  I  will  measure  their 


Ch.  VI.]  LUKE.  317 

former  work  into  their  iosom  ;  also  Jer.  xxxii.  18.  In  Acts 
xxvii.  39,  the  word  is  used  of  a  hay  in  a  beach,  forming  a  bend 
in  the  land  like  the  hollow  of  a  robe.  Similarly,  the  Latin 
sinus  means  both  the  hanging,  baggy  bosom  of  a  robe  and  a 
bay. 

39.  Can  the  blind  (/i.ijTiSwaTatTU(^\o?)?  The  interrogative 
particle  expects  a  negative  reply.     Surely  the  hlmd  cannot,  etc. 

Lead  {oSriyeiv).  Better,  guide,  as  Rev.,  since  the  word  com- 
bines the  ideas  of  leading  and  instructing. 

Shall  they  not  {ovxi.)  ?  Another  interrogative  particle,  this 
time  expecting  an  affirmative  answer. 

40.  Perfect  {KaTr]pri(Tfievo<;).  Rev.,  rendering  the  participle 
more  literally,  perfected.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  21.  The  word  sig- 
nifies to  readjust,  restore,  set  to  rights,  whether  in  a  physical  or 
a  moral  sense.  See  1  Cor.  i.  10,  where  Paiil  exhorts  to  he  per- 
fectly joined  together  {/caTrfpTia-fiivoi)  in  opposition  to  hein^ 
divided.  In  Gal.  vi.  1,  it  is  used  of  restoring  a  brother  taken 
in  a  fault.  Hence  the  meaning  to  ^er/%c^,  as  Eph.  iv.  12.  Used 
in  medical  language  of  setting  a  bone  or  joint. 

41.  Beholdest  (/8\e7ret?) — considerest  {KaTavoei<}) — mote 
(Kdp^o<i) — beam  (Sokov).     See  on  Matt.  vii.  3. 

42.  Brother.  "  Expressing  the  pretence  of  fraternal  duty. 
To  this  is  opposed  '  Thou  hypocrite ! ' "  (Behgel). 

Let  me  cast  out  (a^e?  eK^oKas)  with  a  studied  courtesy : 
allow  me  to  cast  out. 

See  clearly  to  cast  out.    See  on  Matt.  vii.  6. 

43.  A  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt  fruit  (oueVTiv 
SevBpov  KoKov,  iroiovv  Kapirov  aaTrpov).  Rev.,  more  correctly, 
there  is  no  good  tree  that  Iringeth,  etc.     Sairpop,  corrupt,  is  ety- 


318  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VL 

mologically  akin  to  o-j^ttm,  in  Jas.  v.  2  :  "  Tour  riches  are  cor- 
rujpUdP     The  word  means  rotten,  stale. 

Neither.  Eev.,  nor  ogam.  The  A.  V.  omits  agmn  {iraXiv, 
on  the  other  hand). 

44.  Bramble-bush  (0dTov.)  Matthew  has  rpi^oXuiv,  thistles. 
The  word  occurs  only  once  outside  of  Luke's  writings,  in  Mark 
xii.  26,  where  it  is  used  as  the  familiar  title  of  a  section  of  the 
Pentateuch.  Luke  also  uses  it  in  the  same  way  (xx.  37).  He 
was  doubtless  acquainted  with  it  medicinally,  as  it  was  exten- 
sively used  by  ancient  physicians.  Galen  has  a  chapter  on  its 
medicinal  uses,  and  the  medical  writings  abound  in  prescriptions 
of  which  it  is  an  ingredient.  Galen  also  has  a  saying  similar  to 
our  Lord's :  "  A  farmer  could  never  make  a  bramble  bear 
grapes."  It  is  the  word  employed  by  the  Septuagint  for  the  bush 
out  of  which  God  spoke  to  Moses. 

Grapes  {a-To^vXrjv),     Lit.,  a  cluster  of  grapes. 

45.  Evil.     See  on  Luke  iii.  19. 

47.  I  will  shew  you  to  whom  he  is  like.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 
See  on  Matt.  vii.  24. 

48.  Digged  deep  {ea-Ka^ev  Koi  e^d^vvev).  The  A.  Y.  re- 
gards the  two  words  as  a  strong  expression  of  a  single  idea ;  but 
the  idea  is  twofold  :  he  dnig  (through  the  sand),  and  deepened 
down  into  the  solid  rock.  So  Kev.,  rightly,  he  digged  and  went 
deep. 

The  flood  {Tr\r)fifivpa<;).  There  is  no  article :  ajlood.  The 
word  occurs  in  Luke  only,  and  only  in  this  passage.  As  a  med- 
ical term  it  is  used  of  excess  of  fluids  in  the  body :  jloodvag. 

Beat  vehemently  (TTpocre/J^iy^ei').  Eev.,  more  literally,  J^-a^iS. 
Used  by  physicians  of  a  rupture  of  the  veins.  It  occurs  only 
here  and  ver.  49.     Matthew  has  irpoakKo-^av.,  heat. 


Ch.  vn.]  LUKE.  319 

49.  Upon  the  earth  without  a  foundation.  Matthew,  upon 
the  sand.  The  two  men  are  conceived  as  alike  selecting  a  spot 
where  the  sand  overlies  the  rock.  The  one  builds  directly  ppon 
the  sand,  the  other  digs  through  and  down  into  the  rock. 

It  fell  (eirea-ev).  But  the  best  texts  rea,d  a-vveirea-ev,  feU  to- 
gether, collapsed.  'Rev.,  fell  in.  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
In  medical  language  used  of  the  falling-in  of  parts  of  the  body. 
Thus  Hippocrates,  "  the  temples  fallen  m .'  the  limb  quickly 
collapses  or  shrivels.''^  Matthew  uses  the  simple  verb  eirea-ev, 
fell. 

Ruin  (Jnjyfia).  Lit.,  breaking.  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. A  medical  term  for  a  laceration  or  rupture.  Matthew 
has  7rTd)<Tt?,  the  fall. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

1-10.  Compare  Matt,  viii,  5-13. 

1.  Sayings  {prifjuna).     See  on  ch.  i.  37. 

In  the  ears  (e«  Ta<;  d,Koa<;).  Lit.,  into  the  ears.  See  on  ears, 
Luke  iv.  37. 

2.  Centurion  {eKarovTdpxov).  From  e/carov,  a  hundred,  and 
apx<^,  to  commamd.  Commander  of  a  hundred  men.  Mark 
uses  KevTvpiav,  a  Graecized  form  of  the  Latin  word  centwrio.  A 
centuria  was  originally  a  division  consisting  of  a  hundred  things 
of  a  kind ;  and  thence  came  to  mean  any  division,  whether  con- 
sisting of  a  hundred  or  not.  In  military  language  it  meant  a  di- 
vision of  troops,  a  company,  not  necessarily  of  a  hundred,  the 
captain  of  which  was  called  centurio.  The  numbers  of  a  cen-. 
tury  varied  from  about  fifty  to  a  hundred.  The  Eoman  legion 
consisted  of  ten  cohorts  or  a-irelpai,  bands,  as  "  the  Italian  band," 
of  which  Cornelius  was  a  centurion  (Acts  x.  1).  The  command- 
ers of  these  cohorts  were  called  chiliarchs,  or  chief  captains 


320  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VII. 

(John  xviii.  12,  Eev.).  Each  cohort  contained  six  centuries,  or 
companies,  of  which  the  commanders  were  called  centurions. 
The  duty  of  the  centurion  was  chiefly  confined  to  the  regulation 
of  his  own  corps,  and  the  care  of  the  watch.  The  badge  of  his 
office  was  the  viUs,  or  vine-stock.  He  wore  a  short  tunic,  and 
was  also  known  by  letters  on  the  crest  of  his  helmet.  Dean 
Howson  ("  Companions  of  St.  Paul ")  remarks  on  the  favorable 
impression  left  upon  the  mind  by  the  officers  of  the  Eoman  army 
mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,  and  cites,  besides  the  centu- 
rion in  this  passage,  the  one  at  the  cross,  and  Julius,  who  es- 
corted Paul  to  Rome.     See,  further,  on  Acts  x.  1. 

Servant  (SouXo?).  A  bond-servant.  Matthew  has  irah,  a 
servant,  which  occurs  also  at  ver.  7. 

Dear  {evTifio<;).  Lit.,  held  in  honor  or  value.  It  does  not 
necessarily  imply  an  affectionate  relation  between  the  master 
and  tlie  servant,  though  such  may  well  have  existed.  It  may 
mean  only  that  he  was  a  valuable  servant.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  4. 
In  this  case  Luke  omits  the  mention  of  the  disease,  which  is 
given  by  Matthew. 

Beseeching  {ipwT&v).  Too  strong.  Better  asking,  as  Kev. 
The  word  to  heseech  (irapaKaKeco)  occurs  in  the  next  verse.  See 
on  Matt.  XV.  23. 

Heal  {Siaa-tocTT)).     Better  as  Rev.,  san}e.     See  on  ch.  vi.  19. 

4.  They  besought  him  instantly  {irapeKoKow  a-TrovBaio)';). 
On  lesought,  see  on  ch.  vi.  24.  Instantly,  which  commonly 
means  at  once,  is  used  in  its  older  meaning,  jpressingly,  from  the 
Latin  instate,  to  urge  or  press  upon.  So  Rom.  xii.  12,  "  instant 
in  prayer."     Wye,  prayed  busily. 

That  he  was  worthy  {on  d^io';  eariv).  The  A.  V.  renders 
oTi,  as  a  conjunction,  that.  The  Rev.,  more  correctly,  takes  it 
as  a  mark  of  quotation,  besides  properly  rendering  icniv  is,  in- 
stead of  was.    Render  as  Rev.,  He  is  worthy  that  thou  shouldst 


Ch.  Vn.]  LUKE.  321 

do  this  ;  for  the  best  texts  read  Trape^y,  the  second  person,  thou 
shouldst  do,  instead  of  the  third  person,  Trape^ei,  he  shall  do. 

5.  He  hath  built  {avTo<i  wKoSo/irjo-ev).  Me  is  emphatic;  hvrn- 
self,  at  his  own  expense. 

A  synagogue  {rrjv  awar/wyriv).  The  article,  "the  syna- 
gogue," marks  the  particular  synagogue  which  these  elders 
represented.  Hence  Eev.,  rightly,  "  our  synagogue."  "  He 
did  not  merely  avoid  profaning  the  synagogue  "  (Bengel). 

6.  Went  (iiropeveTo).  The  imperfect  tense  is  explained  by 
what  follows.  He  was  going,  was  on  the  way,  when  he  was 
met  by  the  second  messenger  from  the  centurion. 

Friends.     Possibly  kinsmen,  not  elders  now. 

Trouble  {aKvKXov).  Lit.,  worry.  See  on  Matt.  ix.  36; 
Mark  v.  35. 

Worthy  (iKavo^).  Lit.,  sufficient.  Compare  Matt.  iii.  11, 
"  worthy  to  bear ; "  and  3  Cor.  iii.  5,  "  not  that  we  are  sufficient 
{iKavol),  but  our  sufficiency  {'iKavoTrj';)  is  of  God."  It  is  also 
used  in  the  sense  of  much,  many,  long.  See  ch.  vii.  12 ;  viii. 
27,  32 ;  XX.  9 ;  Acts  ix.  23. 

7.  Say  in  a  word.    Lit.,  "say  with  a  word." 

My  servant  shall  be  healed  (IoS^tw  6  irah  p,ov).  It  is 
strange  that  the  Eev.  should  have  omitted  to  note  the  impera- 
tive mood  here,  at  least  in  the  margin.  The  literal  rendering 
is  the  more  graphic :  Let  my  servami  le  healed.  Note  the  pro- 
fessional word  for  heal.     See  on  ch.  vi.  19. 

8.  Also.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  9. 

Set  under  authority  {vwo  i^ovaiav  ratraoiievo^).  It  is  not 
easy  to  render  the  exact  force  of  these  words.     The  sense  of 

21 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VH 

the  present  participle  with  the  verb  elfii,  I  am,  is  very  subtle. 
The  words  set  under  are  commonly  understood  to  m^^'o. placed 
in  a  subordinate  position  ;  but  this  would  be  more  accurately  ex- 
pressed by  the  perfect  participle,  reraryfievo^.  The  present  parti- 
ciple indicates  something  operating  daily,  and  the  centurion  is 
describing  not  his  appointed  position  so  much  as  his  daily  course 
of  life.  The  word  set  originally  means  arranged,  drawn  up  in 
order;  so  that  the  words  might  be  paraphrased  thus:  "I  am 
a  man  whose  daily  course  of  life  and  duty  is  appointed  and 
arranged  by  superior  authority."  The  centurion  speaks  in  a 
figure  which  is  well  explained  by  Alford :  "  1  know  how  to 
obey,  being  myself  under  authority ;  and  I  know  how  others 
obey,  having  soldiers  under  me.  If  then  I,  in  my  subordinate 
station  of  command,  am  obeyed,  how  much  more  thou,  who  art 
over  all,  and  whom  diseases  serve  as  their  Master."  Just  what 
estimate  of  Jesus  these  words  imply  we  cannot  say.  It  seems 
evident,  at  least,  that  the  centurion  regarded  him  as  more  than 
man.  If  that  be  so,  it  is  a  question  whether  the  word  man 
(av^pw'iro'i)  may  not  imply  more  than  is  commonly  assigned  to 
it.  Taking  the  Greek  words  in  their  order  they  may  read, 
"  For  I  also,  a  Tnan  (as  compared  with  thee),  am  set  under 
authority,  having  soldiers  under  myself.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  9. 

10.  Whole  (vyta'ivovTa).  See  on  ch.  v.  31.  The  best  texts 
omit  that  had  been  sick. 

11-17.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 

11.  The  day  after  (eV  ry  e^?).  Others  read  iv  res  ef^?,  soon 
after.     So  Rev.     Luke's  usage  favors  the  latter. 

Nain.  Mentioned  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible.  "On  the 
northern  slope  of  the  rugged  and  barren  ridge  of  Little  Hermon, 
immediately  west  of  Endor,  which  lies  in  a  further  recess  of 
the  same  range,  is  the  ruined  village  of  Nain.  No  convent,  no 
tradition  marks  the  spot.  But,  under  these  circumstances,  the 
name  alone  is  sufficient  to  guarantee  its  authenticity.  One  en- 
trance alone  it  could  have  had — that  which  opens  on  the  rough 


Ch.  VII.]  LUKE.  323 

hillside  in  its  downward  slope  to  the  plain.  It  mnst  have  been 
in  this  steep  descent,  as,  according  to  Eastern  custom,  they  '  car- 
ried out  the  dead  man,'  that,  '  nigh  to  the  gate '  of  the  village, 
the  bier  was  stopped,  and  the  long  procession  of  mourners  stayed, 
and  '  the  young  man  delivered  back  to  his  mother ' "  (Stanley, 
"  Sinai  and  Palestine  ").  "  It  is  in  striking  accord  with  the  one 
biblical  incident  in  the  history  of  Nain  that  renders  it  dear  to 
the  Christian  heart,  that  about  the  only  remains  of  antiquity 
are  tombs.  These  are  cut  in  the  rock,  and  are  situated  on  the 
hillside  to  the  east  of  the  village  "  (Thomson,  "  Land  and  Book  "). 

12.  Carried  out.     The  tombs  were  outside  of  the  city. 

13.  The  Lord.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  3. 

Saw  her.  Edersheim  says,  "  Had  it  been  in  Judaea,  the  hired 
mourners  and  musicians  would  have  jpreceded  the  bier ;  in  Gal- 
ilee they  followed.  Eirst  came  the  women ;  for,  as  an  ancient 
Jewish  commentary  explains,  woman,  who  brought  death  into 
our  world,  ought  to  lead  the  way  in  the  funeral  procession  " 
(«  Jewish  Social  Life  ")• 

Had  compassion  (eaifKopfyyicr^^.  From  aifSMr^yya,  the 
nobler  entrails,  regarded  as  the  seat  of  the  affections.  See  on 
jpitiful,  1  Pet.  iii.  8. 


14!  Touched.  Not  fearing  the  ceremonial  defilement  of 
contact  with  the  dead. 

The  bier  {(jop6<s).  In  classical  Greek,  originally,  of  a  vessel 
for  holding  anything  :  sometimes  of  a  cinerary  urn.  Here  the 
open  bier.    Edersheim  says  "  of  wicTcer-worJc." 

15.  Sat  up  (dveKoiBia-ev).  Compare  Acts  ix.  40.  In  this  in- 
transitive sense  the  word  is  used  mostly  by  medical  writers. 

Delivered  {eSaicev).  Rev.,  ga^e.  "For  he  had  already 
ceased  to  belong  to  his  mother  "  (Bengel).     Compare  ch.  ix.  42. 


324  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VIX 

16.  There  came  a  fear  on  all  {eKa^ev  he  (j)6^o<i  airavTa';). 
Lit.,  as  Rev.,  fear  took  hold  on  all. 

IT.  This  rumor.  Eev.,  report :  viz.,  of  a  great  prophet  who 
had  vindicated  his  claims  by  raising  the  dead. 

18-35.  Compare  Matt.  xi.  2-19. 

19.  Two  {Bvo  Ttm?).  Lit.,  two  certain  ones.  Hey.,  in  margin,, 
certain  two. 

Art  thou.     The  thou  is  emphatic.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  3. 

21.  Diseases — plagues  {voamv — /laa-rtymv).  See  on  Matt.  iv. 
23 ;  Mark  iii.  10.  Marking  the  two  classes  of  disease  recognized 
in  medical  writings,  chronic  and  acute. 

Evil  spirits  {•jrvevfidTtovjrovTip&v).  On  Trovrjpo's,  evil,  see  ch. 
iii.  19.  It  is  applied  to  evil  spirits  by  Luke  only,  with  the  sin- 
gle exception  of  Matt.  xii.  45.  In  accordance  with  its  signifi- 
cation of  evil  on  its  actvve  side,  it  is  applied  in  medicine  to  that 
which  spreads  destruction  or  corruption ;  as  the  poison  of  ser- 
pents. Note,  moreover,  that  Luke  distinguishes  here  between 
disease  and  demoniac  possession,  as  often.  See  ch.  vi.  17,  18  ;, 
viii.  2  ;  xiii.  32. 

He  gave  {ixapla-aro).  More  is  expressed  by  this  verb  than 
simple  giving/.  He  gave  as  a  free,  gracious,  joy-giving  gift. 
See  on  X'"'P'''>ff<^or,  ch.  i.  30  ;  and  compare  freely  give,  Horn, 
viii.  32.     Also,  1  Cor.  ii.  12. 

22.  The  blind  receive,  etc.  Better,  aT-e  receiAivng,  are  walk- 
ing, even  while  Jesus  is  speaking  and  John  is  in  doubt. 

23.  Shall  not  be  offended  ijii]  a-KavBaXia-Sfj).  Rev.,  shall 
find  none  occasion  of  stnirnbln/ng.  See  on  Matt.  v.  29.  Note 
also  the  conditional  not  (jirf) :  "  shall  not  find,  whatever  may 
occur." 


Ch.  VII.]  LUKE.  325 

24.  To  see  {l^eda-aa-^ai).  Eev.  is  correct  but  awkward,  to 
behold.  The  verb  implies  steadfast,  intent  gazing.  See  on 
Matt.  xi.  Y. 

25.  Gorgeously  apparelled  (eV  t/iaTt<r/iw  ej/S6^§)).    Lit.,  m 

^lendnd  clothing. 

Live  delicately  (T(3i/(^5v7rapj^ovTe?).  IsA^areinhixury.  On 
inrdp'xpine<;,  are,  see  on  Jas.  ii.  15.  On  rpv^,  luamry,  see  on 
2  Pet.  ii.  13,  the  only  other  place  where  it  occurs.  Compare  the 
kindred  verb  Tpv(j)da>,  to  li/ve  vn  hoxury,  Jas.  v.  5. 

Kings'  courts  {fiaaCKeloi'i).  Only  here  in  !N"ew  Testament. 
Often  rendered  palaces.  Sometimes,  in  later  Greek,  applied 
to  a  capital  or  royal  city,  a  royal  treasury,  and  a  royal  diadem. 

26.  A  prophet  {'7rpo(f>i^Tr]v).  The  popular  conception  of  a 
prophet  is  limited  to  his  foretelling  future  events.  This  is  in- 
deed included  in  the  term,  but  does  not  cover  its  meaning  en- 
tirely. The  word  is  from  (prjfii,  to  speak,  and  irpo,  before,  in 
front  of.  This  meaning  of  the  preposition  may  have  reference 
to  time,  viz.,  before,  heforeha/nd ;  or  to  place,  viz.,  in  front  of, 
and  &o,jpublicly  ;  and  this  latter  meaning,  in  turn,  easily  runs 
into  that  of  in  hehalf  of;  for.  The  prophet  is,  therefore,  pri- 
marily, one  who  speaks  standing  before  another,  and  thus  forming 
a  medium  between  him  and  the  hearer.  This  sense  runs  natur- 
ally into  that  of  instead  of.  Hence  it  is  the  technical  term  for 
the  interpreter  of  a  divine  message.  So  Plato  :  "  For  this  rea- 
son it  is  customary  to  appoint  diviners  or  interpreters  to  be 
judges  of  the  true  inspiration.  Some  persons  call  them  diviners, 
seers  (jiavTe^) ;  they  do  not  know  that  they  are  only  repeaters 
of  dark  sayings  and  visions,  and  are  not  to  be  called  diwiners  at 
all,  but  interpreters  {TrpotjyrJTai,)  of  things  divine  "  ("  Timaeus," 
72).  Similarly  of  an  advocate  to  speak  for,  or  instead  of  one. 
The  central  idea  of  the  word  is,  one  to  whom  God  reveals  him- 
self and  through  whom  he  speaks.  The  revelation  may  or  may 
not  relate  to  the  future.  The  prophet  is  a  forth-teller,  not 
necessarily  afaz-eteller.     The  essence  of  the  prophetic  character 


326  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VIL 

is  immediate  intercourse  with  God.  One  of  the  Hebrew  names 
for  '•  prophet,"  and,  as  some  maintain,  the  earlier  name,  signi- 
fied a  shewer  or  seer.  See  1  Sam.  ix.  10  ;  and  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  26- 
30,  Paul  shows  that  revelation  stands  in  necessary  connection 
with  prophesying. 

27.  Prepare  {KaTaaKevda-ei).     See  on  ch.  i.  17. 

Least  (jjLiKpoTepo'i).  Lit.,  less.  Rev.,  hut  Utile  /  or,  as  we 
might  saj',  "  corrvparatively  little." 

29.  Justified  God.  Declaring,  by  being  baptized,  that  God's 
will  concerning  John's  baptism  was  right. 

30.  Lawyers  (vofiiKol).  Ifot  legal  practitioners,  but  inter- 
preters and  doctors  of  the  Mosaic  law. 

Rejected  {■^^eTrja-av).  Set  aside,  or  omnulled ;  made  it 
vain  through  their  disobedience. 

Against  themselves  (ew  kavTovi).  More  strictly,  with 
reference  to  themselves. 

32.  Children  (TratSt'ots).  Diminutive;  lilMe  children.  See 
on  Matt.  xi.  16. 

Market-place.    See  on  Matt.  xi.  16. 

We  piped.     Playing  at  wedding. 

Mourned  {i&prjv^a-afiev).  'Rev.,  much  better,  waMed :  play- 
ing at  funeral. 

Weep  (eKKava-are).  Of  audible  weeping.  See  on  Matt.  v.  4. 
Matthew  has  eKoyfraaS^e,  beaten  your  breasts.  See  on  Matt.  xi. 
17. 

33.  Bread  and  wine.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 


Ch.  VII.]  LUKE.  327 

37.  A  woman  who  (^rt?).     Of  that  class  which  was,  etc. 

A  sinner.  Wye,  a  sinneress.  Her  presence  there  is  ex- 
plained by  the  Oriental  custom  of  strangers  passing  in  and  out 
of  a  house  during  a  meal  to  see  and  converse  with  the  gnests. 
Trench  cites  a  description  of  a  dinner  at  a  consul's  house  in 
Damietta.  "  Many  came  in  and  took  their  places  on  the  side- 
seats,  uninvited  and  yet  unchallenged.  They  spoke  to  those  at 
table  on  business  or  the  news  of  the  day,  and  our  host  spoke 
freely  to  them"  ("Parables").  Bernard  beautifully  says: 
"  Thanks  to  thee,  most  blessed  sinner :  thou  hast  shown  the 
world  a  safe  enough  place  for  sinners — the  feet  of  Jesus,  which 
spurn  none,  reject  none,  repel  none,  and  receive  and  admit 
all.  "Where  alone  the  Pharisee  vents  not  his  haughtiness,  there 
surely  the  Ethiopian  changes  his  skin,  and  the  leopard  his 
spots"  (cit.  by  Trench,  "Parables"). 

Sat  (/cara/eetTat).  Lit.,  is  reclining  at  meat :  a  lively  change 
to  the  present  tense. 

Alabaster.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  7. 

38.  At  his  feet  behind.  The  body  of  the  guest  rested  on 
the  couch  ;  the  feet  were  turned  from  the  table  toward  the 
walls,  and  the  left  elbow  rested  on  the  table. 

Wash  {^pexetv).  More  literally  and  better,  as  Kev.,  wet,  as 
with  rain. 

Wiped  (i^e/xacj-a-ev).     See  on  ch.  v.  2. 

41.  Creditor  {SaveiarTf}).  From  Bdvewv,  a  loan.  Properly 
a  lender  of  money  at  interest.    Rev.,  lender.     See  on  ch.  vi.  34. 

Pence  {Srjvdpia).    See  on  Matt.  xx.  2. 

42.  Frankly  forgave  (ixapla-aro).  Eev.  omits  framMy, 
which  is  implied  in  the  verb.     See  on  ver.  21. 


328  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VIII. 

43.  I  suppose  {v7ro\afil3dva>).  The  verb  literally  means  to 
take  wp  hy  gettmg  under.  It  might  be  rendered,  accordingly,  1 
take  it. 

45.  Ceased  (SteXtTrez/).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Common  in  medical  language,  meaning  to  he  intermittent,  and 
to  discontinue  giving  remedies  for  a  time. 

To  kiss  {Kara^iXovcTa).  The  compound  verb  has  the  force 
of  kissing  tenderly,  caressing. 

46.  Oil  {i\aia>).  In  vv.  37,  38,  the  word  fivpov,  liquid  oint- 
ment, is  used.  This  was  the  finer  and  costlier  of  the  two. 
Christ  means  to  say  to  Simon,  "  thou  didst  not  anoint  my  Aead, 
the  nobler  part,  with  ordinary  oil.  She  hath  anointed  mjj'eet 
with  costly  ointment. 

49.  They  began.  Luke  notes  the  first  uprising  of  the 
thought. 

Within  themselves  (eV  eawrot?).  Better,  a/mong  themselves, 
as  Eev.,  in  margin. 

Also  {kolC).    Much  better  as  Rev.,  "  who  ewnforgiveth  sins." 

50.  I  n  peace  (eiV  eip'^vrjv).  Lit.,  into  peace.  See  on  Mark 
V.  34. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


1-3.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 

1.  Afterward  (ev  tS>  koJ^s^^).     Eev.,  soon  afterwa/rd.    See 
on  ch.  vii.  11. 

Throughout  every  city  and  village  {icaTh.    iroKiv    Koi 
Kwfji/rjv).    Lit.,  hy  city  and  village.     See  on  ver.  4. 


Ch.  vm.]  LUKE.  329 

Preaching  {Ktipixrawv).  Or  proclaiming,  as  a  herald.  Com^ 
pare  ch.  iv.  18,  and  see  on  1  Pet.  ii.  5. 

And  the  twelve  were  with  him.  The  were  is  supplied  by 
the  translators.  Better,  "  he  himself  went  about,"  etc.,  "  and 
the  twelve  (went)  with  him ; "  or,  as  Kev.,  and  with  him  the 
twel/ue. 

3.  Steward  {eiriTpoirov).  From  itrvTpkirw,  to  turn  towa/rd  j 
thence  to  turn  over  to,  transfer,  and  so  commit  or  intrust  to. 
The  word  thus  literally  means,  one  to  whom  the  management 
of  affairs  is  turned  over. 

4^18.'  Compare  Matt.  xiii.  1-23  ;  Mark  iv.  1-25. 

4.  Out  of  every  city  (Kwra  iroKlv).     City  by  city. 

Were  come  {imiropevofievav).  The  present  participle  de- 
noting something  in  progress.  They  kept  coming.  Eev.,  re- 
sorted. 

5.  To  sow.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  3. 
His  seed.    Peculiar  to  Luke. 

By  the  way-side.    See  on  Matt.  xiii.  i. 

Was  trodden  down.  A  rendering  which  would  apply  better 
to  standing  grain.  Eender,  as  Rev.,  trodden  underfoot.  Pecu- 
liar to  Luke. 

6.  The  rock  {ttjv  ireTpav).  Matthew  has  the  rocTcy  places, 
and  Mark  the  rocky  ground. 

Sprung  up  (0uev).  Lit.,  hamvng  sprung  vp.  Eev.,  better, 
grew.  Sprung  up  is  Matthew's  i^aveTSiXev.  Only  here  and 
Heb.  xii.  15,  where  it  is  a  quotation  from  the  Septuagint.  See 
on  Matt.  xiii.  7. 


330  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VIH 

IVI 0  istu  re  {tKfidha).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Matthew 
and  Mark  have  depth  of  earth.  The  word  is  the  medical  ex- 
pression for  juices  of  the  body,  of  plants,  and  of  the  earth. 
Aristophanes,  metaphorically,  the  juice  of  thought  ("  Clouds," 
233).  Hippocrates  uses  this  and  the  preceding  word  together, 
comparing  the  juices  of  the  body  with  those  of  the  earth. 

7.  Among  (eV  fiiaa).  In  the  midst.  Stronger  than  the 
simple  eV,  in,  as  giving  more  prominence  to  the  danger. 

Sprung  up  with  it  {(7v/ji.<f)vela-ai).  Only  here  in  ISTew  Testa- 
ment. See  on  ver.  6,  and  Matt.  xiii.  7.  The  technical  word 
among  physicians  for  closing  of  wounds  or  ulcers,  and  the  unit- 
ing of  nerves  or  bones.  Dioscorides  iises  it,  as  here,  of  plants 
growing  in  the  same  place  :  "  The  hellebore  grows  together  with 
the  vines." 

CJioked  {aireirvt^av).  Lit.,  choked  off.  Matthew  has  the 
simple  e-TTvi^av,  choked/  and  Mark  crvveirvi^av  ;  the  avv,  to- 
gether, emphasizing  the  idea  of  compression.  Luke  is  very  fond 
of  compounds  and  sonorous  words.     See  on  ch.  xxiii.  61. 

8.  A  hundred-fold.  Omitting  the  thirty  and  sixty  of  Mat- 
thew and  Mark.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  8. 

10.  Mysteries.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  11. 

Understand  (awitaaiv).  See  on  ■wwc^TOtow«?mp',  the  kindred 
noun,  Mark  xii.  33. 

11.  The  parable  is  this.     According  to  its  interpretation. 

13.  For  awhile  believe.  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  21.  Matthew 
and  Mark  have  endureth,  or  endure  for  a  while. 

In  time  of  temptation.  Matthew  and  Mark  have,  when 
tribulation  or  persecution  cometh. 


Ch.  VIII.]  LUKE.  331 

Fall  away.  Lit.,  withdraw  or  stamd  aloof.  Matthew  and 
Mark  have  stumMe. 

14.  Go  forth  {tropevo/jievoi).  Tlie  present  participle.  Much 
better  Eev.,  "  they  that  have  heard,  and  as  they  go  on  their  way 
are  choked,"  etc. 

Choked  with  (wtto,  v/nder).  Implying  the  impulse  under 
which  they  pursue  their  course. 

Bring  (no  fruit)  to  perfection  (reXea^opovaiv).  Only  here 
in  New  Testament.  Matthew  and  Mark  have,  it  iecometh  un- 
fruitful. The  verb  literally  means  to  hring  to  an  end  or  accom- 
jplishment. 

16.  These  are  they  which  {ohToi,  elaiv  oX-rivei).  Which  de- 
notes them  as  belonging  to  a  class.  Hence  Rev.,  rightly,  such 
as. 

Honest  and  good  heart.  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Honest ;  YA., 
fair,  noble.  Honest,  not  in  the  popular  sense,  but  in  the  sense 
of  the  Latin  honestvbs  ;  noble,  vi/rtaious,  worthy. 

Keep  {KaTe.')(ovffiv).  Much  better  Rev.,  hold  it  fast,  giving 
the  force  of  the  compound  verb. 

With  patience.  Or  m  patience.  Peculiar  to  Luke.  In 
contrast  -with,  fall  amay,  ver.  13. 

16.  Candle  (^iyyov).  Rev.,  properly,  lamp.  See  on  Mark 
iv.  21. 

Candlestick  (Xvyylax;).  Correctly,  as  Rev.,  a  stand.  See 
on  Matt.  v.  15. 

17.  Nothing  is  secret — manifest.  Correctly  rendered  in 
A.  y.,  but  not  so  the  parallel  passage,  Mark  iv.  22,  on  which 
see  note. 


332  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  VHI. 

18.  How  ye  hear  (ttw?).  The  manner  of  hearing.  Mark 
has  Ti,  what  ye  hear  ;  the  matter. 

Seemeth  (Sowet).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Eev.  renders  "  thhik- 
eth  he  hath,"  as  Jas.  i.  26,  on  which  see  note.  Wye,  guesseth  ; 
Tynd.,  sujyposeth. 

19-21.  Compare  Matt.  xii.  46-50  ;  Mark  iii.  31-36. 

Come  at  him  {crvvrvxelv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  properly  carries  the  idea  of  an  accidental  meeting, 
and  slightly  so  here.  Jesus  was  lost  in  the  crowd,  and  his 
friends  could  not  fall  in  with  him. 

22-25 ;  ix.  57-62.  Compare  Matt.  viii.  18-27 ;  Mark  iv. 
35-41. 

22.  Let  us  go  over  unto  the  other  side  of  the  lake.  Wye. 
has,  pass  we  over  the  standing  water.    On  laJce,  see  on  ch.  v.  1. 

Launched  forth  {avri'}(^a-av).  See  on  ch.  v.  3.  The  verb 
literally  means  to  lead  up  /  hence  to  lead  up  to  the  high  sea,  or 
take  to  sea  ;  put  to  sea.  It  is  the  word  used  of  Jesus'  being  led 
up  into  the  wilderness  and  the  mount  of  temptation  (Matt.  iv. 
1 ;  Luke  ii.  22) ;  also  of  bringing  up  a  sacrifice  to  an  idol-altar 
(Acts  vii.  41).     Often  in  Acts  in  the  accounts  of  Paiil's  voy- 


23.  He  fell  asleep  {a^inrvcoffev).  Very  graphic.  He  fell 
off  {awo)  into  sleep. 

Came  down  {Kare^r}).  More  vivid  than  either  Matthew  or 
Mark,  who  have  there  arose.  The  word  describes  the  action  of 
the  sudden  storms  which  literally  come  down  from  the  heights 
surrounding  the  lake.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  24. 

Storm  (Xai'X,ai/r).  See  on  Mark  iv.  37.  Matthew  has  ffewr/cto?, 
a  shaking.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  24. 


Ch.  VIII.]  LUKE.  333 

They  were  filling  with  water  {aweTrX-qpovvTo).  Used  by 
Luke  only.  Mark,  as  usual,  goes  into  minuter  detail,  and  de- 
scribes how  the  waves  beat  into  the  boat.  Note  tlie  imperfects : 
they  were  fillvng ;  they  were  beginning  to  he  in  danger,  con- 
trasted with  the  instantaneous  descent  of  the  storm  expressed 
by  the  aorist  came  down. 

24.  Master.     See  on  ch.  v.  5. 

Rebuked.  Compare  the  more  detailed  narrative  of  Mark, 
iv.  39,  and  see  notes  there.     Wye,  blamed. 

The  raging  {KKvhmvi).     See  on  Jas.  i.  6. 

Arose  (Steyep-Sets).  Wrong.  It  is  the  word  used  just  before, 
awoJce.  Lit.,  homing  heen  thoroughly  awakened.  Rev.,  cor- 
rectly, he  awoke.  Luke  is  especially  fond  of  compounds  with 
hid. 

A  calm.     Matthew  and  Mark  have  "  a  great  calm." 

25.  He  commandeth.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

26.  They  arrived  (KaTeTrXeva-av).  The  verb  means  literally 
to  sail  down  from  the  sea  to  the  shore.  Compare  launched 
forth,  ver.  22.  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  two  prepo- 
sitions, up  and  down,  are  used  in  our  nautical  terms  hear  wp 
and  hear  down.  See  Introduction,  on  Luke's  variety  of  words 
for  sailing.     Matthew  and  Mark  have  came  (eX-Jwro?,  riX^ov). 

Gerasenes.  The  texts  vary,  some  reading  Gada/renes,  as 
A.  Y.,  others  Gergesenes. 

Over  against  {avmrepa).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

27.  There  met  him  out  of  the  city.  The  words  out  of  the 
dty  belong  rather  with  a  certain  man.     So  Rev. 


334  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  VIIL 

Which  had  devils  longtime.  The  best  texts  insert  koI, 
and,  after  devils  (demons),  and  read  "  who  had  demons,  and 
for  a  long  time  he  had  worn,"  etc.  Long  {iicavat).  See  on  ch. 
vii.  16. 

Tombs.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  28.     Compare  Mark  v.  4^6. 

28.  Fell  down  (TTjOoo-eTreo-ev).  Mark  has '7r/joo-e«wi7o-ev,  which 
often  implies  religious  or  superstitious  feeling,  as  Matt.  iv.  9, 10. 
This  is  the  prostration  of  abject  terror. 

Cried  out  {avaKpd^a<;).  The  compound  verb  with  ava,  wp, 
implies  what  is  conveyed  by  our  phrase,  lifting  wp  the  voice. 
See  on  Mark  v.  5. 

What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?     See  on  Mark  v.  7. 

Torment  {^aa-avlarjs:).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  24.  Luke  never 
uses  the  word  of  sichiess,  as  Matt.  viii.  6,    See  on  ch.  iv.  41. 

29.  He  had  commanded  {-TrapijjyeWev).  Imperfect  tense. 
Rev.  does  not  improve  by  reading  he  commanded.  The  imper- 
fect expresses  the  simultaneousness  of  the  exorcism  and  the  cry 
torment  me  not.  Better,  for  he  was  commanding.  So  the 
Am.  Rev. 

It  had  seized  {a-wrjpTrdKei).  Used  by  Luke  only.  See  Acts 
vi.  12 ;  xxvii.  15.  The  verb  literally  means  to  snatch  and  carry 
away  with  (ervv). 

He  was  kept  bound  {iBeafievero  <j)vXacr<T6fievo(}).  Lit.,  he 
was  bound,  being  guarded.  Rev.,  was  kept  under  gua/rd  and 
hound.  The  A.  V.  does  not  sufficiently  bring  out  the  vigilance 
with  which  be  was  attended. 

Chains  and  fetters.    See  on  Mark  v.  4. 

Breaking  {Siappijaa-oov).  Compare  Mark  iv.  4,  and  see  note 
there. 


Ch.  vul]  LUKE.  335 

Was  driven,  etc.    Peculiar  to  Luke. 

30.  Many  devils  were,  etc.     Compare  Mark  v.  9. 

31.  Command  them.    The  plural,  referring  to  the  legion. 

The  deep  (a/Swo-o-oj/).  Lit.,  the  bottomless.  Transcribed  into 
our  abyss,  as  Eev.  Mark  has  a  quite  different  request,  that  he 
would  not  send  them  out  of  the  country  (v.  10).  In  Rom.  x. 
7,  used  of  Hades,  to  which  Christ  descended  ;  and  in  Apoc. 
always  of  the  bottomless  pit.  The  demons  refer  to  their  place 
of  abode  and  torment. 

33.  Ran  violently  (&p/ja}a-ev).  Rev.,  more  neatly,  rushed. 
Only  Mark  gives  the  number  of  the  swine,  two  thousomd. 

A  steep  place.    See  on  Matt.  ix.  32. 

36.  He  that  was  possessed  with  devils.  Expressed  in  the 
Greek  by  two  words,  6  Sai/iovicrS-eh,  the  demonized. 

Was  healed  {ia-aS^).     See  on  ch.  vi.  19. 

37.  They  were  taken  {<ruveixovro).  See  on  ch.  iv.  38.  The 
same  word  as  of  the  fever. 

38.  Besought  (eSeero).  Im-periect :  was  beseeching.  See  on 
prayers,  ch.  v.  33.  ^Q^.,jprayed.  Beseech  is  used  to  render 
irapaieaXico  (Mark  v.  10).  See  on  consolation,  ch.  vi.  24. 
IlapaKaXeo),  beseech,  is  used  of  prayer  to  God  in  only  one  in- 
stance, 2  Cor.  xii.  8,  where  Paul  besought  the  Lord  to  remove 
the  thorn  in  the  flesh.  Frequently  of  requests  to  Christ  while 
on  earth.  Aeofiai,  to  Jpray,  often  of  prayer  to  God  (Matt.  ix. 
38 ;  Luke  x.  2  ;  Acts  viii.  22).  It  is  noticeable  that  in  ver.  28, 
where  the  demons  address  Christ  as  the  Son  of  the  highest 
God,  they  say  Seo/wtt,  I  pray.  In  vv.  31,  32,  where  they  ask 
not  to  be  sent  away,  and  to  be  allowed  to  enter  into  the  swine, 
they  say  TrapaKoKim,  I  beseech.     The  restored  man,  recognizing 


336  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  VHl 

Jesus'  divine  power, ^at/ec?  {iBelro)  to  be  with  him.  The  dis- 
tinction, however,  must  not  be  closely  pressed.  The  two  words 
seem  to  be  often  used  interchangeably  in  the  New  Testament. 

39.  Shew  (SiTiyov).  Eather  relate,  recount,  with  the  idea  of 
telling  the  story  throughout  {Sid).     See  on  declaration,  ch.  i.  1. 

Throughout  the  whole  city.    Mark  says  in  Decapolis. 

How  great  things  (oa-a).  Lit.,  how  many  things,  and  thus 
according  with  recount.  Declared  all  things  throughout,  as 
many  as  Jesus  had  done. 

41-56.  Compare  Matt.  ix.  18-26 ;  Mark  v.  22-43. 

41.  Jairus.  The  name  of  one  of  the  Israelite  chiefs,  Jair, 
who  conquered  and  settled  Bashan  (ISTum.  xxxii.  41 ;  Josh.  xiii. 
30).  "  His  name  lingered  down  to  the  time  of  the  Christian 
era,  when,  in  the  same  region  as  that  which  he  conquered,  we 
find  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue  named  Jair  "  (Stanley,  "  Jewish 
Church  "). 

42.  Thronged  {crvvi'irviyov).  With  the  idea  of  pressing 
together  {avv)  upon  him :  stifii/ng.  The  simple  verb  is  that  ren- 
dered choice,  as  in  vv.  8,  33. 

43.  Had  spent  {irpocravaXdia-acra).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. Some  texts  omit  who  had  spent  all  her  living  upon 
jphysida/ns.  Luke,  with  professional  sensitiveness,  omits  Mark's 
statement  that  she  had  suffered  many  things  from  many  physi- 
cians, and  was  not  bettered  but  made  worse. 

44.  Hem.     See  on  Matt.  ix.  20. 
Stanched  (Io-tij).     A  common  medical  term. 

45.  Who  touched  (jk  o  a\fra/jLev6i).  Lit.,  who  is  he  that 
touched  ?    Kev.,  who  is  it  that. 


Ch.  VIIL]  LUKE.  337 

Throng  and  press  {a-vvexovcnv — airoSXi^ovtriv).  On  the 
former  word,  see  ver.  37,  and  ch.  iv.  38.  Rev.  renders  the  lat- 
ter, which  occurs  here  only,  more  literally,  crush.  It  means  to 
squeeze  out,  as  wine  from  grapes.  See  on  tribulation,  Matt, 
xiii.  21. 

46.  Hath  touched  {ri-^aro) — 1  perceive  {eyvmv).  Eev.  ren- 
ders the  two  aorists  strictly  :  did  touch,  and  /perceived,  with 
reference  to  Jesus'  knowledge  of  the  toiich  at  the  moment  it 
was  applied. 

Virtue  (Bvva/iiv).  Eev.,  power.  The  evangelists  use  the 
word  frequently  of  miracles — mighty  works.  It  is  used  here  in 
the  sense  of  virtue,  according  to  its  use  by  naturalists  and 
physicians.  Still,  too  much  stress  must  not  be  laid  upon  it  as  a 
mark  of  Luke's  professional  accuracy,  as  Dean  Plumptre  in 
''  The  Expositor,"  iv.,  139  ;  since  Mark  uses  it  in  his  narrative 
of  the  same  incident,  and  in  the  same  sense  (Mark  v.  30). 

47.  Falling  down.  Not  in  worship,  but  in  terror.  See  on 
fell  down,  v.  28. 

48.  In  peace.    See  on  ch.  vii.  50. 

49.  From  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue's  house.  A.  V.  and 
Rev.  properly  supply  house,  as  the  ruler  himself  is  present  with 
Jesus. 

Dead.  Placed  first  in  the  Greek  order,  for  emphasis. 
"Dead  is  thy  daughter." 

Trouble.  See  on  Matt.  ix.  36  ;  Mark  v.  35.  Tyndale  ren- 
ders dis-ease,  in  the  old  verbal  sense  of  disturb. 

52.  Wept  and  bewailed.  Both  imperfects,  were  weeping 
and  bewailing.  So,  rightly,  Eev.  Compare  on  bewailing,  Mark 
V.  38. 

19 


338  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  DC 

54.  Maid  (17  irah).    Instead  of  the  unclassical  KopaaCov,  damr 
sel,  of  Matthew  and  Mark. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1-6.  Compare  Matt.  x.  1,  7,  9-11, 14 ;  Mark  vi.  7-13. 
1.  Called  together.    Matthew  and  Mark  have  called  to. 

3.  Take(aIfp6T6).     Lit.,  Uft,  with  a  view  of  carrying  away. 

Staves.  Following  the  reading  pd^Sov^,  for  which  read 
pd^Bov,  staff. 

Two  coats  {dv^  Bvo  ;Y;tTwi/as).  Lit.,  Pwo  ajyieee :  the  force  of 
dvd,  as  in  John  ii.  6. 

4.  There  abide.     See  on  Matt.  x.  10. 

5.  Shake  off.     See  on  Matt.  x.  14. 

6.  Throughout  the  towns  (/carA  ra?  K<»|ta?).  Eev.,  rightly, 
villages.     The  preposition  is  distributive,  village  iy  viMage. 

7-9.  CompareMatt.xiv.  1-2;  6-12.     Mark  vi.,  14-16,  21-29. 

7.  The  tetrarch.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  1. 

That  was  done  {rd  yivofieva).    The  present  participle.   Lit, 

all  that  is  being  done. 

Was  perplexed  (StT^Tropet).  Used  by  Luke  only.  From  Bid, 
through,  and  diropio},  to  he  without  a  way  out.  The  radical  idea 
of  the  compound  verb  seems  to  be  of  one  who  goes  through  the 
whole  list  of  possible  ways,  and  finds  no  way  out.  Hence,  to  le 
im,  perplexity. 


Ch.  IX.]  LUKE.  339 

9.  He  desired  (e'5»;T6t).    'Rev.jhesoitght.     He  did  more  than 
desire. 

10-17.  Compare  Mark  vi.  30-44. 

•     10.  Declared  (Bifriy^a-avro).     Related  everything  throughout 
(Std).     See  on  ver.  39  ;  cli.  i.  1. 

Bethsaida.     Peculiar  to  Luke.     It  means  Fishmg-place. 

Healed  {laro)  them  that  had  need  of  healing  (SepaTreia^). 
See  on  ch.  v.  15. 


12.  And  when  the  day  began  to  wear  away.  Omit  ■ 

Eender,  and  the  day  began,  etc.     To  wear  away  (KXlveiv).  Lit., 
to  decline.     Wye,  very  literally,  to  bow  down. 

Lodge  (KaTaXva-axTiv).  Peculiar  to  Luke.  Primarily  the 
verb  means  to  break  up  or  dissolve.  Hence  often  in  New  Tes- 
tament to  destroy  (Matt.  v.  17  ;  Mark  xiii.  2).  Intransitively, 
to  take  up  one^s  quarters ;  lodge  /  either  because  the  harness 
of  the  travellers'  horses  is  loosed,  or  because  the  fastenings  of 
their  garments  are  untied.  The  kindred  word  KaToKvfia,  a 
guest-chamber,  occurs,  Mark  xiv.  14 ;  or  inn,  Luke  ii.  7. 

Victuals  (eTTto-tTtCT/iw).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Prop- 
erly a  stock  of  provisions.  Thus  Xenophon.  "  Cyrus  hastened 
the  whole  journey,  except  when  he  halted  in  order  to  furnish 
himself  with  sujyplies  "  {eTricriTia-fiov  eveKa). 

Desert  {epr)fj,<p).     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  15. 

13.  Give  ye.  The  ye  emphatic,  closing  the  sentence  in  the 
Greek  order.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  15. 

Buy  food.    Compare  Mark  vi.  37. 

14.  In  a  company  (wXto-ta?).  The  plural,  in  companies. 
Lit.,  table-companies.    The  word  is  also  used  in  classical  Greek 


340  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX. 

of  a  couch  for  reclining  at  table.     Only  here  in  N'ew  Testament. 
See  on  Mark  vi.  39. 

16.  Brake  and  gave  {KaTeKXaaev—iSiSov).  Note  the  two 
tenses,  as  in  Mark  vi.  41,  and  see  note  there. 

To  set  before  {iTapa^elvai).  Lit.,  to  set  leside,  since  the 
table  was  at  the  side  of  the  guest.  A  common  word  for  serving 
up  a  meal.  Compare  Luke  x.  8  ;  Acts  xvi.  34.  From  the  sense 
oi placing  heside,  comes  that  of  putting  in  charge,  committing 
(Luke  xii.  48 ;  xxiii.  46 ;  1  Tim.  i.  18).  Hence  the  kindred 
noun  irapa^KTj  (2  Tim.  i.  12),  a  deposit :  that  which  I  ha/ve 
com,mitted. 

17.  Were  filled.     See  on  Matt.  v.  6. 

There  were  taken  up  of  fragments  that  remained  to 
them  twelve  baskets  {koX  ijpOr}  to  irepicra-evcrav  aiiroi^  kXmo-- 
fidroav  Kocpivoi  ScoSeKo).  The  Kev.  is  more  accurate,  putting 
the  comma  after  avToi<;,  to  them,  instead  of  after  KKaa-fidrasv, 
fragments  ;  and  making  the  latter  word  depend  on  ko^ivol,  bas- 
kets. Render,  therefore.  And  there  was  taken  up  that  which 
remai/ned  over  to  them,  of  broken  pieces,  twelve  baskets. 

Baskets.     See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20. 

18-21.  Compare  Matt.  xvi.  13-20.     Mark  viii.  27-30. 

18.  As  he  was  praying.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

20.  Ye.     Emphatic :  "  but  ye,  whom  do  ye  say  that  I  am  ? " 

The  Christ  of  God.  Each  evangelist  gives  Peter's  confes- 
sion differently.  Matthew,  The  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God.  Mark,  The  Christ.  See  on  Matt.  xvi.  15.  On  Christ, 
see  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

21.  He  straitly  charged  (eVm/ijyo-a?).     The  word  implies 


Ch.  IX.]  LUKE.  341 

an  emphatic,  solemn  charge ;  its  meaning  being,  strictly,  to  lay 
a  penalty  wpon  one,  and  thence,  to  charge  under  penally. 

No  man  {fj/rjBevl).  The  conditional  negative  :  no  man,  who- 
ever he  might  be. 

22-27.  Compare  Matt.  xvi.  21-28  ;  Mark  viii.  31-38  ;  ix.  1. 

22.  Be  rejected  {a-irohoKviMaa-^vai).  The  verb  means  to  re- 
ject on  scrutiny  or  trial,  and  therefore  implies  deliberate  rejec- 
tion. 

Of  the  elders  {airo).     Lit.,  from  the  side  of;  on  the  part  of. 

23.  Will  come  after  {BiXei).  Not  the  future  tense  of  the  verb 
come,  but  the  present  of  the  verb  to  will :  wills  to  come.  See 
on  Matt.  i.  19 ;  and  Mark  viii.  34.     Rev.,  properly,  would  come. 

Daily.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

24.  Will  save  (.JeXi;  a-uxrai).  The  same  construction  a,s  will 
come  after  (ver.  23).     Rev.,  would  same. 

Life  ('>}rvxvv).     See  on  soul,  Mark  xii.  30. 

25.  Gain  (KepS^a-wi).  A  merchant's  word.  Jesus  is  putting 
the  case  as  a  common-sense  question  of  profit  and  loss. 

Lose  (aTToXetra?).  "When  he  might  have  been  saved" 
(Bengel).  This  word,  in  classical  Greek,  is  used :  1.  Of  death  in 
battle  or  elsewhere.  2.  Of  laying  waste,  as  a  city  or  heritage. 
3.  Of  losing  of  life,  property,  or  other  objects.  As  an  active 
verb,  to  Mil  or  demolish.  4.  Of  being  demoralised,  morally 
abandoned  or  ruined,  as  children  under  bad  influences.  Li  New 
Testament  of  killing  (Matt.  ii.  13  ;  xii.  14).  Of  destroying  and 
perishing,  not  only  of  human  life,  but  of  material  and  intellect- 
ual things  (1  Cor.  i.  19  ;  John  vi.  27 ;  Mark  ii.  22 ;  1  Pet.  i.  7 ; 
Jas.  i.  11 ;  Heb.  i.  11).  Of  losing  (Matt.  x.  6,  42 ;  Luke  xv.  4, 
6,  8).     Of  moral  abamdonment  (Luke  xv.  24,  32).     Of  ths  doom 


342  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Oh.  IX. 

of  the  invpenitent  (Matt.  x.  28  ;  Luke  xiii.  3  ;  John  iii.  15 ;  John 
X.  28  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9 ;  Eom.  ii.  12. 

Cast  away  {^rj/Mtm^ek).  Another  business  term.  The  word 
means  to  fine,  mnerce,  mulct  y  to  punish  by  exacting  forfeit. 
Hence  Rev.,  correct] j,  forfeit  his  own  self.  See  on  win  your 
souls,  Luke  xxi.  19.     Also  on  Matt.  xvi.  26. 

26.  Shall  be  ashamed  (i-Traicrxw^).  The  feeling  expressed 
by  this  word  has  reference  to  incurring  dishonor  or  shame  in  the 
eyes  of  men.  It  is  "  the  grief  a  man  conceives  from  his  own  im- 
perfections considered  with  relation  to  the  world  taking  notice 
of  them ;  grief  upon  the  sense  of  disesteem  "  ("  Soath,"  cit.  by 
Trench).  Hence  it  does  not  spring  out  of  a  reverence  for  right 
in  itself,  but  from  fear  of  the  knowledge  and  opinion  of  men. 
Thus  in  the  use  of  the  kindred  noun  alay^yvrj,  shame,  in  the  New 
Testament.  In  Luke  xiv.  9,  the  man  who  impudently  puts  him- 
self in  the  highest  place  at  the  feast,  and  is  bidden  by  his  host 
to  go  lower  down,  begins  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  place  ; 
not  from  a  right  sense  of  his  folly  and  conceit,  but  from  being 
humiliated  in  the  eyes  of  the  guests.  Thus,  Heb.  xii.  2,  Christ 
is  said  to  have  "endured  the  shame,"  i.e.,  the  public  disgrace 
attaching  to  crucifixion.  So,  too,  in  the  use  of  the  verb,  Horn, 
i.  16 ':  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel,"  though  espousing  its 
cause  subjects  me  to  the  contempt  of  the  Jew  and  of  the  Greek, 
to  whom  it  is  a  stumbling-block  and  foolishness.  Onesiphorus 
was  not  ashamed  to  be  known  as  the  friend  of  a  prisoner  (2  Tim. 
i.  16).  Compare  Heb.  ii.  11 ;  xi.  16.  It  is  used  of  the  Son  of 
Man  here  by  a  strong  metaphor.  Literally,  of  course,  the  glo- 
rified Christ  cannot  experience  the  sense  of  shame,  but  the  idea 
at  the  root  is  the  same.  It  will  be  as  if  he  should  feel  himself 
disgraced  before  the  Father  and  the  holy  angels  in  owning  any 
fellowship  with  those  who  have  been  ashamed  of  him. 

His  glory,  etc.  Threefold  glory.  His  own,  as  the  exalted 
Messiah ;  the  glory  of  God,  who  owns  him  as  his  dearly  beloved 
son,  and  commits  to  him  the  judgment ;  and  the  glory  of  the 
angels  who  attend  him. 


Ch.  IX.]  LUKE.  343 

2Y.  Taste  of  death.  The  word  taste,  in  the  sense  of  exj>e- 
rience,  is  often  used  in  classical  Greek ;  as,  to  taste  of  toils,  of 
sorrow,  of  freedom,  but  never  of  death.  The  phrase,  taste  of 
death,  is  common  in  Eabbinical  writings.  In  the  New  Testa- 
ment only  here  and  Heb.  ii.  9,  used  of  Christ.  Chrysostom 
(cited  by  Alf  ord)  compares  Christ  to  a  physician  who  first  tastes 
his  medicines  to  encourage  the  sick  to  take  them. 

The  kingdom  of  God.     See  on  ch.  vi.  20. 

28-36.  Compare  Matt.  xvii.  1-18 ;  Mark  ix.  2-13. 

28.  A  mountain.  Rev.,  the  mountain.  The  tradition  that 
this  mountain  was  Tabor  is  generally  abandoned,  and  Mount 
Hermon  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  the  scene  of  the 
transfiguration.  "  Hermon,  which  is  indeed  the  centre  of  all 
the  Promised  Land,  from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the 
river  of  Egypt;  the  mount  of  fruitfulness,  from  which  the 
springs  of  Jordan  descended  to  the  valleys  of  Israel.  Along  its 
mighty  forest-avenues,  until  the  grass  grew  fair  with  the  moun- 
tain lilies,  his  feet  dashed  in  the  dew  of  Hermon,  he  must  have 
gone  to  pray  his  first  recorded  prayer  about  death,  and  from  the 
steep  of  it,  before  he  knelt,  could  see  to  the  south  all  the  dwell- 
ing-place of  the  people  that  had  sat  in  darkness,  and  seen  the 
great  light — the  land  of  Zabulon  and  of  Naphtali,  Galilee  of 
the  nations  ;  could  see,  even  with  his  human  sight,  the  gleam 
of  that  lake  by  Capernaum  and  Chorazin,  and  many  a  place 
loved  by  him  and  vainly  ministered  to,  whose  house  was  now  left 
unto  them  desolate  ;  and,  chief  of  all,  far  in  the  utmost  blue, 
the  hills  above  Nazareth,  sloping  down  to  his  old  home :  hills 
on  which  the  stones  yet  lay  loose  that  had  been  taken  up  to  cast 
at  him,  when  he  left  them  forever  "  (Ruskin,  "  Modern  Paint- 
ers," iv.,  374). 

To  pray.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

29.  Was  altered  (eyevero  erepov).      Lit.,   became  different. 
Luke  avoids  Matthew's  word,  fierafwptjxoST},  was  meta/morphosed. 


344  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX. 

He  was  writing  for  Greek  readers,  to  whom  that  word  repre- 
sented the  transformations  of  heathen  deities  into  other  forms. 
See,  for  instance,  tlie  story  of  the  capture  of  Proteus  by  Mene- 
laus,  in  the  fourth  book  of  Homer's  "  Odyssey."  See  on  Matt, 
xvii.  2. 

White  (XevKos;).  In  classical  Greek  very  indefinite  as  an  ex- 
pression of  color  ;  being  used,  not  only  of  the  whiteness  of  the 
snow,  but  of  gray  dust.  Its  original  sense  is  clear.  All  three 
evangelists  use  the  word,  but  combined  with  different  terms. 
Thus,  Matthew,  as  the  light.  Mark,  aT'Ck^ovra,  glistering  (see 
on  Mark  ix.  3).  Luke,  i^aarpaTrrmv  (only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament), flashing  as  with  the  hrilliance  of  lightning.  Kev., 
dazzling. 

30.  There  talked  {awekaXow).  The  imperfect  is  graphic  ; 
as  the  vision  revealed  itself,  the  two  were  in  the  act  of  talking. 

31.  This  verse  is  peculiar  to  Luke.  Spake  (e\eyov).  Im- 
perfect, were  speaking. 

Decease  {e^oBov).  The  Rev.  retains  the  word  of  the  A.  V., 
though  it  has,  to  modern  ears,  a  somewhat  formal  sound.  'No 
word,  however,  could  more  accurately  represent  the  original, 
which  is  compounded  of  ef,  out  of,  and  686<;,  a  Journeying  / 
and  thus  corresponds  to  the  Latin  decessus,  a  going  away, 
whence  the  word  decease.  The  Greek  word  is  familiar  to  us  as 
exodus,  applied  principally  to  the  migration  of  the  Hebrews 
from  Egypt,  and  thus  used  at  Heb.  xi.  22,  departing.  In  the 
mouth  of  Christ  it  covers  the  ideas  both  of  death  and  ascension. 
Peter  uses  it  of  his  own  death  (2  Pet.  i.  15,  where  see  note). 

He  should  accomplish  {efieWev  irXrjpovv).  Better,  asEev., 
he  was  about  to  accomplish.  "Accomplish,"  or  "  fulfil,"  is  very 
significant  with  reference  to  Christ's  death.  Moses  and  Joshua 
had  begun  an  exodus  from  Egypt,  but  had  not  accomplished  the 
going  out  of  God's  people  from  this  present  world.  See  Heb. 
iii.  18  ;  iv.  8. 


Ch.  IX.]  LUKE.  345 

32.  Heavy  (fiefiafyrifiivoi).  The  perfect  participle.  Lit.,  bur- 
dened or  (ypjpressed.  "It  was  but  natural  for  these  men  of 
simple  habits,  at  night,  and  after  the  long  ascent,  and  in  the 
strong  mountain  air,  to  be  heavy  witli  sleep  ;  and  we  also  know 
it  as  a  psychological  fact,  that,  in  quick  reaction,  after  the  over- 
powering influence  of  the  strongest  emotions,  drowsiness  would 
creep  over  their  limbs  and  senses  "  (Edersheim). 

33.  As  they  were  departing  {ev  Tm  Siaxcopl^ea-^ai  avroix;). 
Lit.,  in  their  departing.  The  verb  only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment.    The  whole  sentence  is  peculiar  to  Luke's  narrative. 

Master.     See  on  ch.  v.  6. 

Let  us  make.     See  on  Matt.  xvii.  4. 

Tabernacles.  See  on  Matt.  xvii.  4.  "Jesus  might  have 
smiled  at  the  naive  proposal  of  the  eager  apostle  that  they  six 
should  dwell  forever  in  the  little  sucooth  of  vrattled  boughs  on 
the  slopes  of  Hermon  "  (Farrar). 

Not  knowing  wliat  he  said.  Not  implying  any  reproach 
to  Peter,  but  merely  as  a  mark  of  his  bewilderment  in  his  state 
of  ecstasy. 

34.  A  cloud.  "A  strange  peculiarity  has  been  noticed 
about  Hermon,  in  the  extreme  rapidity  of  the  formation  of 
cloud  on  the  summit.  In  a  few  minutes  a  thick  cap  forms 
over  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  as  quickly  disperses  and 
entirely  disappears"  (Edersheim). 

Overshadowed  them  {eTrea-Kta^ev).  A  beautiful  imperfect : 
"  began  to  overshadow  them ; "  thus  harmonizing  with  the 
words,  "  as  they  entered  into."  T/iem  {avroixi)  must,  I  think, 
be  confined  to  Moses,  Elias,  and  Jesus.  Grammatically,  it 
might  include  all  the  six  ;  but  the  disciples  hear  the  voice  out 
of  the  cloud,  and  the  cloud,  as  a  symbol  of  the  divine  presence, 
rests  on  these  three  as  a  sign  to  the  disciples.  See  Exod.  xiv. 
19  ;  xix.  16 ;  1  Kings  viii.  10  ;  Ps.  civ.  3. 


346  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX. 

36.  When  the  voice  was  past  {iv  tw  yeveaSav  ttjv  <j)covrjv). 

Lit.,  m  the  coming  to  pass  of  the  voice.     Rev.,  when  the  voice 
came,  with  A.  Y.  in  margin. 

37-43.  Compare  Matt.  xvii.  14^21 ;  Mark  ix.  14^29. 

37.  Come  down  {KaTiS^ovrmv).  Yery  frequent  in  Luke, 
and  only  once  elsewhere :  Jas.  iii.  15. 

38.  Master  (BiSda-KoXe).     Teacher. 

Look  upon  (6'7ri/3A,ei|rai).  Only  here  and  Jas.  ii.  3.  To 
look  with  pitying  regard  ;  and  by  medical  writers  of  examining 
the  condition  of  a  patient. 

39.  Taketh  {Xafi^dvei,).     See  on  Mark  ix.  18. 

Suddenly  {e^ai^vr)^).  Used  only  once  outside  of  the  writ- 
ings of  Luke  :  Mark  xiii.  36.  Naturally,  frequent  in  medical 
writers,  of  sudden  attacks  of  disease.  Luke  has  more  medical 
details  in  his  account  than  the  other  evangelists.  He  mentions 
the  suddeii  coming  on  of  the  iits",  and  their  lasting  a  long  time. 
Mr.  Hobart  remarks  that  Aretaeus,  a  physician  of  Luke's  time, 
in  treating  of  epilepsy,  admits  the  possibility  of  its  being  pro- 
duced by  demoniacal  agency.  Epilepsy  was  called  by  physicians 
"  the  sacred  disease." 

Bruising  {a-wrpt^ov).  See  on  hruised,  ch.  iv.  18.  The  word 
literally  means  crushing  together.  Rev.  expresses  the  (7vv,  to- 
gether, by  sorely.  Compare  the  details  in  Mark,  gnashing  the 
teeth  and  j>ining  away  (ix.  18).  The  details  in  Mark  ix.  21,  22, 
we  might  rather  expect  to  find  in  Luke ;  especially  Christ's 
question,  how  long  he  had  been  subject  to  these  attacks.  See 
note  on  Mark  ix.  20. 

41.  Faithless.     See  on  Mark  ix.  19. 

Perverse.     See  on  Matt.  xvii.  17. 


Ch.  IX.]  LUKE.  347 

How  long  {e(o<}  TTore).     Lit.,  until  when. 

Suffer  (avi^ofiai).  Better  as  B.ev.,  bear  with.  See  Acts 
xviii.  14 ;  2  Oor.  xi.  1.  The  literal  meaning  is  to  "  bear  uj> 
(avd)  under." 

42.  Threw  him  down  (ep'pri^ev).  See  on  teareth,  Mark 
ix.  18. 

Tare  {jruveairdpa^ev).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Con- 
vulse, which  is  the  exact  Latin  equivalent,  would,  perhaps,  be 
the  nearest  rendering.  S7rapayii6<;,  a  kindred  noun,  is  the  word 
for  a  cramp. 

43-45.     Compare  Matt.  xvii.  22,  23 ;  Mark  ix.  30-32. 

43.  Astonished  {i^eirX'^a-a-ovTo).     See  on  Matt.  vii.  28. 

Mighty  power  (jieyaXeioTriTi).  Used  only  by  Luke  and  at 
2  Pet.  i.  16,  on  which  see  note. 

He  did  {iiroiei).     Imperfect.     Better,  was  doing. 

44.  Let  these  sayings  sink  down  into  your  ears.     Lit., 

put  these  sayings  into  your  ears. 

Shall  be  delivered  (/LteWei  TrapaSiSoa^ai).  father,  is  about 
to  be  delivered. 

46-50.  Compare  Matt,  xviii.  1-35  ;  Mark  ix.  33-50. 

46.  A  reasoning  {Sia\oyia-/jLb<i).  A  debate  or  discussion. 
See  on  ch.  xxiv.  38,  and  Jas.  i.  22 ;  ii.  4. 

47.  He  took  a  little  child  {iiriXa^o/Mevo^  iraiSiov).  Strictly, 
having  laid  hold  of. 

By  him  {vap  kavTtS).  Lit.,  by  himself.  Mark  alone  records 
the  taking  him  in  his  arms. 

48.  In  my  name.     See  on  Matt,  xviii.  5. 
51-56.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 


348  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX. 

51.  When  the  time  was  come  (eV  t&>  crv/iTrXijjOoOo-^at  ras 
fifiepa<;).  Lit.,  in  the  fuljillmg  of  the  days.  This  means  when 
the  days  were  heing  fulfilled;  not  when  they  were  fulfilled: 
when  the  time  was  drawing  near.  Kev.,  were  well-nigh  come. 
Luke  is  speaking  of  a.  period  beginning  with  the  first  announce- 
ment of  his  sufferings,  and  extending  to  the  time  of  his  being 
received  up. 

That  he  should  be  received  up  (t^9  avaXrjfii^eco'i  avrov). 
Lit.,  the  days  of  his  heing  taken  xijp :  his  ascension  into  heaven. 
'AvdX7]fj,'\fn'i  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament ;  but  the 
kindred  verb,  dva\a/j,^dvo),  is  the  usual  word  for  being  received 
into  heaven.     See  Acts  i.  2,  11,  22;  1  Tim.  iii.  16. 

57-62.  Compare  Matt.  viii.  19-27 ;  Mark  iv.  35-41. 

57.  A  certain  man.     Matthew,  a  scribe. 

Thou  goest  {d-n-ipxp).  Lit.,  "  goest  away"  {diro).  I  will 
follow  thee  whithersoever-away  thou  goest. 

58.  Holes.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  20. 

Birds  {TTereiva).  Strictly,  flying  fowl.  The  common  word 
for  hi/rd  in  the  New  Testament.  "Opviv  occurs  Matt,  xxiii.  37 ; 
Luke  xiii.  34;  but  both  times  in  the  sense  of  hen.  See  on 
Matt,  xxiii.  37.  "Opveov  is  found  in  Apoc.  xviii.  2 ;  xix.  17,  21 ; 
and  iTT'qvov,  another  form  for  the  word  in  this  passage,  occurs 
1  Cor.  XV.  30. 

Nests.     See  on  Matt.  viii.  20. 

60.  Their  dead  (toii?  eavrSv  veKpov<;).  As  Kev.,  their  own 
dead. 

Preach  {Sidr/yeWe).  Publish  abroad,  as  Rev.  hid,  through/- 
out  all  regions. 

61,  62.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 


Ch.  X.]  LUKE.  349 

61,  To  bid  farewell  (aTTOTafatr^at).  In  this  sense  the  word 
is  used  only  in  later  Greek.  In  classical  Greek  it  signifies  to 
set  apart  or  assign,  as  a  soldier  to  his  post  or  an  official  to  his 
office,  and  later  to  detach  soldiers.  Hence  to  dismiss  one  with 
orders.  This  latter  sense  may,  as  Kypke  suggests,  be  included 
in  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  this  passage ;  the  man  desiring 
to  return  home,  not  merely  to  take  formal  leave,  but  also  to  give 
his  final  instructions  to  his  friends  and  servants.  Similarly, 
Acts  xviii.  18,  of  Paul  taking  leave  of  the  brethren  at  Corinth, 
and,  presumably,  giving  them  instructions  at  parting.  In  the 
New  Testament  the  word  is  used  invariably  in  the  sense  of  bid- 
ding farewell.  Mark  vi.  46  is  rendered  by  Rev.  after  he  had 
talcen  lea/oe  of  them.  See  note  there,  and  compare  Luke  xiv. 
B3  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  13. 

62.  Put  his  hand  to  {eiri^akfiiv  iirv).  Lit.,  hamng  laid  his 
hand  upon. 

Back  (et?  ra  oirLam).  Lit.,  to  things  behind.  "The  figure  is 
that  of  a  man  who,  while  engaged  in  labor,  instead  of  keeping 
his  eye  on  the  furrow  which  he  is  drawing,  looks  behind  at  some 
object  which  attracts  his  interest.  He  is  only  half  at  work, 
and  half -work  only  will  be  the  result "  (Godet). 

Fit  (eur^eros).     Lit.,  well-placed:  adjusted. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1-16.  Peculiar  to  Luke. 

1.  Appointed  {aviBei^ev).  Used  by  Luke  only.  Lit.,  to 
Uft  ujp  and  shew,  as  Acts  i.  24  :  "  /Shew  which  one  thou  hast 
chosen."  Hence  to  proclaim,  any  one  elected  to  an  office.  See 
on  the  kindred  noun,  shewvng,  ch.  i.  80. 

Other  seventy.  Wrong;  for  he  had  not  appointed  seventy 
previously.  Eev.,  rightly,  seventy  others,  with  reference  to  the 
twelve. 


350  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

2.  The  harvest  (^e/sKr/xo?).  From  Mpo<;,  summer  (compare 
Sipofiai,  to  become  warm).  Harvest,  that  which  is  gathered  in 
summer.    Wye,  much  ripe  corn  is,  hut  few  workman. 

Pray.    See  on  ch.  viii.  38. 

Send  forth  (eK^aXy).  Lit,  On/oe  or  thrust  forth,  implying 
the  urgency  of  the  mission.     See  on  Mark  i.  12. 

3.  I  send  forth  (aTroo-TeWw).     See  on  Matt.  x.  2. 

4.  Purse  (fidXXdvTiov).     Used  by  Luke  only.     For  money. 
Scrip  {irrjpav).     For  victuals.     Rev.,  wallet. 

Shoes.  Not  that  they  were  to  go  unshod,  but  that  they 
were  not  to  carry  a  change  of  sandals.  See  Dent.  xxix.  5 ; 
xxxiii.  25. 

Salute  no  man.  Oriental  salutations  are  tedious  and  com- 
plicated. The  command  is  suited  to  a  rapid  and  temporary 
mission.  Compare  2  Kings  iv.  29.  "  These  instructions  were 
also  intended  to  reprove  another  propensity  which  an  Oriental 
can  hardly  resist,  no  matter  how  urgent  his  business.  If  he 
meets  an  acquaintance,  he  must  stop  and  make  an  endless  num- 
ber of  inquiries,  and  answer  as  many.  If  they  come  upon  men 
making  a  bargain,  or  discussing  any  other  matter,  they  must 
pause  and  intrude  their  own  ideas,  and  enter  keenly  into  the 
business,  though  it  in  nowise  concerns  them  ;  and,  more  espe- 
cially, an  Oriental  can  never  resist  the  temptation  to  assist  when 
accounts  are  being  settled  or  money  counted  out.  The  clink  of 
coin  has  a  positive  fascination  to  them  "  (Thomson,  "  Land  and 
Book"). 

5.  Peace  to  this  house.  The  usual  oriental  salutation.  See 
Judg.  xix.  20. 

6.  If  a  son  of  peace  be  there.  So  Rev.  A  Hebraism, 
referring  to  the  character  of  the  head  of  the  house,  and  the 
tone  of  the  household.     Compare  Job  xxi.  9. 


Ch.  X.]  LUKE.  351 

7.  The  workman  is  worthy,  etc.     See  on  Matt.  x.  10. 

11.  Dust  {Kovioprbv).  From  k6vi<;,  chist,  and  Spvvfii,  to  stir 
up.     Strictly,  dust  that  is  raised  by  walking. 

Cleaveth.  See  on  Matt.  xix.  5.  Frequent  in  medical  lan- 
guage of  the  uniting  of  wounds. 

Wipe  off  {airop.daaoiie^a).     See  on  Luke  v.  2.     Only  herein 

New  Testament. 

13.  Mighty  works.    See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 

Sackcloth  (ad/cK^).  From  the  Hebrew  sa^;  what  is  knotted 
together ;  net-shaped  /  coarsely  woven.  It  was  made  of  goats' 
or  camels'  hair  (Apoc.  vi.  12),  and  was  a  material  similar  to 
that  upon  which  Paul  wrought  in  tent-making.  The  same 
word  in  Hebi'ew  is  used  to  describe  a  grain-sack,  and  this 
coarse  material  of  which  it  is  made  (Gen.  xlii.  25  ;  Josh.  ix.  4). 
So  the  Greek  crayi]  means  a  j)ack  or  iaggage.  The  same  root, 
according  to  some  etymologists,  appears  in  aarfrivii,  a  d/rag-net 
(see  Matt.  xiii.  47),  and  adr/o<;,  Latin  sagum,  a  coarse,  soldier's 
cloak.  It  was  employed  for  the  rough  garments  for  mourners 
(Esth.  iv.  1 ;  1  Kings  xxi.  27),  in  which  latter  passage  the 
sackcloth  is  piit  next  the  flesh  in  token  of  extreme  sorrow. 
Compare  2  Kings  vi.  30  ;  Job  xvi.  15. 

Ashes  (<77ro8o)).  As  a  sign  of  mourning.  Defiling  one's  self 
with  dead  things,  as  ashes  or  dirt,  as  a  sign  of  sorrow,  was 
common  among  the  Orientals  and  Greeks.  Thus  Homer  de- 
scribes Achilles  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  Patroclus : 


' '  Grasping  in  both  hands 
The  ashes  of  the  hearth,  he  showered  them  o'er 
His  head,  and  soiled  with  them  his  noble  face." 

Iliad,  xviii.,  23. 


352  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

And  Priam,  mourning  for  Hector : 

' '  In  the  midst  the  aged  man 
Sat  with  a  cloak  wrapped  round  him,  and  much  dust 
Strewn  on  his  head  and  neck,  which,  when  he  rolled 
Upon  the  earth,  he  gathered  with  his  hands." 

Iliad,  xxiv.,  168-5. 

See  1  Sam.  iv.  12 ;  2  Sam.  i.  2 ;  xiii.  19 ;  Job  ii.  12 ;  Ezek. 
xvii.  30 ;  Apoc.  xviii.  19.  In  Judith  iv.  14,  15,  in  the  mourn- 
ing over  the  ravages  of  the  Assyrians,  the  priests  minister  at 
the  altar,  girded  with  sackcloth,  and  with  ashes  on  their  mitres. 
Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  describing  a  funeral  at  Thebes,  says: 
"  Men,  women,  and  children,  with  the  body  exposed  above  the 
waist,  throw  dust  on  their  heads,  or  cover  their  faces  with 
mud "  ("  Modern  Egypt  and  Thebes ").  Stifling  with  ashes 
was  a  Persian  mode  of  punishment.  Compare  Apocrypha,  2 
Mace.  xiii.  5-7.  Herodotus  relates  that  Nitocris,  an  Egyptian 
queen,  after  having  drowned  the  murderers  of  her  brother, 
threw  herself  into  an  apartment  full  of  ashes,  in  order  to  escape 
the  vengeance  of  their  friends. 

14.  But  (ttX^v).     Kev.,  howbeit.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  22. 

15.  Which  art  exalted  to  heaven.  For  tj,  the  article,  ren- 
dered which,  the  best  texts  give  fi-q,  the  interrogative  particle ; 
and  for  the  participle  having  heen  exalted,  the  future  shalt  he 
exalted.     Pender,  as  Rev.,  Shalt  thou  he  exalted,  etc.  ? 

Hell.     Rev.,  Hades.     See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 

16.  Despiseth  {o^ereT).  See  on  Luke  vii.  30,  and  compare 
Gal.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  15. 

17.  The  seventy.  "  The  fuller  development  of  the  new  dis- 
pensation begins  with  the  mission  of  the  seventy,  and  not  with 
the  mission  of  the  apostles.  Its  ground- work,  from  Luke's  point 
of  sight,  is  the  symbolic  evangelization  of  every  nation  upon 
earth,  and  not  the  restoration  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  Ac- 
cording to  Jewish  tradition,  there  were  seventy  or  seventy-two 


Ch.  X.]  LUKE.  353 

different  nations  and  tongues  in  the  world.  In  ch.  x.  1,  some  read 
seventy-two  instead  of  seventy  "  (Westcott,  "  Int.  to  the  Study 
of  the  Gospels"). 

.18.  I  beheld  {i^ewpow).  The  verb  denotes  calm,  intent, 
continuous  contemplation  of  an  object  which  remains  before  the 
spectator.  So  John  i.  14,  we  ieheld,  implying  that  Jesus'  stay 
upon  earth,  though  brief,  was  such  that  his  followers  could 
calmly  and  leisurely  contemplate  his  glory.  Compare  John  ii. 
23 :  "  they  Ieheld  his  miracles,"  thoughtfully  and  attentively. 
Here  it  denotes  the  rapt  contemplation  of  a  vision.  The  im- 
perfect, was  ieholding,  refers  either  to  the  time  when  the 
seventy  were  sent  forth,  or  to  the  time  of  the  triumplis  which 
they  are  here  relating.  "  "While  you  were  expelling  the  sub- 
ordinates, I  was  beholding  the  Master  fall "  (Godet).  The  Ee- 
visers  do  not  seem  to  have  had  any  settled  principle  in  their 
rendering  of  this  word  throughout  the  New  Testament.  See 
my  article  on  the  Revised  New  Testament,  Presbyterian  Re- 
view, October,  1881,  p.  646  s'q. 

Satan.  A  transcription  of  the  Hebrew  word,  derived  from 
a  verb  to  lie  i/n  wait  or  oppose.  Hence  an  adversary.  In  this 
sense,  of  David,  1  Sam.  xxix.  4,  and  of  the  angel  who  met 
Balaam,  Num.  xxii.  22.  Compare  Zech.  iii.  1,  2  ;  Job  i.,  ii. 
^fa/3o\o?,  devil,  is  the  more  common  term  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    In  Apoc.  xii.  9,  both  terms  are  applied  to  him. 

As  lightning.  Describing  vividly  a  dazzling  brilliance 
suddenly  quenched. 

Fall  (Treo-owa).  Lit.,  homing  fallen.  The  aorist  marks  the 
insta/ntaneous  fall,  like  lightning. 

21.  The  best  texts  omit  Jesus. 

Rejoiced.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  6. 

In  spirit.     The  best  texts  add  raar/lq),  the  holy,  and  rendei 
in  the  Holy  Spi/rit. 
23 


354  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

I  thank.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  25.  From  this  point  to  ver.  25, 
compare  Matt.  xi.  25-27,  and  xiii.  16,  17. 

Prudent.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  25. 

22.  Are  delivered  (Tra/seSo'Sij).     See  on  Matt.  xi.  27- 

25.  Lawyer.     See  on  ch.  vii.  30. 

Tempted.     See  on  ternptation,  Matt.  vi.  13. 

To  inherit.     See  on  inheritance,  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Eternal  {alwvtov).  The  word  will  be  fully  discussed  in  the 
second  volume. 

26.  Read.     See  on  ch.  iv.  16. 

27.  Thou  shalt  love,  etc.  See  on  Mark  xii.  30.  Luke  adds 
strength. 

The  Paeablb  op  the  Good  Samaritan,  29-37.  Peculiar 
to  Luke. 

29.  Willing  {^eXcov).  Eev.,  desiring.  See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 
I  think  this  is  stronger  than  desiring  ;  rather,  determined. 

Neighbor  (ttXi/o-iW).     See  on  Matt.  v.  43. 

30.  Answering  {vTroKa^mv).  Used  by  Luke  only,  and  in 
this  sense  only  here.  See  on  ch.  vii.  43.  It  means,  strictly,  to 
take  up ;  and  hence,  of  conversation,  to  take  up  another's  dis- 
course and  reply. 

Fell  among.    See  on  Jas.  i.  2. 

Thieves  (Xj^o-rat?).  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  55  ;  and  Luke  xxiii. 
39-43.     These  were  not  petty  stealers,  but  men  of  violence,  as 


Ch.  X.]  LUKE.  355 

■was  shown  by  their  treatment  of  the  traveller.  The  road  from 
Jerusalem  to  Jericho  passed  through  a  wilderness  (Josh.  xvi.  1), 
which  was  so  notorious  for  robberies  and  murders  that  a  por- 
tion of  it  was  called  "  the  red  or  bloody  way,"  and  was  pro- 
tected by  a  fort  and  a  Koman  garrison. 

Stripped.    Not  of  his  clothing  only,  but  of  all  that  he  had. 

Wounded  {irXrjya^  iiriMvre':).  Lit.,  hewing  laid  on  blows. 
Slows  or  stripes  is  the  usual  sense  of  the  word  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. See  ch.  xii.  48  ;  Acts  xvi.  23.  It  has  the  metaphorical 
sense  oi plagues  in  Apoc.  xv.  1,  6,  8,  etc. 

Half  dead  {rmi^avfi  rvyxdvovTo).  The  fnll  force  of  the  ex- 
pression cannot  be  rendered  into  English.  The  word  Tvy)(avovTa 
throws  an  element  of  chance  into  the  case.  Lit.,  happening  to 
he  half  dead  ,•  or  "  leaving  him  half  dead,  as  it  chanced ;  "  his 
condition  being  a  matter  of  unconcern  to  these  robbers.  The 
word  rifiiBainj,  half  dead,  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament.    The  best  texts,  however,  omit  rvyx^'V^'''"" 

31.  By  chance  {Kara  avyKvplav).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. The  word  means,  literally,  a  coincidence.  By-  coinci- 
dence of  circumstances. 

There  came  down.    Imperfect,  was  going  down,  as  Eev. 

Priest.  The  Talmudists  said  that  there  were  almost  as  many 
priests  at  Jericho  as  at  Jerusalem. 

Passed  by  on  the  other  side  {avTim-apfj\S6v).  The  verb 
occurs  only  here  and  ver.  32. 

32.  Came  and  looked.  Eev.,  saw.  Seeming  to  imply 
that  the  Levite  went  farther  than  the  priest  in  coming  near  to 
the  wounded  man,  and,  having  observed  his  condition,  passed  on. 


356  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X 

33.  Came  where  he  was.  There  is  a  strong  contrast  with 
the  other  cases,  and  a  downright  heartiness  in  the  words,  /car 
avTov,  down  to  him.  The  Levite  had  come  Karci  tottov,  "  down 
to  ih.ej>lac6." 

34.  Bound  up  {KariBrja-ev).    Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Wounds  {rpavfuiTa).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Pouring  in  {iwixecov).  Eather  wpon  {iiri),  as  Kev.  "Wine 
to  cleanse,  and  oil  to  soothe.     See  Isa.  i.  6. 

Oil  and  wine.  Usual  remedies  for  sores,  wounds,  etc.  Hip- 
pocrates prescribes  for  ulcers,  "Bind  with  soft  wool,  and 
sprinkle  with  wine  and  oil." 

Beast  (kt^vos).  Perhaps  akin  to  KTrj/ia,  a  possession  /  since 
animals  anciently  constituted  wealth,  so  that  a  piece  of  property 
and  a  beast  were  synonymous  terms. 

Inn  (TravSo-x^elov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  From 
Trdv,  all,  and  Sixo/iai,  to  receive :  a  place  of  common  reception. 
See  on  inn,  ch.  ii.  7.  Remains  of  two  khans,  or  inns,  on  the 
road  between  Jericho  and  Jerusalem  are  mentioned  by  modern 
travellers.  Porter  ("  Handbook  of  Syria  and  Palestine  ")  speaks 
of  one  about  a  mile  from  Bethany,  and  another  farther  on,  at 
the  most  dangerous  part  of  the  road,  an  extensive,  ruined  cara- 
vanserai, called  Khan  el  Almah,  situated  on  the  top  of  a  bleak 
ridge.  Concerning  the  former,  Hepworth  Dixon  ("Holy 
Land  ")  says :  "  About  midway  in  the  descent  from  Bethany  to 
Jericho,  in  a  position  commanding  a  view  of  the  road  above 
and  below,  ...  on  the  very  spot  where  search  would  be 
made  for  them,  if  no  such  ruins  were  suspected  of  existing, 
stands  a  pile  of  stones,  archways,  lengths  of  wall,  which  the 
wandering  Arabs  call  Khan  Moud^ar,  and  still  make  use  of  as 
their  own  resting-place  for  the  night.  These  ruins  are  those  of 
a  noble  inn ;  the  lewan,  the  fountain,  and  the  court,  being 
plainly  traceable  in  the  ruins." 


Ch.  X,]  LUKE.  357 

35.  Two  pence.  About  thirty-five  cents.  See  on  Matt. 
XX.  2. 

I  will  repay.  The  / is  expressed  (eVoi)),  and  is  emphatic. 
Trouble  hvm  not  for  the  reckoning ;  /  will  repay. 

36.  Was  neighbor  (wXijo-iW  7e7oz/6i'ai).  More  correctly,  Aas 
become  neighbor.  Jesus  throws  himself  back  to  the  time  of 
the  story.  So  Kev.,  proved  neighbor.  "  The  neighbor  Jews 
iecrnne  strangers.  The  stranger  Samaritan  became  neighbor  to 
the  wounded  traveller  "  (Alford). 

37.  He  that  shewed  mercy  on  him.  Eather  with  him 
{jieTo)  :  dealt  with  him  as  with  a  brother.  The  lawyer  avoids 
the  hated  word  Samaritan. 

The  Yisit  at  the  house  in  Bethany,  38-42.  Peculiar  to 
Luke. 

38.  Received  {vTreSi^aro).  From  viro,  itnder,  and  Bi'xpfuu, 
to  receive.  Received  him  under  her  roof.  Martha  is  marked 
as  the  head  of  the  household.  It  was  Aer  house.  She  received 
the  guest,  and  was  chiefly  busy  with  the  preparations  for  his 
entertainment  (ver.  40). 

39.  Sat  {irapaKaSea-Beia-a).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Lit.,  sat  beside  (Trapd). 

40.  Was  cumbered  {■jrepiea-'n-aTo).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. The  Rev.  might  better  have  inserted  in  the  text  the 
marginal  rendering,  was  distracted.  The  verb  means,  literally, 
to  draw  from  aroxmd  (irepi).  Martha's  attention,  instead  of 
centring  round  Jesus,  was  drawn  hither  and  thither.  The 
"Trepi,  around,  in  composition  with  the  verb,  is  followed  imme- 
diately by  another  Tre/jt,  "  about  much  serving." 

Came  to  him  {iina-Taa-a).  Came  up  to  him,  as  Rev.,  sud- 
denly stopping  in  her  hurry. 


358  WORD  STUDIES  US  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XL 

Hath  left  {KaTiKiirev).  The  aorist,  as  Eev.,  did  leave,  in- 
dicating that  she  had  been  assisting  before  she  was  drawn  off 
by  Jesus'  presence.  Some  read  KaTeKenrev,  the  imperfect,  was 
leaving. 

Help  {<7vvavTiXd^T]Tai.).  The  verb  consists  of  three  elements : 
\ap,0dvco,  to  take  hold  ;  avv,  together  with  ;  avri,  recijprocaUy — 
doing  her  part  as  Martha  does  hers.  It  might  be  paraphrased, 
therefore,  tahe  hold  and  do  her  part  along  with  me.  It  occurs 
only  here  and  Kom.  viii.  26,  of  the  Spirit  helping  our  infirmi- 
ties, where  all  the  elements  of  the  verb  are  strikingly  exempli- 
fied. 

41.  Thou  art  anxious  (jiepi/Mvas).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  25. 

Troubled  {%pv0d^ri).  From  ^opv^o^,  tumult.  Anxious 
denotes  the  inward  uneasiness :  trovhled,  the  outward  confusion 
and  bustle. 


CHAPTER  XL 

2-4.  Compare  Matt.  vi.  9-13. 

3.  Daily  bread  {t6v  dprov  top  iirioia-iov).  Great  differences 
of  opinion  exist  among  commentators  as  to  the  strict  meaning 
of  the  word  rendered  daily.  The  principal  explanations  are  the 
following : 

1.  From  eTTiivai,  to  com.e  on.     Hence, 

a.  The  coming,  or  to-morrow's  bread. 
h.  Daily :  regarding  the  days  in  their  future  succes- 
sion. 

c.  Coniimml. 

d.  Yet  to  come,  applied  to  Christ,  the  Bread  of  life, 

who  is  to  come  hereafter. 

2.  From  bttI  and  ova-La,  ieing.     Hence, 

a.  For  our  sustenance  (physical),  and  so  necessary, 
i.  For  our  essential  life  (spiritual). 

c.  Above  all  heing,  hence  p?'e-eminent,  excellent. 

d.  Abundant. 


Ch.  XI.  ]  LUKE.  359 

It  would  be  profitless  to  the  English  reader  to  go  into  the  dis- 
cussion. A  scholar  is  quoted  as  saying  that  the  term  is  "  the 
rack  of  theologians  and  grammarians."  A  satisfactory  discus- 
sion must  assume  the  reader's  knowledge  of  Greek.  Those  who 
are  interested  in  the  question  will  find  it  treated  by  Tholuck 
("  Sermon  on  the  Mount "),  and  also  very  exhaustively  by 
Bishop  Lightfoot  ("On  a  Fresh  Kevision  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment"). The  latter  adopts  the  derivation  from  i-n-iivai,  to  come 
on,  and  concludes  by  saying,  "the  familiar  rendering,  daily, 
which  has  prevailed  uninterruptedly  in  the  Western  Church 
from  the  beginning,  is  a  fairly  adequate  representation  of  the 
original ;  nor,  indeed,  does  the  English  language  furnish  any 
one  word  which  .would  answer  the  purpose  so  well."  The  ren- 
dering in  the  margin  of  Rev.  is,  our  Ijveadfor  the  coming  day. 
It  is  objected  to  this  that  it  contradicts  the  Lord's  precept  in 
Matt.  vi.  34,  not  to  be  anxious  for  the  morrow.  But  the  word 
does  not  necessarily  mean  the  morrow.  "  If  the  prayer  were 
said  in  the  evening,  no  doubt  it  would  mean  the  following  day  / 
but  supposing  it  to  be  used  before  dawn,  it  would  designate  the 
day  then  breaking  "  (the  coming  day).  "  And  further,  if  the 
command  not  to  be  anxious  is  tantamount  to  a  prohibition 
against  prayer  for  the  object  about  which  we  are  forbidden  to 
be  anxious,  then  not  only  must  we  not  pray  for  to-morrow's 
food,  but  we  must  not  pray  for  food  at  all ;  since  the  Lord  bids 
us  (Matt.  vi.  25)  not  to  be  anxious  for  our  Zi/e"  (Lightfoot, 
condensed). 

4.  Forgive.    See  on  ch.  iii.  3 ;  Jas.  v.  15. 

Sins  {afiaprlof;).  See  on  Matt.  i.  21.  Compare  debts.  Matt, 
vi.  12. 

Tliat  is  indebted.     Matthew's  debts  appears  here. 

Lead  {elaeve<yKy<;).  Eev.  gives  "  bring  us  not,"  which,  be- 
sides being  a  more  accurate  rendering  of  the  word  (etV,  into, 
(fiipo),  to  bear  or  bring),  avoids  the  invidious  liint  of  seducing  or 
enticing  which  attaches  to  lead.     James  tells  us  that  God  does 


360  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XI 

not  tempt  any  man  (i.  13) ;  but  the  circumstances  of  a  man's 
life  often,  indeed  ahoays,  involve  possibilities  of  temptation. 
A  caution  is  written  even  over  the  door  of  God's  own  house 
(Eccl.  V.  1).  God  also  sends  trials  to  prove  and  chasten  us; 
but  something  may  change  the  salutary  power  of  trial  into  the 
corrupting  power  of  evil  solicitation ;  and  that  something,  as 
James  tells  us  (i.  14),  is  our  own  evil  desire.  God  tempteth  no 
man ;  but  "  every  man  is  tempted  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his 
own  lust  and  enticed."  We  pray,  therefore,  "  suffer  us  not  to  be 
drawn  away  by  our  own  lusts :  keep  us  out  of  the  power  of  our 
own  evil  hearts.  Thou  knowest  our  frame,  and  rememberest 
that  we  are  dust.  Kemember  our  weakness.  What  thou  imposest 
we  would  not  shun.  What  thou  dost  not  impose,  keep  us  from 
seeking.  Forbid  that  our  evil  desire  should  convert  our  tempt- 
able  condition  into  actual  temptation.  -Keep  us  out  of  situations 
in  which,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  it  would  be  beyond  our 
present  strength  to  keep  from  sinning."  It  is  not  a  coward's 
prayer.  No  man  is  a  coward  for  being  afraid  of  his  own  heart. 
It  marks  the  highest  quality  of  courage  to  know  what  to  be 
afraid  of  and  to  fear  it.  To  pray  that  God  will  not  bring  us 
within  the  possibility  of  temptation,  would  be  to  ignore  our 
manhood,  or  to  pray  to  be  taken  out  of  the  world.  But  we 
may  pray,  and  will  surely  pray,  the  more  keenly  conscious  we 
become  of  the  weakness  of  our  nature,  that  God  will  not  suffer 
the  trials  of  life  to  become  temptations  to  evil. 

Temptation.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  13. 

The  Paeable  of  the  Fkiend  at  Midnight,  5-9.  Peculiar 
to  Luke. 

5.  Set  before.     See  on  ch.  ix.  16. 

7.  My  children  are  with  me  in  bed.  "A  whole  family — 
parents,  children,  and  servants — sleep  in  the  same  room" 
(Thomson,  "  Land  and  Book  ").  Tynd.,  my  servants  are  with  me 
in  the  chamber. 


Ch.  XI.]  LUKE.  361 

8.  Importunity  {avaiSetav).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
A  very  striking  word  to  describe  persistence.  Lit.,  shcMneless- 
ness.  As  related  to  prayer,  it  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of 
Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom  (Gen.  xviii.  23-33) ;  and  of 
the  Syro-Phoenician  woman  (Matt.  xv.  22-28). 

9.  Ask  {alreiTe).  The  word  for  the  asking  of  an  inferior 
(Acts  xii.  20  ;  iii.  2) ;  and  hence  of  man  from  God  (Matt.  vii. 
7 ;  Jas  i.  5).  Christ  never  uses  the  word  of  his  own  asking 
from  the  Father,  but  always  ipwrSi,  as  asking  on  equal  terms. 
Martha  shows,  her  low  conception  of  his  person  when  she  uses 
the  term  of  his  asking  God  (John  xi.  22).* 

Ask,  seek,  knock.  "  The  three  repetitions  of  the  com- 
mand are  more  than  mere  repetitions ;  since  to  seek  is  more 
than  to  ask,  and  to  knock  than  to  seek  "  (Trench,  "  Parables  "). 

11.  Of  any  of  you  (rtVa).  The  A.  V.  renders  as  though  the 
pronoun  were  indefinite  ;  but  it  is  interrogative  and  commences 
the  sentence.  Kev.,  therefore,  rightly,  of  which  of  you  that  is 
a  father,  etc. 

13.  Being  {vTrdpxovre'!).     See  on  Jas.  ii.  15. 

Heavenly  Father.     Lit,  theFatker,  he  who  isfromSeaven. 

14,  15,  17-23.  Compare  Matt.  xii.  22-37. 

14.  Dumb  (icaxjiov).     See  on  Matt.  ix.  32. 

15.  Beelzebub.     See  on  Matt.  x.  25. 

16.  Tempting.     See  on  temptation,  Matt.  vi.  13. 
Sign.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 

17.  Thoughts  (Siavo'^fiaTa).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Primarily  with  a  sense  of  intent,  _purpose. 

*  Further  examination  has  convinced  me  that  this  distinction  is  unfounded. 
See  Prof.  Ezra  Abbot's  "  Critical  Essays." 


362  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XL 

A  house  divided  against  itself  falleth  {oIko';  eirl  oIkov 
■jTiTTTet).  Some  make  this  an  enlargement  on  the  previous  sen- 
tence— a  more  detailed  description  of  the  general  is  brought  to 
desolation,  and  render  house  falleth  upon  house.  So  Kev.,  mar- 
gin. It  might  be  taken  metaphorically :  the  divided  kingdom 
is  brought  to  desolation,  and  its  families  and  households  in  their 
party  strifes  are  brought  to  ruin.  Wye,  amd  am,  house  shall 
fall  on  an  house.     Tynd.,  one  house  shall  fall  wpon  another. 

18.  Satan.     See  on  ch.  x.  18. 

Be  divided.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  26. 

20.  Is  come  upon  you.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  28. 

21.  A  strong  man  (o  la-xypb^).  It  has  the  article :  the 
strong  man.     So  Rev.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  29. 

Armed  (Ka.Ja)7r\to-/tej/o?).  Fully  armed:  down  (KaTo)  from 
head  to  heel. 

His  palace  (eavrov  avk^qv).  Lit.,  his  own.  ^AvXrj  is  strictly 
the  open  court  in  front  of  a  house :  later,  the  court  round  which 
the  house  is  built,  and  so  applied  to  the  house  generally,  as  our 
door  or  roof.  Rev.,  court ;  for  there,  in  the  open  space,  com- 
manding the  doors,  he  would  mount  guard. 

22.  A  stronger.     Also  with  the  article:  the  stronger. 

All  his  armor  {rrjv  •jravoirXlav).  Wrong;  for  the  armor  is 
regarded  as  a  whole — the  panoply — which  is  a  transcript  of  this 
word.     Rightly,  Rev. ,  his  whole  armor.     Tynd.,  his  harness. 

Spoils  (ra  o-«{)Xa).  See  on  Mark  v.  35.  Compare  on  groot^, 
Matt.  xii.  29. 

24.  Dry  p\aces  {avvBpeov roTrav).  Rev.,  more  literally,  icater- 
less.     The  haunts  of  evil  spirits  (Isa.  xiii.  21,  22  ;  xxxiv.  14). 


Ch.  XL]  ^  LUKE.  363 

By  satyrs  in  these  two  passages  are  meant  goblins  shaped  like 
goats,  which  were  sacrificed  to  by  some  of  the  Israelites  (Lev. 
xvii.  Y ;  2  Chron.  xi.  15) ;  a  remnant  of  the  Egyptian  worship 
of  Mendes  or  Pan,  who,  under  the  figure  of  a  goat,  was  wor- 
shipped by  the  Egyptians  as  the  fertilizing  principle  in  nature. 
In  Isa.  xxxiv.  14,  it  is  said  "the  screech-owl  shall  rest  there." 
This  is  rendered  in  margin  of  A.  Y.  and  in  the  Eev.,  Old  Tes- 
tament, the  night-monster  (Hebrew,  Lilith) ;  and  by  Cheyne 
(Isaiah)  night-fairy.  The  reference  is  to  a  popular  superstition 
that  Lilith,  Adam's  first  wife,  forsook  him  and  became  a  demon 
which  murdered  young  children  and  haunted  desert  places. 

Rest.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  28. 

26.  Taketh  to  him  (■jrapaXa/ji^dvei).     See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 

Seven.     Emphatic  :  "taketh  spirits,  seven  of  them." 

More  wicked.     See  on  ch.  iii.  19  ;  Mark  vii.  21. 

Dwell  («aToiK6t).  Settle  down  {Kara)  to  make  their  dwelling 
{oIkoi})  there. 

27.  B  lessed,  etc.   "  She  speaks  well,  but  womanly  "  (Bengel). 
29-36.  Compare  Matt.  xii.  38-45. 

29.  Were  gathered  thick  together  {e-rra^poil^ofievav).  The 
present  participle ;  and  therefore,  as  Kev.,  were  gathering  to- 
gether unto  him,,  or  v^on  him  (ivi).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

Evil.    See  on  adulterous.    Matt.  xii.  39. 

30.  A  sign  to  the  Ninevites.    Compare  Matt.  xii.  40. 

31.  Shall  rise  up  (iyep^a-eTai).     From  the  dead. 


364  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XI. 

A  greater  (7r\etov).  Lit.,  something  more.  See  on  Matt, 
xii.  6.     Wye,  here  is  more  than  Solomon. 

32.  Shall  rise  up  {uvainria-ovTai).  This  verb  is  also  used  of 
rising  from  the  dead,  and  that  is  implied  here  ;  but  the  mean- 
ing is,  shall  a^ear  as  witness.  Hence  Kev.,  stand  wp.  See 
on  Matt.  xii.  41. 

Preaching  {icripv^iia).  The  proclamation.  See  on  2  Pet. 
ii.  5. 

33.  Candle.    Properly,  lamp. 

Secret  place  {KpinrTrjv).     Eather,  a  cellar  or  crypt,  which 

latter  is  the  Greek  word  transcribed. 

The  bushel.    See  on  Matt.  v.  15. 

Candlestick.    Properly  s^aw?.     See  on  Matt.  v.  15. 

Which  enter  in  (ela-iropevofievoi).  Better  with  the  con- 
tinuous force  of  the  present  participle,  are  entering  m  from 
time  to  time. 

Light  (^€7705).  The  word  occurs  in  only  two  other  places: 
Matt.  xxiv.  29  ;  Mark  xiii.  24,  on  which  see  notes. 

34.  Single— full  of  light.    See  on  Matt.  vi.  22. 

35.  The  light  that  is  in  thee.  Lit.,  the  light,  that,  namely, 
which  is  in  thee  ;  thus  emphasizing  the  inward  light.  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  23. 

36.  The  bright  shining  of  a  candle  (o  Xvxyof  tjj  dtrrpaTrff). 

More  correctly,  as  Eev.,  the  lamp  with  its  bright  shining. 
'Aa-TpaTTTj  means  lightning :  see  ch.  x.  18  ;  and  that  is  the 
usual  meaning  in  classical  Greek,  though  it  occurs,  rarely,  of 
the  light  of  a  lamp.  It  is  used  here  to  emphasize  the  idea  of 
moral  illumination. 


Oh.  XI.]  LUKE.  365 

3Y.  Besought  (epwra).  Too  strong.  Better,  as  Eev.,  asfeziA. 
The  present  tense. 

Dine  [apiaTqarj).  See  on  dinner,  Matt,  xxii,  4.  The  morn- 
ing meal,  immediately  after  the  return  from  morning  prayers  in 
the  synagogue. 

38.  Washed  {i^airria^).     See  on  Mark  vii.  4.    ' 

39.  Platter  (TrtVaKo?).  The  word  rendered  charger  in  Matt, 
xiv.  8,  on  which  see  note.  Compare,  also,  irapo'^k,  platter. 
Matt,  xxiii.  25. 

41.  Such  things  as  ye  have  (ja  evovra).  Only  herein  New 
Testament.  Commentators  differ  as  to  the  meaning,  but  gen- 
erally reject  that  of  the  A.  Y.  Eev.,  those  things  which  are 
within.  The  meaning  is,  give  alms  of  the  contents  of  the  cups 
and  platters.  Jesus  is  insisting  upon  inward  righteousness  as 
against  pharisaic  externalism,  and  says:  "Your  virtue  consists 
in  washing  the  outside,,  and  making  a  respectable  appearance. 
Cultivate  rather  the  loving,  brotherly  spirit  of  inward  right- 
eousness, which  will  prompt  you  to  give  of  the  food  which  the 
vessels  contain  (that  which  is  within)  to  your  suffering  brother." 
"  Do  yon  think  it  is  enough  to  wash  your  hands  before  eating  ? 
There  is  a  surer  means.  Let  some  poor  man  partake  of  your 
meats  and  wines  "  (Godet).  So  Eengel,  Meyer,  Alford.  Com- 
pare Matt.  ix.  13 ;  Hos.  vi.  6.  Wye,  That  thing  that  is  over 
(i.e.,  remaining  in  the  dishes)  give  ye  alms* 

42.  Ye  tithe  {cuKoheKaTovre).  Tithe  is  tenth.  See  on  Matt. 
xxiii.  23. 

Rue  {vT^avov).  Probably  from  iri^yvvfii,  to  make  fast ;  be- 
cause of  its  thick,  fleshy  leaves.  Matthew  has  anise.  See  on 
xxiii.  23. 

*  The  Eev.  is  not  open  to  the  charge  of  Mr.  Yonge  ( Expositor,  3d  Series, 
v. ,  318)  of  "  construing  through  a  brick  wall."  The  rendering  is  quite  "  in- 
telligible ;  "  quite  as  much  so  as  Mr.  Y.'s  "  cleanse  the  within  by  alms." 


366  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XI 

Herb  i;\dxavov).  See  on  Mark  iv.  32.  "Wye.  has  wort,  orig- 
inally the  general  term  for  a  plant.  Hence  coUwort,  Irner- 
wort,  and  similar  words.  Compare  the  German  wurz,  root  or 
herh. 

43.  Pharisees  (rot?  ^apia-a(oi<;).  Luke's  form  of  expression 
differs  from  that  of  Matthew,  who  says,  "  ye  Pharisees ;  while 
Luke  has  "  woe  unto  you,  the  Pharisees,"  marking  them  by  the 
article  as  a  well-known  religious  body. 

44.  Tombs  which  appear  not  [ra  ixvqfieia  ra  aSrpui).  Lit., 
the  tombs,  the  unseen  ones.  The  word  aBrj\o<;,  una/^arent,  oc- 
curs only  here  and  1  Cor.  xiv.  8,  of  the  trumpet  giving  an  vav- 
certain  sound. 

That  wall<  over  {'rrepnraTovvTe'i).  The  participle,  and  with- 
out the  article ;  and  therefore  better,  as  they  walk;  walk  about 
(Trepi)  on  their  daily  business.  In  Matthew  the  sepulchres  are 
whitened,  that  men  may  see  them  and  avoid  ceremonial  defile- 
ment. Here  they  are  not  seen,  and  men  walking  on  them  are 
unconsciously  defiled.     See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  27. 

45.  Reproachest  (uiSpt'^ets).  The  lawyer  converts  Jesus' 
reproach  (see  Mark  xvi.  14,  upbraided)  into  an  insult;  the 
word  meaning  to  outrage  or  affront. 

Us  also  («:al  ij/^Ss).     Or  perhaps  better,  even  us,  the  learned. 

46.  Also  («:at).  Emphatic.  "  ^ww  or  afoo  unto  you  lawyers, 
woe."  ISTote  the  article  as  in  the  address  to  the  Pharisees  (ver. 
43) :  You,  the  lawyers. 

Ye  lade.     Compare  hea/oy  laden.  Matt.  xi.  28. 

Grievous  to  be  borne  {Bvcr^daraKTa).  Only  here  and  Matt, 
xxiii.  4. 

Touch  {irpoa-yjraveTe).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  A 
technical  term  in  medicine  for  feeling  gently  a  sore  part  of  the 
body,  or  the  pulse.     Matt,  xxiii.  4,  has  Kivrja-ai,  move. 


Ch.  XII.]  LUKE.  367 

47.  Ye  build.  Or  are  huildmg,  carrying  on  the  work  now. 
See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  29. 

Tombs  of  the  prophets.    See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  29. 

48.  Ye  bear  witness  that  ye  allow  (jidpTvper  eo-re  km 
a-vvevBoKeiTe).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  ye  a/re  witnesses  and  con- 
sent. The  compound  verb  means  "  give  your  full  approval." 
Ye  think  (So/eetre) ;  favorably  (eu) ;  along  with  them  {avv). 

51.  The  altar  and  the  temple.  OIkov,  temple,  lit,  house, 
is  equivalent  to  vaov,  sanctuary  (Eev.),  in  Matt,  xxiii.  35.  The 
altar  is  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  5 ;  and 
compare  2  Chron.  xxiv.  18-21. 

53.  To  urge  him  vehemently  (Seww?  evexeiv).  See  on 
Mark  vi.  19. 

Provoke  to  speak  {airotrTOfuiTl^eiv).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  From  airo,  from,  and  a-Toiia,  the  mouth.  Origi- 
nally to  dictate  to  a  pupil  what  he  is  to  learn  by  heart.  Thus 
Plato :  "  When  the  grammar-master  dictated  (avoa-TOfiaTi^ot,) 
to  you  "  ("  Euthydemus,"  276).  Hence  to  catechize,  with  the 
idea  of  putting  words  into  Christ's  mouth,  and  making  him  say 
what  they-wanted  him  to  say. 

54.  Lying  in  wait — to  catch  (eVeSpeuoi/re? — Sijpeva-ai).  Met- 
aphors from  hunting. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  An  innumerable  multitude  {r&v  fivpiMwv  tow  o')(\jov). 
The  word  fivpltK  strictly  means  a  number  of  ten  thovsa/nd.  It 
is  our  word  myriad.   Hence,  generally,  of  any  countless  number. 

First  of  all.  Many  connect  this  with  what  follows:  "first 
of  all  beware,"  etc. 

Leaven.    See  on  Matthew  xiii.  33. 


368  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XIL 

Which  (^Tt?).  Classifying  the  leaven ;  which  belongs  to  the 
category  of  hypocrisy. 

Hypocrisy.     See  on  hypocrites,  Matt,  xxiii.  13. 

2.  Covered  up  (a-vjKeicaXviJLfjiivov).  Only  here  in  ITew 
Testament :  implying  close  concealment. 

3.  Closets  {rafieioiq).  The  word  has  the  same  root  as 
reij,vw,  to  cut  or  dwide,  and  means  an  apartment  where  supplies 
are  divided  and  apportioned :  a  treasury,  magazine,  and  there- 
fore a  secret  and  well-guarded  place.  There  the  stewa/rd 
(Ta/j,ia<s),  the  distributor,  has  his  seat. 

House-tops.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  17. 

4.  Unto  you,  my  friends  (vfiiv  rot?  (fiiXoK  /lov).  See  on 
Pharisees  and  lawyers,  ch.  xi.  43,  46.  Not  an  address,  "  O 
my  friends,"  but,  "  unto  you,  the  friends  of  me." 

Be  not  afraid  of  (jiri  i^o^'q^Te  airo).  Lit,  "  fear  not  from  ;  " 
i.e.,  from  the  hands  of. 

5.  I  will  forewarn  (uTToSei'^ft)).  'Rev.,  warn.  See  pnwa^ned, 
ch.  iii.  7. 

Hell.     See  on  Matt.  V.  22. 

6.  Sparrows.     See  on  Matt.  x.  29. 
Fall.     See  on  Matt.  X.  29. 

7.  Confess  me.    Lit.,  "  confess  in  me."   See  on  Matt.  x.  32. 

10.  A  word  {\6yov).  Distinguished  from  hlaspheme,  which 
follows.  A  word  against  the  poor  and  humble  Son  of  Man 
might,  as  Godet  observes,  have  proceeded  from  a  sincerely 
pious  Jew,  under  the  influence  of  his  early  education,  which 
taught  him  to  regard  Jesns  as  an  enthusiast  or  even  as  an  im- 


Ch.  XII.]  LUKE.  369 

postor.  The  sin  of  the  Jews  was  in  rejecting  and  resisting  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  Pentecost.  Pardon  was  offered  them  there 
for  the  sin  of  crucifying  the  Lord  (see  Acts  ii.  38-40,  and  com- 
pare Acts  iii.  17-19). 

11.  Answer  {aTroXoy^a-rja-^e).     See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

14.  Made  {Karia-nja-ev).     Appointed  or  constituted. 

15.  Beware  of  {<pv\da-a-ea-S^e  airo).     Lit.,   guard  ^/ourselves 
from. 

17.  Bestow  {avvd^o}).     Lit.,  gather  together. 

18.  Fruits  {yev^iMara).  Some  texts,  however,  read  ror  o-trov, 
my  corn.     So  Rev. 

19.  Soul  {yjrvxv)-     See  on  Mark  xii.  30. 
Take  thine  ease.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  28. 

20.  F oo\  (dcjjpmv).  Senseless.  In  Xenophon's  " Memorabilia," 
Socrates,  addressing  Aristodemus,  says,  "  Which  do  you  take  to 
be  the  more  worthy  of  admiration,  those  who  make  images 
without  sense  {d^povd)  or  motion,  or  those  who  make  intelligent 
and  active  creations  ?  "  (1,  iv.,  4).  Sometimes,  also,  in  the  sense 
of  crazed,  framtic,  but  never  in  New  Testament. 

Is  required  {airaiTova-iv).  Lit.,  they  require;  i.e.,  the  mes- 
sengers of  God.     The  indefiniteness  is  impressive. 

Whose  shall  those  things  be  which  thou  hast  pro- 
vided ?  The  Greek  order  puts  that  first  which  was  upper- 
most in  the  rich  man's  thought — his  accumulations :  "  and  the 
things  which  thou  hast  provided  (Rev.,  j>rej)ared),  whose  shall 
they  be  ? "  God  does  not  say,  "  the  things  which  thou  hast 
or possessest."  The  whole  question  of  the  tenure  of  his  prop- 
erty is  opened  for  the  rich  man.  He  had  said  m/y  fruits 
24 


370  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XII. 

and  my  goods.  ls"ow  his  proprietorship  is  ignored.  They  are 
not  his.  Whose  shall  they  be  ?  He  is  to  be  dispossessed  af 
once.  Plato  relates  how  Pluto  complained  to  Zeus  that  the 
souls  of  the  dead  found  their  way  to  the  wrong  places,  be- 
cause the  judged  have  their  clothes  on,  and  evil  souls  are 
clothed  in  fair  bodies,  so  that  the  judges,  who  also  have  their 
clothes  on  and  their  souls  veiled  by  their  mortal  part,  are  de- 
ceived. Zeus  replies:  "In  the  first  place,  I  will  deprive  meu 
of  the  foreknowledge  of  death  which  they  now  have.  In  the 
second  place,  they  shall  be  entirely  stripped  before  they  are 
judged,  for  they  shall  be  judged  when  they  are  dead  ;  and  the 
judge,  too,  shall  be  naked  ;  that  is  to  say,  dead.  He,  with  his 
naked  soul,  shall  pierce  into  the  other  naked  soul,  and  they 
shall  die  suddenly  and  be  deprived  of  all  their  kindred,  and 
leave  their  brave  attire  strewn  upon  the  earth  "  ("  Gorgias,"  523). 

22.  Take  no  thought.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  25. 

24.  Consider.     See  on  Matt.  vii.  3. 
Storehouse  (ra/j,eiov).     See  onver.  3. 

25.  Stature  {tjXikmv).  The  original  meaning  of  the  word  is 
time  of  life,  age.  So,  commonly,  in  classical  Greek.  See,  also, 
John  ix.  21,  23  ;  Heb.  xi.  11.  The  other  meaning,  stature,  also 
occurs.  Herodotus  speaks  of  one  who  was  of  the  same  height 
{rjXtKi'^v)  with  another  (iii.  16).  But  both  the  usage  and  the 
connection  are  in  favor  of  the  meaning  age.  A  measure  of 
time  is  sometimes  represented  by  a  measure  of  length,  as  in  Ps. 
xxxix.  5  ;  but,  most  of  all,  the  addition  of  a  cubit  (a  foot  and  a 
half)  to  one's  stature  would  not  be  a  small  one,  as  the  text  im- 
plies {that  which  is  least),  but  a  very  large  one.  Moreover,  Christ 
is  speaking  of  food  and  clothing,  the  object  of  which  is  to  foster 
and  prolong  life.     Rev.,  age,  in  margin. 

21.  How  they  grow.  Some  texts  omit  they  grow,  and  read 
how  they  toil  not,  etc. 


Ch.  Xn.]  LXIKE.  371 

Toil — spin  {Kotriq. — vjj^et).     Some  read,  instead  of  ^oiZ,  u^a^ 


28.  Which  is  to-day  in  the  field.  Construe  in  the  field -^xih 
the  grass;  and  render  is  absolutely  :  exists,  lives.  So  Rev.,  the 
grass  in  the  field  which  to-day  is. 

Oven  {icXl^avov).  Sti-ictly,  a  covered  earthen  vessel,  wider  at 
bottom  than  at  top,  in  which  bread  was  baked  by  putting  hot 
embers  round  it.  The  regular  oven  or  furnace  is  ittto?.  Herod- 
otus, speaking  of  the  papyrus-plant  (byblus),  the  lower  portion 
of  which  is  used  for  food,  says,  "  Such  as  wish  to  enjoy  the  by- 
blus in  full  perfection,  bake  it  first  in  a  closed  vessel  {ev  KKi^dv^), 
heated  to  a  glow  "  (ii.,  92). 

And  seek  not  what  ye,  etc.  Ye  is  emphatic :  "  and  ye,  seek 
not  what,"  etc. 

29.  Be  ye  of  doubtful  mind  (/j-erempi^ecrBe).  Only  here  in 
New  Testanient.  The  verb  primarily  means  to  raise  to  a  height  / 
buoy  up,  as  with  false  hopes ;  and  so  to  urisettle,  or  excite,  or 
keep  in  fluctuation.  Thus  Thucydides  says  of  the  war  between 
Athens  and  Sparta :  "  All  Hellas  was  excited  {/lerecopos;)  by  the 
coming  conflict  between  the  two  chief  cities"  (ii.,  8). 

33.  Bags  (^aXXdvna).  From  /SaKKoy,  to  throw.  Something 
into  which  money  and  other  things  are  cast.  Rev.,  purses.  See 
on  ch.  X.  4.     Wye. ,  satchels. 

Moth.     Compare  Jas.  v.  2. 

36.  Shall  return  {avaXvcrr}).  The  verb  means,  originally,  to 
unloose :  so  of  vessels,  to  unloose  their  moorings  and  go  to  sea. 
Of  departing  generally.  This  is  its  sense  in  the  only  other  pas- 
sage where  it  occurs,  Philip,  i.  23,  "  having  a  desire  to  depart, 
or  break  up;  the  metaphor  being  drawn  from  breaking  up  an 
encampment."  Compare  departure  [avaKvaeai),  2  Tim.  iv.  6. 
The  rendering  return  is  a  kind  of  inference  from  this  :  when 
he  shall  leave  the  wedding  and  return. 


372  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XII. 

Viedd'mg  {T&vyd/Mav).  Properly,  the  marriage/^asi!.  See 
on  Matt.  xxii.  2. 

37.  Watching.     See  on  Mark  xiii.  35. 

Gird  himself.  As  a  servant  girding  up  his  loose  garments 
to  wait  on  the  table. 

Serve.     See  on  minister,  Matt.  xx.  26. 

38.  Second  watch.     See  on  Mark  xiii.  35. 

39.  What  hour  {iroia&pa).     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  42. 

Would  come.     Lit.,  oometh.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  43. 

Broken  through.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  19. 

42.  That  faithful  and  wise  steward.  Lit.,  that  faithful 
steward,  the  wise  man. 

Household  {S-epaTreia';).  From  its  original  meaning  oi.  wait- 
ing on,  attendance  (Luke  ix.  11),  it  comes  to  mean  the  retinue  of 
attendants ;  the  body  of  household  servants. 

Portion  of  meat  {cmoiJberpiov).     Lit.,  measure  of  food. 

In  due  season.  At  the  appointed  time  for  distributing 
rations.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  45. 

45.  Delayeth.  The  emphatic  word,  since  the  thought  of 
the  lord's  delay  and  of  the  ^postponement  of  the  reckoning  is, 
uppermost  in  the  servant's  thought. 

46.  Unbelievers  {airla-rajv).  Much  better  as  Kev.,  the  un- 
faithful;  for  it  is  oi  fidelity,  not  oi faith,  that  Christ  is  speak- 
ing.    Wye,  unfaithful  men. 

48.  Stripes.    See  on  ch.  x.  30. 


Ch.  XII.]  LUKE.  373 

Commit.    See  on  set  hefore,  ch.  ix.  16. 

49.  Fire.  A  spiritual  impulse  which  shall  result  in  the  divis- 
ions described  in  the  following  verses. 

50.  Am  I  straitened.  See  on  ch.  iv.  38,  and  compare  2  Cor. 
V.  14 ;  Philip,  i.  23.     Wye,  constrained. 

53.  The  father  shall  be  divided,  etc.  But  the  verb  is  in 
the  plural.  Eightly,  as  Eev.,  "  They  shall  be  divided,  the 
father  against  the  son,"  etc. 

Daughter-in-law.     See  on  Matt.  x.  35. 

54.  A  cloud.  With  the  definite  article,  the  cloud,  which 
you  so  often  see. 

There  cometh  a  shower.  Or,  a  shower  is  coming.  See 
on  Jas.  V.  Y. 

It  is  (yiverai).     Better,  as  Kev.,  it  cometh  to  pass. 

55.  Heat  (Kava-mv).     See  on  Jas.  i.  10  ;  Matt.  xx.  12. 

Discern  (SoKifid^ew).  See  on  trial  and  tried,  1  Pet.  i.  7.  It 
means  here  test  or  jprove.  You  can  test  and  prove  the  weather 
by  your  signs ;  but  you  cannot  apply  the  proof  which  lies  in  the 
signs  of  the  times.  Kev.,  interpret,  gives  the  idea.  Wye, 
prove. 

57.  Of  yourselves.  In  the  exercise  of  your  ordinary  habits 
of  observation  which  you  apply  to  the  heavens. 

58.  When  thou  goest  (w?  <yap  v'7rdyeL<;).  The  A.  Y.  does  not 
translate  yap,  for.  Rev.,  correctly,  for  as  thou  art  going.  Their 
own  judgment  should  show  them  the  necessity  of  repentance 
toward  God ;  and  this  duty  is  urged  under  the  figure  of  a 
debtor  who  meets  his  creditor  in  the  way,  and  whose  best 
policy  it  is  to  make  terms  on  the  spot. 


374  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XHL 

As  thou  art  in  the  way.  Emphatic,  standing  first  in  the 
Greek  order:  "  On  the  way  give  diligence." 

Hale  (varoo-vjoj;).  Drag.  Compare  AawZ.  Only  here  in  New 
Testament. 

Officer  {■n-paKTopi).  From  irpda-a-a),  to  effect  or  accomplish  ; 
to  bring  things  to  an  issue,  and  hence  to  exact.  The  name 
jprahtor  was  given  at  Athens  to  an  officer  charged  with  the 
collection  of  taxes  ;  hence  an  exactor,  as  Rev.,  in  margin.  Only 
here  in  New  Testament. 

Mite  (A.eTTToi').     See  on  Mark  xii.  42. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

4.  Sinners  (o^etXerai).  Lit.,  debtors.  Possibly  with  refer- 
ence to  the  figure  at  the  close  of  the  last  chapter.  Compare 
Matt.  V.  25  ;  vi.  12 ;  xviii.  24 ;  Luke  xi.  4. 

7.  These  three  years  I  conne.  The  best  texts  insert  d^'  ou, 
from  which,  or  since.  "It  is  three  years  from  the  time  at 
which  I  came." 

Cut  it  down  (eK/eoi/roi^).  Eather,  "cut  it  out^^  (ck)  from 
among  the  other  trees  and  the  vines. 

Why  cumbereth  it.  The  A.  V.  omits  the  very  important 
Kal,  also  (Rev.),  which,  as  Trench  observes,  is  the  key-word  of 
the  sentence.  Besides  being  barren  in  itself,  it  also  injures  the 
soil.  "  Not  only  is  it  unfruitful,  but  it  draws  away  the  juices 
which  the  vines  would  extract  from  the  earth,  intercepts  the 
sun,  and  occupies  room  "  (Bengel).  The  verb  cumbereth  {kut- 
apyei)  means  to  make  of  no  effect.  So  Rom.  iii.  3,  31 ;  Gal. 
111.  17.  Cumbereth  expresses  the  meaning  in  a  very  general  and 
comprehensive  way.  The  specific  elements  included  in  it  are 
expressed  by  Bengel  above.  De  Wette,  mahes  the  land  un- 
fruitful.    See  on  ba/rren  and  unfruitful,  2  Pet.  i.  8. 


Ch.  XIII.]  LUKE.  375 

9.  And  if  it  bear  fruit,  well  ;  and  if  not,  then  after  that. 

Join  after  that  with  hear  fruit.  "  If  it  bear  hxAt  for  the  future 
(ek  TO  /jLeXKov,  Rev.,  thenceforth),  well ;  but  if  not,  thou  shalt 
cut  it  down."  Trench  ("Parables")  cites  an  Arabian  writer's 
receipt  for  curing  a  palm-tree  of  barrenness.  "  Thou  must  take 
a  hatchet,  and  go  to  the  tree  with  a  friend,  unto  whom  thou 
sayest,  '  I  will  cut  down  this  tree,  for  it  is  unfruitful.'  He  an- 
swers, '  Do  not  so,  this  year  it  will  certainly  bear  fruit.'  But 
the  other  says,  '  It  must  needs  be — it  must  be  hewn  down  ; ' 
and  gives  the  stem  of  the  tree  three  blows  with  the  back  of  the 
hatchet.  But  the  other  restrains  him,  cryiiig,  '  Nay,  do  it  not, 
thou  wilt  certainly  have  fruit  from  it  this  year,  only  have 
patience  with  it,  and  be  not  overhasty  in  cutting  it  down  ;  if 
it  still  refuses  to  bear  fruit,  then  cut  it  down.'  Then  will  the 
tree  that  year  be  certainly  fruitful  and  bear  abundantly." 
Trench  adds  that  this  story  appears  to  be  widely  spread  in  the 
East. 

Thou  shalt  cut  it  down.  The  vine-dresser  does  not  say, 
"  /  will  cut,"  but  refers  that  to  the  master. 

11.  Spirit  of  infirmity.  A  spirit  which  caused  infirmity. 
An  evil  demon,  see  ver.  16,  though  it  is  not  certain  that  it  was 
a  case  of  possession.  The  details  of  the  disease,  and  the  noting 
of  the  time  of  its  continuance,  are  characteristic  of  a  physician's 
narrative. 

Bowed  together  {a-vyKirn-rovaa).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

Lift  herself  up  {avaxinfrai).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
unless  John  viii.  7-10  be  accepted  as  genuine.  Used  by  Galen 
of  strengthening  the  vertebrae  of  the  spine. 

12.  Thou  art  loosed  {airoKekvaai).  The  only  passage  in 
the  New  Testament  where  the  word  is  used  of  disease.  Medical 
writers  use  it  of  releasing  from  disease,  relaxing  tendons,  and 
taking  off  bandages. 


376  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XHI 

13.  She  was  made  straight  {dvop&aSr)).  The  verb  occurs, 
Acts  XV.  16,  of  setting  up  tlie  tabernacle  of  David,  and  Heb. 
xii.  12,  of  lifting  up  the  bauds  which  hang  down. 

15.  Loose  (Xvei).     Compare  thou  art  loosed,  vet.  12. 
Stall.     See  on  ch.  ii.  7. 

16.  Satan.  "True  to  its  principle  of  contrast,  this  book 
gives  Satan  a  prominent  position"  (Abbot).  See  ch.  iv.  13,- 
X.  18  ;  xxii.  3,  31.     See  Introduction. 

17.  Were  ashamed.  Rev.,  more  correctly,  were  put  toshcvme. 

Glorious  things.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  10. 

Were  done  {'yivofievois:).  Lit.,  are  being  done,  denoting  their 
being  then  in  progress. 

19.  His  garden.  Properly,  as  Rev.,  his  own  {iavrov)  where 
he  could  personally  observe  and  tend  it. 

Great  tree.     The  best  texts  omit  great. 

Birds.     See  on  ch.  ix.  58. 

Branches  («Xa8ot?).     See  on  Mark  xi.  8. 

21.  Leaven.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  33. 

24.  Strive.  Used  only  by  Luke  and  Paul,  except  John  xviii. 
36.  Originally  to  contend  for  a  prize  in  the  public  games  ;  and 
thus  conveying  a  sense  of  struggle.  The  kindred  noun,  aymvia, 
agony,  is  used  of  Christ's  struggle  in  Gethsemane  (ch.  xxii.  44). 
Compare  1  Tim.  vi.  12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  Y. 

Strait  gate  (a-Tevfj<;  .Svpas).  Rev.,  narrow  door.  See  on 
Matt.  vii.  13.     The  door  of  a  house,  and  not  a  gate,  is  meant 


Ch.  XIII.]  LUKE.  377 

(ver.  25).    In  Matt.  vii.  13,  where  the  image  is  of  a  gate  opening 
into  a  way,  iriiKr),  gate,  is  used. 

25.  When  once  (acji  ov).  Lit.,  from  the  time  that.  Compare 
ver.  7.  Some  editors  connect  this  with  the  previous  sentence  : 
"  Shall  not  be  able  when  once,"  etc. 

Whence  {-n-oBev).  Of  what  family.  Ye  do  not  belong  to  my 
household.  See  John  vii.  27 :  "  We  know  whence  he  (Jesus) 
is ; "  i.e.,  we  know  his  birthplace  and  family. 

26.  In  thy  presence  {evdiriop  a-ov).  Not  as  beloved  and 
familiar  guests.     Compare  with  you  {/te^'  v/m&v),  Matt.  xxvi.  29. 

27.  I  know  not  whence.  "  The  sentence  is  fixed,  but  it  is 
repeated  with  emphasis  "  (Bengel). 

Shall  sit  down  {avaKXiS-^crovTai).  Sit  down  at  table.  Jesus 
casts  his  thought  into  a  familiar  Jewish  image.  According  to 
the  Jewish  idea,  one  of  the  main  elements  of  the  happiness 
of  the  Messianic  kingdom  was  the  privilege  of  participating 
in  splendid  festive  entertainments  along  with  the  patriarchs  of 
the  nation.  With  this  accords  ver.  30,  in  allusion  to  places  at 
the  banquet.     Compare  ch.  xiv.  7-9  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  6. 

31.  Day.     The  best  texts  read  hour. 

Will  kill  {9-i\ei  airoKTelvai).  As  in  so  many  cases  the  A.  V. 
renders  as  the  future  of  the  verb  to  kill ;  whereas  there  are  two 
distinct  verbs;  to  will  or  determi/ne,  and  to  TciU.  The  meaning 
is,  Herod  willeth  or  is  determined  to  kill  thee.  Kev.,  would 
fa/in,  seems  rather  feeble. 

32.  That  fox.  Herod.  Describing  his  cunning  and  cow- 
ardice. 

Cures  {ldaei<i).     Used  by  Luke  only. 


378  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIV. 

I  shall  be  perfected  {TeKeiovfMi).  The  present  tense :  "the 
present  of  the  certain  future"  (Meyer).  The  meaning  is,  1 
come  to  an  end :  I  have  do'oe.  Expositors  differ  greatly.  Some 
interpret,  "  I  end  my  career  of  healing^''  etc. ;  others,  my  life. 

33.  It  cannot  be  {ovk  ivBexerai).  The  verb  means  to  acc^t 
or  admit ;  so  that  the  sense  is,  "  it  is  not  admissible  that."  The 
expression  is  ironical  and  hyperbolical,  with  reference  to  Jeru- 
salem as  having  a  monopoly  of  such  martyrdoms.  "  It  would 
be  contrary  to  use  and  wont,  and,  in  a  manner,  to  theocratic  de- 
corum, if  such  a  prophet  as  I  should  perish  elsewhere  than  in 
Jerusalem  "  (Godet). 

34.  Would  I  have  gathered  {i^MXTja-a ivia-vvd^ai).  Lit.," I 
desired  to  gather."     See  on  will  kill,  ver.  31. 

Hen.     See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  37. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  Watched  {'^crav  Traparrjpovfievov).  The  participle  and 
finite  verb,  were  engaged  in  watching.  Closely  i^apa).  See  on 
Mark  iii.  2. 

2.  Which  had  the  dropsy  {v8pio7nK6<i).  Lit.,  a  dropsical 
man.  The  \isual  way  of  marking  a  dropsical  patient  in  medical 
language. 

4.  Took.     Took  hold  of  him.     Luke  xx.  20  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  12. 

5.  Pit  {(f)peap).  The  primary  meaning  is  a  well^  as  distin- 
guished from  a,  fountain. 

Pull  out.     More  correctly  wp  (dvd). 

7.  They  chose.  Imperfect:  were  choosing.  Something  go- 
ing on  before  his  eyes. 


Ch.  XIV.]  LUKE.  379 

The  chief  seats.  Or  couches.  The  Greek  writers  refer  to 
the  absurd  contentions  which  sometimes  arose  for  the  chief 
seats  at  table.  Theophrastus  designates  one  who  thrusts  him- 
self into  the  place  next  the  host  as /it/e/aoc^tXort/io?,  onewho seeks 
Jpetty  distinctions. 

8.  Wedding.     More  ^'^o^&iX-^,  marriage-feast. 

9.  Begin.  Emphasizing  the  shame  of  the  reluctant  move- 
ment toward  the  lower  place. 

The  lowest.  Since  the  other,  intervening  places  are  all 
assigned. 

10.  Sit  down  {avdireae).     Lit.,  lay  yourselfbaek. 

11.  Humbled.     See  on  Zow^,  Matt.  vii.  29. 

12.  Dinner — supper.  See  on  Matt.  xxii.  4.  Sujpper  {^dirvov) 
is  the  principal  meal  at  evening,  and  corresponding  to  the 
modern  late  dinner. 

Call  not  thy  friends,  etc.  A  striking  parallel  occurs  in 
Plato's  "  Phaedrus,"  233.  "  And,  in  general,  when  you  make  a 
feast,  invite  not  your  friend,  but  the  beggar  and  the  empty 
soul,  for  they  will  love  you,  and  attend  you,  and  come  about 
your  doors,  and  will  be  the  best  pleased,  and  the  most  grateful, 
and  will  invoke  blessings  on  your  head." 

13.  Feast  (tvyrp)).  Or  reception.  Used  by  Luke  only.  See 
on  ch.  V.  29. 

16.  Blessed.     See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

16.  Made  (hroUC).  Imperfect,  wa^  m.aMng.  His  prepara- 
tions were  in  progress.  A  definite  act  among  these  preparations 
is  described  by  the  aorist,  he  hade  {iicaXecrev),  the  technical  word 
for  inviting  to  a  festival.     See  Matt.  xxii.  3 ;  John  ii.  2. 


380  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIV. 

Sent  his  servant.  "  If  a  sheikh,  bey,  or  emeer  invites,  he 
always  sends  a  servant  to  call  you  at  the  proper  time.  This 
servant  often  repeats  the  very  formula  mentioned  in  Luke  xiv. 
17 :  Come,  for  the  swpper  is  ready.  The  fact  that  this  custom 
is  confined  to  the  wealthy  and  to  the  nobility  is  in  strict  agree- 
ment with  the  parable,  where  the  man  who  made  the  supper  is 
supposed  to  be  of  this  class.  It  is  true  now,  as  then,  that  to  re- 
fuse is  a  high  insult  to  the  maker  of  the  feast  (Thomson,  "Land 
and  Book  ").  Palgrave  mentions  a  similar  formula  of  invitation 
among  the  Bedouins  of  Arabia.  "  The  chief,  or  some  un- 
breeched  youngster  of  his  family,  comes  up  to  us  with  the  cus- 
tomary tefaddaloo,  or  do  us  the  favor"  ("Central  and  Eastern 
Arabia  ")• 

18.  Make  excuse  {-n-apaiTeid^aC).  Also  rendered  in  New 
Testament  refuse,  Heb.  xii.  19,  25,  where  both  meanings  occur. 
See  also  2  Tim.  ii.  23,  Rev.  Our  phrase,  ieg  off,  expresses  the 
idea  here. 

1  must  needs  {e^i^  avdyKriv).  Lit.,  I  home  necessity:  a 
strong  expression. 

Go  (effX^etz/).     Go  out  (e|)  from  the  city. 

20.  I  cannot.  A  newly  married  man  had  special  indulgence 
allowed  him.  See  Deut.  xxiv.  6.  Herodotus  relates  how  Croe- 
sus refused  for  his  son  an  invitation  to  a  hunt  on  this  ground. 
"But  Croesus  answered,  'Say  no  more  of  my  son  going  with 
you;  that  may  not  be  in  anywise.  He  is  but  just  joined  in 
wedlock,  and  is  busy  enough  with  that ' "  (i.,  36).  The  man  who 
had  the  most  plausible  excuse  returned  the  surliest  and  most 
peremptory  answer.     Compare  1  Cor.  vii.  33. 

21.  Streets  (TrXaTeta?) — lanes  {pvjxa^).  The  former  word 
from  7r\aTi5s,  hroad;  the  broad  streets  contrasted  with  the 
narrow  Icmes.     Wye,  great  streets  and  small  streets. 

22.  As  thou  hast  commanded.  Following  the  reading  w?, 
as.  The  best  texts  substitute  o,  wliat.  Render  as  Rev.,  "  WhM 
thou  didst  command  is  done." 


Ch.  XIV.]  LUKE.  381 

23.  Hedges  {<f>pa/y/iov<!).  See  on  Matt.  xxi.  33.  It  may 
mean  either  a  hedge,  or  a  place  enclosed  with  a  hedge.  Here 
the  hedges  beside  which  vagrants  rest. 

Compel.  Compare  constrained,  Matt.  xiv.  22;  Acts  xxvi. 
11 ;  Gal.  vi.  12.  Not  to  use  force,  but  to  constrain  them  against 
the  reluctance  which  such  poor  creatures  would  feel  at  accept- 
ing the  invitation  of  a  great  lord. 

May  be  filled  {ye/jLiaSjj).  A  very  strong  word  ;  properly  of 
loading  a  ship.  "Nature  and  grace  alike  abhor  a  vacuum" 
(Bengel). 

27.  His  cross.  More  correctly,  his  own.  An  important 
charge.  All  must  bear  the  cross,  but  not  all  the  sa/me  cross : 
each  one  his  own. 

28.  A  tower.  The  subject  of  the  parable  is  the  life  of 
Christian  discipleship,  which  is  figured  by  a  tower,  a  lofty 
structure,  as  something  distinguished  from  the  world  and  at- 
tracting attention. 

Counteth  (i^^t^ist).  Only  here  and  Apoc.  xiii.  18.  From 
yfnj^o<s,  a  pebble  (see  Apoc.  ii.  17),  used  as  a  counter.  Thus 
Herodotus  says  that  the  Egyptians,  when  they  calculate  (Xoyi- 
^ovrat  ■\|rj;^ot?,  Techon  with  pebbles),  move  their  hand  from  right 
to  left  (ii.,  36).  So  Aristophanes,  "  Reckon  roughly,  not  with 
pebbles  {■\}r^^oi<;),  but  on  the  hand  "  ("  "Wasps,"  656).  Similarly 
calculate,  from  Latin  calculus,  a  pebble.  Used  also  of  voting. 
Thus  Herodotus :  "  The  Greeks  met  at  the  altar  of  Neptune, 
and  took  the  ballots  (ra?  ■\^^ov'i)  wherewith  they  were  to  give 
their  votes."  Plato:  "And  you,  would  you  vote  (av  ■\}r7J4>ov 
l^eio,  cast  your  pebble)  with  me  or  against  me  ? "  ("  Protagoras," 
330).     See  Acts  xxvi.  10. 

Cost  {rijv  hairdvqv).  Allied  to  hdiTTm,  to  devour.  Hence  ex- 
pense, as  something  which  eats  up  resources. 


382  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIV. 

Sufficient  {ek  a-rrapTia/jbov).  Lit.,  unto  completion.  The 
kindred  verb  uTrapTi^co,  not  used  in  New  Testament,  means  to 
make  even  or  squa/re,  and  hence  to  com/plete. 

29.  To  finish  [eKTeXia-ai).     Lit.,  "  to  finish  out "  (e/e). 

Behold  {3-e(opovvTe<;).  Attentively  watching  the  progress  of 
the  building.     See  on  ch.  x.  18. 

Begin  to  mock.    As  his  resources  come  to  an  end. 

30.  This  man  {ovro^  6  av^pcoiro';).    With  sarcastic  emphasis. 

Was  not  able  {ovk  ia-xva-ev).  From  tV^w,  strength.  See 
oupower,  2  Pet.  ii.  11.     To  be  strong  in  body  or  in  resources, 

and  so  to  ie  worth,  as  Lat.,  valere.  "  This  man  was  not  worth 
enough,  or  was  not  good  for  the  completion."  In  this  latter 
sense,  Matt.  v.  13,  ^^goodiov  nothing." 

31.  To  make  war  against  another  king  (erep^  ^aaiXel 
(TVfi^aXetv  6t?  iroXefiov).  Lit.,  to  come  together  with  another 
king /or  war.     So  Rev.,  to  encounter  another  king  in  wa/r. 

"  Out  he  flashed, 
And  into  such  a  song,  such  fire  for  fame, 
Such  trumpet-blowings  in  it,  coming  down 
To  sucli  a  stern  and  iron-clashing  close. 
That  when  he  stopped  we  longed  to  hurl  together. " 

Tennyson,  Idyls  of  the  King. 

With  ten  thousand  (eV  Se'/ca  ^^tXtao-ii^).  Lit.,  in  ten  thou- 
sands :  i.e.,  in  the  midst  of  ;  surrounded  hy.     Compare  Jude  14. 

32.  Asketh  {ipanS).  On  a  footing  of  equality :  king  treating 
with  king.     See  on  ch.  xi.  9. 

Conditions  of  peace  {to.  •n-pb<;  elprivriv).  Lit.,  things  looking 
toward  peace  ;  preliminaries.  Compare  Rom.  xiv.  19,  things 
which  Tuake  for  peace  (ra  rfj^  elpilvr]<;,  the  things  of  peace). 


Ch.  XV.]  liUKE.  383 

33.  Forsaketh  {airoTarrffeTai).  Bids  good-hy  to.  Rev.,  re- 
nounceth.  See  on  ch.  ix.  61.  "  In  that  forsaJceth  lies  the  key 
to  the  whole  passage"  (Trench).  Christian  discipleship  is 
founded  in  self-renunciation. 

34.  Have  lost  its  savor.    See  on  Matt.  v.  34. 
Shall  it  be  seasoned.    See  on  Mark  ix.  50. 


CHAPTER  ZV. 

4.  In  the  wilderness.  Not  a  desert  place,  hut  uncultivated 
plains;  pasturage.  Note  that  the  sheep  &re  he.in^ pastured  in 
the  wilderness.  A  traveller,  cited  anonymously  by  Trench, 
says  :  "  There  are,  indeed,  some  accursed  patches,  where  scores 
of  miles  lie  before  you  like  a  tawny  Atlantic,  one  yellow  wave 
rising  before  another.  But  far  from  infrequently  there  are 
regions  of  wild  fertility  where  the  earth  shoots  forth  a  jungle 
of  aromatic  shrubs  "  ("  Parables  "). 

5.  When  he  hath  found  it.   M.sAth.evfjIfso'bethathefindit. 

On  his  shoulders.  Lit.,  his  own  shoulders.  "He  might 
have  employed  a  servant's  aid,  but  love  and  joy  make  the  labor 
sweet  to  himself"  (Bengel).  The  "Good  Shepherd"  is  a 
favorite  subject  in  early  Christian  art.  "  We  cannot  go  through 
any  part  of  the  catacombs,  or  turn  over  the  pages  of  any  col- 
lection of  ancient  Christian  monuments,  without  coming  across 
it  again  and  again.  We  know  from  Tertullian  that  it  was 
often  designed  upon  chalices.  We  find  it  ourselves  painted  in 
fresco  upon  the  roofs  and  walls  of  the  sepulchral  chambers; 
rudely  scratched  upon  gravestones,  or  more  carefully  sculptured 
on  sarcophagi ;  traced  in  gold  upon  glass,  moulded  on  lamps, 
engraved  on  rings ;  and,  in  a  word,  represented  on  every  species 
of  Christian  monument  that  has  come  down  to  us.  .  .  . 
It  was  selected  because  it  expressed  the  whole  sum  and  sub- 


384  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

stance  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  .  .  .  He  is  sometimes 
represented  alone  with  his  flock ;  at  other  times  accompanied 
by  his  apostles,  each  attended  by  one  or  more  sheep.  Some- 
times he  stands  amidst  many  slieep ;  sometimes  he  caresses  one 
only  ;  but  most  commonly — so  commonly  as  almost  to  form  a 
rule  to  which  other  scenes  might  be  considered  the  exceptions 
— he  bears  a  lost  sheep,  or  even  a  goat,  upon  his  shoulders  " 
(Northcote  and  Brownlow,  "  Eoma  Sotteranea  ").  A  beautiful 
specimen  is  found  in  the  mausoleum  of  Galla  Placidia,  at 
Eavenna,  erected  about  450  a.d.  It  is  a  mosaic  in  green  and 
gold.  The  figure  is  a  beautiful  one,  youthful  in  face  and  form, 
as  is  usual  in  the  early  mosaics,  and  surrounded  by  his  sheep. 
Facing  this  appears,  over  the  altar,  the  form  of  Christ  seated 
beside  a  kind  of  furnace,  on  the  other  side  of  which  stands  a 
little  open  bookcase.  He  is  engaged  in  casting  heretical  books 
into  the  fire.  Are  they,  indeed,  the  same — the  Shepherd 
Christ  of  the  Gospels,  and  the  polemic  Christ  of  the  ecclesiastics  ? 

6.  With  me.  "Not  with  the  sheep.  Our  life  is  his  joy" 
(Gregory,  cited  by  Trench). 

7.  Repenteth.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  2. 

8-32.  The  Paeables  of  the  Lost  Com  and  of  the  Peodigal 
Son.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

8.  Pieces  of  silver  {Bpax/J-a^).  Used  by  Luke  only.  A  coin 
worth  about  eighteen  cents,  commonly  with  the  image  of  an 
owl,  a  tortoise,  or  a  head  of  Pallas.  As  a  weight,  65.5  grains.  A 
common  weight  in  dispensing  medicines  and  writing  prescrip- 
tions. Wye,  transcribing  the  Greek  word,  dragmes.  Tynd., 
grotes. 

9.  Her  friends.  Female  friends,  for  the  noun  is  used  in  the 
feminine  form. 

I  lost.  Through  her  own  carelessness.  Of  the  sheep,  Jesus 
says  "  was  lost."     "  A  sheep  strays  of  itself,  but  a  piece  of 


Ch.  XV.]  LUKE.  385 

money  could  only  be  lost  by  a  certain  negligence  on  the  part  of 
such  as  should  have  kept  it "  (Trench).  In  the  one  case,  the 
attention  is  fastened  on  the  condition  of  the  thing  lost ;  in  the 
other,  upon  the  sorrow  of  the  one  wlio  has  lost. 

12.  The  portion.  According  to  the  Jewish  law  of  inheri- 
tance, if  there  were  but  two  sons,  the  elder  would  receive  two 
portions,  the  younger  the  third  of  all  movable  property.  A  man 
might,  during  his  lifetime,  dispose  of  all  his  property  by  gift 
as  he  chose.  If  the  share  of  younger  children  was  to  be  dimin- 
ished by  gift  or  taken  away,  the  disposition  must  be  made  by  a 
person  presumably  near  death.  No  one  in  good  health  could 
diminish,  except  by  gift,  the  legal  portion  of  a  younger  son. 
The  younger  son  thus  was  entitled  by  law  to  his  share,  though 
he  had  no  right  to  claim  it  during  his  father's  lifetime.  The 
request  must  be  regarded  as  asking  a  favor  (Edersheim). 

Unto  them.     Even  to  the  elder,  who  did  not  ask  it. 

13.  All.     Everything  was  taken  out  of  the  father's  hands. 

Took  his  journey  {aireS^/u/rjo-ev).  Answering  to  our  phrase 
went  abroad. 

Wasted  iZiea-Kop-maev).  The  word  used  of  winnowing  grain. 
See  on  Matt.  xxv.  24. 

With  riotous  living  {^wv  da-mras:).  Lit.,  Uving  unsavingly. 
Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  kindred  noun,  affcoria,  is 
rendered  by  the  Eev.,  in  all  the  three  passages  where  it  occurs, 
riot  (Eph.  V.  18  ;  Tit.  i.  6  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  4).  See  note  on  the  last 
passage. 

14.  Spent.     See  on  cost,  ch.  xiv.  28. 

In  that  land.     "Want  is  characteristic  of  the  "far  country." 
The  prodigal  feels  the  evil  of  his  environment.     "  He  (with  a 
shade  of  emphasis)  began  to  be  in  want." 
25 


386  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

To  be,  in  want  {vffrepela-Sai).  From  varepo?,  lehind.  Com- 
pare our  phrase  of  one  in  straitened  circumstances,  to  fall  be- 
hind. 

15.  Joined  himself  {licoXK'fi^ri).  The  verb  means  to  glue  or 
cement.  Very  expressive  here,  implying  that  \\b  forced  himself 
upon  the  citizen,  who  was  unwilling  to  engage  him,  and  who 
took  him  into  service  only  upon  persistent  entreaty.  "  T-  he  un- 
happy wretch  is  a  sort  of  appendage  to  a  strange  personality  " 
(Godet).  Compare  Acts  ix.  26.  Wye,  cleaved.  See,  also,  on 
Acts  V.  13. 

To  feed  swine.  As  he  had  received  him  reluctantly,  so  he 
gave  him  the  meanest  possible  employment.  An  ignominious 
occupation,  especially  in  Jewish  eyes.  The  keeping  of  swine 
was  prohibited  to  Israelites  under  a  curse. 

16.  He  would  fain  (eVe^uyaet).  Longing  desire.  Imperfect 
tense,  he  was  longing,  all  the  while  he  was  tending  the  swine. 

Filled  his  belly  {yefiiaat  rrjv  KotXlav).  The  texts  vary.  The 
Rev.  follows  the  reading  'xppTaa^vai,  "  He  would  fain  have 
ieen filled"  using  the  same  word  which  is  employed  oi.  filling 
those  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  (Matt.  v.  6,  see 
note),  and  of  the  five  thousand  (Matt.  xiv.  20).  He  had  wanted 
the  wrong  thing  all  along,  and  it  was  no  better  now.  All  he 
wanted  was  to  fill  his  belly. 

Husks  {/cepanaiv).  Carob-pods.  The  word  is  a  diminutive 
of  Kipa<},  a  horn,  and  means,  literally,  a  little  horn,  from  the 
shape  of  the  pod.  The  tree  is  sometimes  called  in  German 
BocTcshornbaum,  OoaC s-horn-tree.  "  The  fleshy  pods  are  from 
six  to  ten  inches  long,  and  one  broad,  lined  inside  with  a  ge- 
latinous substance,  not  wholly  unpleasant  to  the  taste  when 
thoroughly  ripe  "  (Thomson,  "  Land  and  Book  ").  The  shell  or 
pod  alone  is  eaten.  It  grows  in  Southern  Italy  and  Spain,  and 
it  is  said  that  during  the  Peninsular  War  the  horses  of  the 
British  cavalry  were  often  fed  upon  the  pods.     It  is  also  called 


Ch.  XV.]  LUKE.  387 

Saint  JoKtHs  hread,  from  a  tradition  that  the  Baptist  fed  npon 
its  fruit  in  the  wilderness.  Edersheim  quotes  a  Jewish  saying, 
"When  Israel  is  reduced  to  the  carob-tree,  they  become  repent- 
ant." 

17.  Came  to  himself.  A  striking  expression,  putting  the 
state  of  rebellion  against  God  as  a  kind  of  madness.  It  is  a  won- 
derful stroke  of  art,  to  represent  the  beginning  of  repentance  as 
the  return  of  a  sound  consciousness.  Ackermann  ("  Christian 
Element  in  Plato  ")  observes  that  Plato  thinks  of  redemption  as 
a  coming  to  one's  self ;  an  apprehending  of  one's  self  as  existent ; 
as  a  severing  of  the  inmost  being  from  the  surrounding  element. 
Several  passages  of  Plato  are  very  suggestive  on  this  point. 
"  He  who  bids  a  man  know  himself,  would  have  him  know  his 
soul "  ("  Alcibiades,"  i.,  130).  "  '  To  see  her  (the  soul)  as  she 
really  is,  not  as  we  now  behold  her,  marred  by  communion  with 
the  body  and  other  miseries,  you  should  look  npon  her  with 
the  eye  of  reason,  in  her  original  purity,  and  then  her  beauty 
would  be  discovered,  and  in  her  image  justice  would  be  more 
clearly  seen,  and  injustice,  and  all  the  things  which  we  have 
described.  Thus  far  we  have  spoken  the  truth  concerning  her 
as  she  appears  at  present ;  but  we  must  remember  also  that  we 
have  seen  her  only  in  a  condition  which  may  be  compared  to 
that  of  the  sea-god  Glaucus,  whose  original  image  can  hardly 
be  discerned,  because  his  natural  members  are  broken  off  and 
crushed,  and  in  many  ways  damaged  by  the  waves ;  and  in- 
crustations have  grown  over  them  of  sea-weed  and  shells  and 
stones,  so  that  he  is  liker  to  some  sea-monster  than  to  his  nat- 
ural form.  And  the  soul  is  in  a  similar  condition,  disfigured  by 
ten  thousand  ills :  but  not  there,  Glaucon,  not  there  must  we 
look.' 

'"Where,  then?' 

" '  At  her  love  of  wisdom.  Let  us  see  whom  she  affects,  and 
what  converse  she  seeks,  in  virtue  of  her  near  kindred  with  the 
immortal  and  eternal  and  divine ;  also,  how  different  she  would 
become,  if  wholly  following  this  superior  principle,  and  borne 
by  a  divine  impulse  out  of  the  ocean  in  which  she  now  is,  and 
disengaged  from  the  stones  and  shells  and  things  of  earth  and 


388  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

rock,  which,  in  wild  variety,  grow  around  her,  because  she 
feeds  upon  earth,  and  is  crusted  over  by  the  good  things  of 
this  life  as  they  are  termed.  Then  would  you  see  her  as  she 
is'"  ("Republic,"  611). 

Have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  {irepuytreiovTat  aprav). 
Lit.,  abound  in  lomes.     'Wye,  2>l6nty  of  loaves. 

Perish.  Better,  lam  perishing.  The  best  texts  insert  wSe, 
here,  in  contrast  with  the  father's  house,  suggested  by  the  fa- 
ther's servants. 

20.  His  father.  An  affecting  touch  in  the  Greek :  his  own 
father. 

Ran.  Trench  cites  an  Eastern  proverb :  "Who  draws  near 
to  me  (God)  an  inch,  I  will  draw  near  to  him  an  ell ;  and 
whoso  walks  to  meet  me,  I  will  leap  to  meet  him." 

Kissed.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  49. 

21.  To  be  called  thy  son.  He  omits  maJce  me  a  servant. 
The  slavish  spirit  vanishes  in  the  clasp  of  the  father's  arms. 
Bengel  suggests  that  the  father  would  not  suffer  him  to  utter 
the  news.  I  once  heard  Norman  McLeod  say  in  a  sermon, 
"  Before  the  prodigal  son  reached  his  home  he  thought  over 
what  he  should  do  to  merit  restoration.  He  would  be  a  hired 
servant.  But  when  his  father  came  out  and  met  him,  and  put 
his  arms  round  him,  and  the  poor  boy  was  beginning  to  say 
this  and  that,  he  just  shut  his  mouth,  and  said,  '  I  take  you  to 
my  heart,  and  that's  enough.' " 

22.  To  his  servants.  Bond-servants.  There  is  a  fine 
touch  in  throwing  in  the  hond-servants  immediately  after  thy 
son  (ver.  21). 

Bring  forth.     Some  texts  add  quickly  (Taxv).     So  Eev. 


Ch.  XV.]  LUKE.  389 

The  best  robe  {o-toXtjv  tt}v  irpcoTijv).  Lit.,  a  robe,  the  first. 
Properly  of  a  long,  flowing  robe,  a  festwe  garment.  See  Mark 
xvi.  5 ;  Luke  xx.  46. 

Ring.     See  on  Jas.  ii.  2.     Compare  Gen.  xli.  42. 

Shoes.  Both  the  ring  and  the  shoes  are  marks  of  a  free 
man.     Slaves  went  barefoot. 

23.  The  fatted  calf.  The  article  denoting  one  set  apart  for 
a  festive  occasion.     Tynd.,  "  that  fatted  calf." 

24.  Is  alive— is  found  {avi^7)a-ev — evpeSTj).  Both  aorists, 
and  pointing  back  to  a  definite  time  in  the  past ;  doubtless  the 
moment  when  he  "  came  to  himself."     Wye,  hath  limed. 

The  Prodigal  Son  is  a  favorite  subject  in  Christian  art.  The 
return  of  the  penitent  is  the  point  most  frequently  chosen,  but 
the  dissipation  in  the  far  country  and  the  degradation  among 
the  swine  are  also  treated.  The  dissipation  is  the  subject  of  an 
interesting  picture  by  the  younger  Teniers  in  the  gallery  of  the 
Louvre.  The  prodigal  is  feasting  at  a  table  with  two  courte- 
sans, in  front  of  an  inn,  on  the  open  shutter  of  which  a  tavern- 
score  is  chalked.  An  old  woman  leaning  on  a  stick  begs  alms, 
possibly  foreshadowing  the  fate  of  the  females  at  the  table. 
The  youth  holds  out  his  glass,  which  a  servant  fills  with  wine. 
In  the  right-hand  corner  appears  a  pigsty  where  a  stable-boy  is 
feeding  the  swine,  but  with  his  face  turned  toward  the  table,  as 
if  in  envy  of  the  gay  revellers  there.  All  the  costumes  and  other 
details  of  the  picture  are  Dutch.  Holbein  also  represents  him 
feasting  with  his  mistress,  and  gambling  with  a  sharper  who  is 
sweeping  the  money  off  the  table.  The  other  points  of  the  story 
are  introduced  into  the  background.  Jan  Steen  paints  him  at 
table  in  a  garden  before  an  inn.  A  man  plays  the  guitar,  and 
two  children  are  blowing  bubbles — "  an  allegory  of  the  transient 
pleasures  of  the  spendthrift."  Mrs.  Jameson  remarks  that  the 
riotous  living  is  treated  principally  by  the  Dutch  painters.  The 
life  among  the  swine  is  treated  by  Jordaens  in  the  Dresden 
Gallery.      The  youth,  with  only  a  cloth  about  his  loins,  ap- 


390  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

proaches  tlie  trough  where  the  swine  are  feeding,  extends  his 
hand,  and  seems  to  ask  food  of  a  surly  swineherd,  who  points 
him  to  the  trough.  In  the  left-hand  corner  a  young  boor  is 
playing  on  a  pipe,  a  sorrowful  contrast  to  the  delicious  music  of 
the  halls  of  pleasure.  Salvator  Rosa  pictures  him  in  a  land- 
scape, kneeling  with  clasped  hands  amid  a  herd  of  sheep,  oxen, 
goats,  and  swine.  Rubens,  in  a  farm-stable,  on  his  knees  near 
a  trough,  where  a  woman  is  feeding  some  swine.  He  looks  im- 
ploringly at  the  woman.  One  of  the  finest  examples  of  the 
treatment  of  the  return  is  by  Murillo,  in  the  splendid  picture  in 
the  gallery  of  the  Duke  of  Sutherland.  It  is  thus  described  by 
Stirling  ("  Annals  of  the  Artists  of  Spain  ")  :  "  The  repentant 
youth,  locked  in  the  embrace  of  his  father,  is,  of  course,  the 
principal  figure  ;  his  pale,  emaciated  countenance  bespeaks  the 
hardships  of  his  husk-coveting  time,  and  the  embroidery  on  his 
tattered  robe  the  splendor  of  his  riotous  living.  A  little  white 
dog,  leaping  up  to  caress  him,  aids  in  telling  the  story.  On  one 
side  of  this  group  a  man  and  a  boy  lead  in  the  fatted  calf  ;  on 
the  other  appear  three  servants  bearing  a  light-blue  silk  dress 
of  Spanish  fashion,  and  the  gold  ring;  and  one  of  them  seems 
to  be  murmuring  at  the  honors  in  preparation  for  the  lost  one." 

25.  Music  {a-vft,<j)covuis;).    A  symphony:  concerted  music. . 

26.  Inquired  (eTrw^dvero).     Imperfect.     Began  to  inquire. 

27.  Is  come— safe  and  sound.  Compare  m  aZwe — is  found. 
"  How  nice  is  the  observance  of  all  the  lesser  proprieties  of  the 
narration.  The  father,  in  the  midst  of  all  his  natural  affection, 
is  yet  full  of  the  moral  significance  of  his  son's  return — that  he 
has  come  back  another  person  from  what  he  was  when  he  went 
or  while  he  tarried  in  that  far  land  ;  he  sees  into  the  deep  of 
his  joy,  that  he  is  receiving  him  now  indeed  a  son,  once  dead 
but  now  alive ;  once  lost  to  him  and  to  God,  but  now  found 
alike  by  both.  But  the  servant  confines  himself  to  the  more 
external  features  of  the  case,  to  the  fact  that,  after  all  he  has 
gone  through  of  excess  and  hardship,  his  father  has  yet  received 
him  safe  and  sound"  (Trench). 


Ch.  XVI.]  LUKE.  391 

28.  He  was  angry  {mpyiaSr}).  Not  with  a  mere  temporary 
fit  of  passion,  but,  as  the  word  imports,  with  a  deep-seated 
wrath. 

29.  Kid  {epi(f>ov).  Some  read  the  diminutive,  ip(<f)iov,  "a 
little  kid."  In  any  event  a  contrast  is  intended  between  the 
kid  and  the  fatted  calf. 

30.  This  thy  son.  Not  my  brother,  but  with  the  bitterest 
sarcasm. 

Was  come  (^X^ei/).  He  says  came,  as  of  a  stranger.  Not 
returned. 

Devoured  {KaTa(f>a^(ov).  We  say  "eat  uj);"  the  Greek  said 
"  eat  down  "  (/cara).  The  word  is  suggested,  no  doubt,  by  the 
mention  of  the  calf,  the  kid,  and  the  feasting. 


CHAPTER  XYI. 

1-8.  The  Payable  of  the  Unjust  Steward.  Peculiar  to 
Luke. 

1.  Steward  {piKovoyMv).  From  ot«o?,  a  house,  and  i/e/tw,  to 
distribute  or  dispense.  Hence,  one  who  assigns  to  the  members 
of  tlie  household  their  several  duties,  and  pays  to  each  his 
wages.  The  paymaster.  He  kept  the  household  stores  under 
lock  and  seal,  giving  out  what  was  required ;  and  for  this  pur- 
pose received  a  signet-ring  from  his  master.  Wye,  fe/rmour, 
or  farmer.     Here  probably  the  fewt^steward. 

Was  accused  (Ste^SXT^^i?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
From  Sta,  over,  across,  and  ^dWm,  to  throw.  To  carry  across, 
and  hence  to  carry  reports,  etc.,  from  one  to  another ;  to  carry 
false  reports,  and  so  to  calumniate  or  slander.  See  on  devU, 
Matt.  iv.  1.  The  word  implies  malice,  but  not  necessarily 
falsehood.  Compare  Latin  traducere  {trans,  oven,  ducere,  to 
lead),  whence  traduce. 


392  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XVI 

Had  wasted  («?  SiaaKop-rri^mv).  Lit,  as  wasting.  Eev.,  was 
wasting;  not  merely  a  past  offence,  but  sonaething  going  on  at 
the  time  of  the  accusation.     See  ch.  xv.  13. 

2.  How  is  it  that  I  hear  this  {titovto  aKova>)'i  Better  ae 
Kev.,  IVhat  is  this  that  I  hear  ? 

Give  an  account  (aTro'Sos  rhv  Tioyov),  Lit.,  "give  back" 
(airo).  Rev.,  render.  The  (rov)  account  which  is  due.  Aris- 
tophanes has  a  striking  parallel :  "And  now  give  back  my  signet ; 
for  thou  Shalt  no  longer  be  my  steward  "  ("  Knights,"  947). 

Thou  mayest  (Bvvna-rj).    More  strictly,  as  Eev.,  thou  canst. 

3.  Tai<eth  away.  Or  is  taking  away.  He  was  not  yet  dis- 
possessed, as  is  shown  by  what  follows. 

I  cannot  (ovk  tV^vtu).  See  on  ch.  xiv.  30.  "I  have  not 
strength."  His  luxurious  life  had  unfitted  him  for  hard  labor. 
In  Aristophanes  ("  Birds,"  1431),  a  sycophant  is  asked  :  "  Tell 
me,  being  a  young  man,  do  you  lodge  informations  against 
strangers  ? "  He  replies :  "  Yes  ;  why  should  I  suffer,  for  I 
know  not  how  to  dig  ? " 

To  beg  (e-n-MTelv).     See  on  besought,  Matt.  xv.  23. 

4.  They  nnay  receive.    The  debtors  of  his  master  (ver.  5). 

5.  He  called.  Alford  and  Trench  think  that  the  debtors 
were  together ;  but  the  words  seem  to  me  to  indicate  that  he 
dealt  with  them  separately.  He  called  to  him  each  one,  and 
said  unto  the  first ;  after  that  (eVetra)  another. 

6.  Measures  (/Sarou?).  Lit.,  baths.  The  bath  was  a  He- 
brew measure,  but  the  amount  is  uncertain,  since,  according  to 
Edersheim,  there  were  three  kinds  of  measurement  in  use  in 
Palestine :  the  original  Mosaic,  corresponding  with  the  Koman ; 
that  of  Jerusalem,  which  was  a  fifth  larger ;  and  the  common 


Ch.  XVI.]  LUKE.  393 

Galilaean  measurement,  which  was  more  than  a  fifth  larger  than 
the  Jerusalem.  Assuming  the  first  standard,  the  bath  would  be 
about  fifty-six  pints,  and  the  debt,  therefore,  a  large  one. 

Take  thy  bill  (8efat  <tov  to,  jpdfifiara).  Lit.,  take  back  thy 
writings.  Eev.,  hond.  Wye,  obligation;  and  in  ver.  7,  letters. 
The  plural  is  used  for  a  single  document.  The  bill  is  the  bond 
which  the  buyer  has  given,  and  which  is  in  the  steward's  keep- 
ing.    He  gives  it  back  to  the  debtor  for  him  to  alter  the  figures. 

Sit  down  quickly.  It  was  a  secret  transaction,  to  be  hur- 
ried through. 

1.  To  another  {erepm).  A  different  one  with  a  different 
debt,  and  his  circumstances  demanding  a  different  rate  of  dis- 
count. 

Measures  (Kopov;).  Cars.  A  cor  was  ten  baths/  the  dry 
and  the  fluid  measures  being  the  same. 

8.  The  lord.     Of  the  steward.     Eev.,  properly,  "Aw  lord." 

Commended.  Admiring  his  shrewdness,  though  iie  him- 
self was  defrauded. 

Unjust  steward.  Lit,  stewa/rd  of  injustice.  See  on  forget- 
ful hearer,  Jas.  i.  25 ;  and  compare  words  of  grace,  Luke  iv. 
22 ;  unjust  judge,  Luke  xviii.  6  ;  son  of  his  love.  Col.  i.  13 ; 
lust  of  v/nclea/nness,  2  Pet.  ii.  10.  The  idiom  is  a  Hebrew  one. 
The  phrase  expresses  Jesus'  judgment  on  what  the  steward's 
master  praised. 

Wisely  (i^/joW/ua?).  See  on  Matt.  x.  16.  Wye,  prudently. 
I  would  suggest  shrewdly,  though  in  the  modern  sense  of  saga- 
ciously, since  the  earlier  sense  of  shrevjd  was  malicious,  or 
wicked.  Plato  says :  "  All  knowledge  separated  from  right- 
eousness and  other  virtue  appears  to  be  cunning  and  not 
wisdom."    In  Matt.  vii.  24-26,  it  is  applied  to  the  sagacious 


394  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVX 

man  who  built  his  house  on  the  rock,  opposed  to  the  foolish 
(jimpo^)  man  who  built  on  the  sand.  "  It  is  a  middle  term,  not 
bringing  out  prominently  the  moral  characteristics,  either  good 
or  evil,  of  the  action  to  which  it  is  applied,  but  recognizing  in 
it  a  skilfnl  adaptation  of  the  means  to  the  end— affirming  noth- 
ing in  the  way  of  moral  approbation  or  disapprobation,  either 
of  means  or  end,  but  leaving  their  worth  to  be  determined  by 
other  considerations  "  (Trench,  "  Parables  "). 

In  their  generation  {ek  ttjv yeveav  ttjv  kavraiv).  The  A.  Y. 
misses  the  point,  following  "Wye.  Lit.,  in  reference  to  their 
own  generation;  i.e.,  the  body  of  the  children  of  this  world  to 
which  they  belong,  and  are  kindred.  They  are  shrewd  in  deal- 
ing with  their  own  hind ;  since,  as  is  shown  in  the  parable, 
where  the  debtors  were  accomplices  of  the  steward  they  are  all 
alike  unscrupulous.     Tynd.,  in  their  kind. 

Than  the  children  of  light.  JAt.,  sons  of  the  light.  The 
men  of  the  world  make  their  intercourse  with  one  another  more 
profitable  than  the  sons  of  light  do  tlieir  intercourse  with  their 
own  kind.  The  latter  "  forget  to  use  God's  goods  to  form 
bonds  of  love  to  the  contemporaries  who  share  their  character  " 
(Godet) ;  forget  to  "  make  friends  of  the  mammon,"  etc. 

9.  Make  to  yourselves  friends.  Compare  Virgil,  "Ae- 
neid,"  vi.,  664.  Among  the  tenants  of  Elysium  he  sees  "  those 
who,  by  good  desert,  made  others  mindful  of  them." 

Of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness  (e«  tov  fiafiwva  t^9 

aZiKia^).  The  same  idiom  as  in  ver.  8,  steward  of  injustice. 
Compare  unrighteous  mamm,on,  ver.  11.  Mammon  should 
be  spelt  with  one  m.  It  is  a  Chaldee  word,  meaning  riches. 
It  occurs  only  in  this  chapter  and  at  Matt.  vi.  24.  "  Of  the 
mammon"  is,  literally,  hy  means  of.  In  the  phrase  of  un- 
righteousness, there  is  implied  no  condemnation  of  property  as 
such  ;  but  it  is  styled  unrighteous,  or  belonging  to  unrighteous- 
ness, because  it  is  the  characteristic  and  representative  object 
and  delight  and  desire  of  the  selfish  and  unrighteous  world : 


Ch.  XVI.]  LDKB.  395 

their  love  of  it  being  a  root  of  all  evil  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).    Wye, 
the  riches  of  wickedness. 

Ye  fail  (eKXtVijTe).  But  all  the  best  texts  read  ckX/ttj;,  "  when 
it  (the  mammon)  fails." 

They  may  receive.    The  friends. 

Habitations  {a-Krivdi).     Lit.,  Unts  or  tahernacles. 

10.  That  which  is  least.  A  general  proposition,  yet  vcith 
a  reference  to  mammon  as  the  least  of  things.     See  next  verse. 

11.  Faithful.  Fidelity  is,  therefore,  possible  toward  the  un- 
righteous mammon. 

12.  That  which  is  another's.  God's.  Eiches  are  not  ot^ra, 
but  given  us  in  trust. 

Your  own.  Equivalent  to  the  i/rue  riches.  That  which 
forms  part  of  our  eternal  being — the  redeemed  self.  Compare 
the  parable  of  the  Rich  Fool  (ch.  xii.  20),  where  the  life  or 
soul  is  distinguished  from  ^q jpossessions.  "  Thy  soul  shall  be 
required  ;  whose  shall  the  wealth  be  ? "  Compare,  also,  rich  to- 
ward Ood  (ch.  xii.  21).  Chrysostom,  cited  by  Trench,  says  of 
Abraham  and  Job,  "  They  did  not  serve  mammon,  but  possessed 
and  ruled  themsel/oes,  and  were  masters,  and  not  servants." 

13.  Servant  (oijeeri;?).     Properly,  household  servant. 
Serve.     See  on  minister,  Matt.  xx.  26. 

The  other.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 
Hold  to.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 

14.  Covetous  {(fiiXdpyvpoi).  Rev.  renders  literally,  accord- 
ing to  the  composition  of  the  word,  lovers  of  money.    Only  here 


396  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVX 

and  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  Compare  the  kindred  noim,  1  Tim.  vi.  10. 
The  usual  word  for  covetous  is  irKeoveKT7)<!  (1  Cor.  v.  10,  11 ; 
vi.  10). 

Derided  (e^efivKT'^pi^ov).  Only  here  and  ch.  xxiii.  35.  Lit., 
to  turn  up  the  nose  at.  The  Romans  had  a  corresponding  phrase, 
naso  adunco  suspendere,  toliomg  on  the  JiooTced nose:  i.e.,  to  turn 
up  the  nose  and  make  a  hook  of  it,  on  which  (figuratively)  to 
hang  the  subject  of  ridicule.  Thus  Horace,  in  one  of  his  satires, 
giving  an  account  of  a  pretentious  banquet  at  the  house  of  a 
rich  miser,  describes  one  of  the  guests  as  hanging  everything  to 
his  nose  ;  i.e.,  making  a  joke  of  everything  that  occurred.  The 
simple  verb  occurs  at  Gal.  vi.  7,  of  mocking  God. 

15.  Abomination.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  15. 

16.  Presseth.  Kev.,  entereth  violently.  See  on  Matt.  xi. 
12.     Wye,  maketh  violence  into  it.     Tynd.,  striveth  to  go  in. 

17.  Tittle.     See  on  Matt.  v.  18. 

19-31.  The  Parable  of  Dives  akd  Lazakus.  Peculiar  to 
Luke. 

19.  Was  clothed.  Imperfect,  and  frequentative ;  denoting 
his  hahitMol  attire. 

Purple  {irop^vpav).  Originally  the  purple. ^sA  from  which 
the  color  was  obtained,  and  thence  applied  to  the  color  itself. 
Several  kinds  of  these  were  found  in  the  Mediterranean.  The 
color  was  contained  in  a  vein  about  the  neck.  Under  the  term 
purj>le  the  ancients  included  three  distinct  colors:  1.  A  deep 
violet,  with  a  black  or  dusky  tinge  ;  the  color  meant  by  Homer 
in  describing  an  ocean  wave:  "As  when  the  great  sea  grows 
j>^i,rj)le  with  dumb  swell "  («  Iliad,"  xiv.,  16).  2.  Deep  scarlet 
or  crimson— the  Tyrian  purple.  3.  The  deep  blue  of  the  Med- 
iterranean. The  dye  was  permanent.  Alexander  is  said  by 
Plutarch  to  have  found  in  the  royal  palace  at  Susa  garments 


Cb.  XVl]  LUKE.  397 

which  preserved  their  freshness  of  color  though  they  had  been 
laid  up  for  nearly  two  hundred  years  ;  and  Mr.  St.  John  ("  Man- 
ners and  Customs  of  Ancient  Greece  ")  relates  that  a  small  pot  of 
the  dye  was  discovered  at  Pompeii  which  had  preserved  the 
tone  and  richness  attributed  to  the  Tyrian  pui'ple.  This  fixed- 
ness of  color  is  alluded  to  in  Isa.  i.  18 — though  your  sins  were 
as  scarlet,  the  term  being  rendered  in  the  Septuagint  (poiviKovv, 
which,  with  its  kindred  words,  denoted  darker  shades  of  red.  A 
full  and  interesting  description  of  the  purple  may  be  found  in 
J.  A.  St.  John's  "  Manners  and  Customs  of  Ancient  Greece," 
iii.,  224  sq. 

Fine  linen  (^va-crov).  Byssus.  A  yellowish  flax,  and  the 
linen  made  from  it.  Herodotus  says  it  was  used  for  enveloping 
mummies  (ii.,  86),  a  statement  confirmed  by  microscopic  exam- 
inations. He  also  speaks  of  it  as  a  bandage  for  a  wound  (vii., 
181).  It  is  the  word  used  by  the  Septuagint  for  linen  (Exod. 
XXV.  4  ;  xxviii.  5  ;  xxxv.  6,  etc.).  Some  of  the  Egyptian  linen 
was  so  fine  that  it  was  called  woven  air.  Sir  Gardner  Wilkin- 
son says  that  some  in  his  possession  was,  to  the  touch,  compar- 
able to  silk,  and  not  inferior  in  texture  to  the  finest  cambric.  It 
was  often  as  transparent  as  lawn,  a  fact  illustrated  by  the 
painted  sculptures,  where  the  entire  form  is  often  made  dis- 
tinctly visible  through  the  outer  garment.  Later  Greek  writers 
used  the  word  for  cotton  and  for  silk.  See  Wilkinson's  "  An- 
cient Egyptians,"  first  series,  iii.,  114  sq.,  and  Eawlinson's  "  His- 
tory of  Ancient  Egypt,"  i.,  487,  512.  A  yellow  byssus  was  used 
by  the  Greeks,  the  material  for  which  grew  around  Elis,  and 
which  was  enormously  costly.     See  Aeschylus,  "  Persae,"  127. 

Fared  sumptuously  {ev<f>paiv6fievo<;  \afnrpa)<;).  Lit.,  mak- 
ing merry  in  splendor.  Compare  ch.  xv.  23,  24,  29,  32.  Wye, 
he  ate,  each  day,  shiningly. 

20.  Beggar.     See  onpoor,  Matt.  v.  3. 

Lazarus.  Abbreviated  from  'EXed^apoi,  Ehaza/r,  and  mean- 
ing Qod  a  help.     "  It  is  a  striking  evidence  of  the  deep  im- 


398  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVI. 

pression  which  this  parable  has  made  on  the  mind  of  Christen- 
dom, that  the  term  lazar  should  have  passed  into  so  many  lan- 
guages as  it  has,  losing  altogether  its  signification  as  a  proper 
name  "  (Trench). 

Was  laid  (e/Se/SXT^ro).  JAi.,  was  thrown:  cast  carelessly  down 
by  his  bearers  and  left  there. 

Gate  (-TrvXcova).  The  gateway,  often  separated  from  the 
house  or  temple.     In  Matt.  xxvi.  71,  it  is  rendered  ^orcA. 

Full  of  sores  {eiXKco/j,evo<;).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  regular  medical  term  for  to  he  ulcerated.  John  uses  the 
kindred  noun  eX,/to?,  an  ulcer  (Apoc.  xvi.  2).     See  next  verse. 

21.  Desiring  (iin^v^iSiv).  Eagerly,  and  not  receiving  what 
he  desired.  The  same  thing  is  implied  in  the  story  of  the 
prodigal,  where  the  same  word  is  used,  "  Ae  would  fain  have 
been  filled  "  (ch.  xv.  16),  but  the  pods  did  not  satisfy  his  hunger. 

The  crumbs  that  fell  {t&v  TnirTovrcav).  Lit.,  the  things 
falling.     The  best  texts  omit  y^i-y^Lcov,  o'urribs. 

Moreover  (aXA,a  kuX).  Lit.,  hut  even.  '■'■But  (instead  of 
finding  compassion),  even  the  dogs,"  etc. 

Licked  {i-n^eXeixov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Cyril, 
cited  by  Hobart,  says  :  "  The  only  attention,  and,  so  to  speak, 
medical  dressing,  which  his  sores  received,  was  from  the  dogs 
who  came  and  licked  them." 

22.  Abraham's  bosom.  A  Rabbinical  phrase,  equivalent 
to  being  with  Abraham  in  Paradise.  "  To  the  Israelite  Abra- 
ham seems  the  personal  centre  and  meeting-point  of  Paradise" 
(Goebel). 

23.  Hell.  ^QY.,  Hades.  Where  Lazarus  also  was,  but  in  a 
different  region.     See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 


Ch.  XVI.]  LUKE.  399 

24.  Cool  (Karai/ruj^eM/).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Com- 
mon in  medical  language.  See  on  cb.  xxi.  26.  Compare  the 
exquisite  passage  in  Dante,  where  Messer  Adamo,  the  false 
coiner,  horribly  mutilated,  and  in  the  lowest  circle  of  Malebolge, 


"I  had,  while  living,  much  of  what  I  wished  ; 
And  now,  alas !  a  drop  of  water  crave. 
The  rivulets  that  from  the  verdant  hills 
Of  Cassentin  descend  down  into  Arno, 
Making  thew  channels  to  he  soft  and  cold. 
Ever  before  me  stand,  and  not  in  vain : 
For  far  more  doth  their  image  dry  me  up 
Than  the  disease  which  strips  my  face  of  flesh. " 

Inferno,  xxx. ,  65  sq. 


Tormented  (68ww/*at).  Used  by  Luke  only.  Tormented  \& 
too  strong.  The  word  is  used  of  the  sorrow  of  Joseph  and 
Mary  when  the  child  Jesus  was  missing  (ch.  ii.  48) ;  and  of  the 
grief  of  the  Ephesian  elders  on  parting  with  Paul  (Acts  xx.  38). 
Kev.,  I  a/m  in  anguish. 

25.  Son  {tskvov).    Lit.,  child. 

Receivedst  (aTreXaySe?).  Received  hack  (airo)  as  a  reward 
or  quittance.     Compare  ch.  vi.  34  ;  xviii.  30  ;  xxiii.  41. 

Gulf  (xda-fia).  From  ;y;ao-K6>,  to  yawn.  Transcribed  into  the 
English  chasm.  In  medical  language,  of  the  cavities  in  a  wound 
or  ulcer. 

Is  fixed  (ioTijpiKTai,).  Compare  ch.  xxii.  32 ;  and  see  on  1 
Pet.  V.  10. 

27.  Send  him  to  my  father's  house.  Compare  Dante, 
where  Ciacco,  the  glutton,  says  to  Dante : 

"  But  when  thou  art  again  In  the  sweet  world, 
I  pray  thee  to  the  mind  of  others  bring  me." 

Inferno,  vi.,  88. 


400  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XVIL 

31.  Be  persuaded.  Dives  had  said,  "they  will  repent." 
Abraham  replies,  "they  will  not  be  ew  en  persuaded." 

Though  one  rose.     Dives  had  said,  "if  one  went." 

From  the  dead  (e'/c  veKpwv).  Dives  had  said/rom  the  dead, 
but  using  a  different  preposition  {airo).  It  is  wellnigh  im- 
possible to  give  the  English  reader  this  nice  play  of  prepositions. 
The  general  distinction  is  atro,  from  the  outside ;  e'/c,  from 
within.  Thus  Luke  ii.  4,  Josepli  went  up  from,  {a-rro)  Galilee, 
the  province,  out  of  (e'/c)  the  city  of  Nazareth.  Abraham's 
preposition  {Ik,  out  of)  implies  a  more  complete  identification 
with  the  dead  than  Dives'  cnro,  from.  A  rising  from  among 
the  dead  was  more  than  a  messenger  going  from  the  dead. 
"We  can  hardly  pass  over  the  identity  of  the  name  Lazarus 
with  that  of  him  who  actually  was  recalled  from  the  dead  ;  but 
whose  return,  far  from  persuading  the  Pharisees,  was  the  im- 
mediate exciting  cause  of  their  crowning  act  of  unbelief" 
(Alford). 

CHAPTER  XYII. 

1.  Impossible  (avivBeKTov).  Inadmissible.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.     See  on  it  cannot  be,  ch.  xiii.  33. 

Offences.  See  on  offend.  Matt.  v.  29;  and  compare  on 
Matt.  xvi.  23. 

2.  It  were  better  {Xva-ireKel).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. The  verb  means  to  pay  what  is  due,  and  is  equivalent 
to  our  phrase,  it  pays. 

M  i  II  sto  n  e .  Compare  Matt,  xviii.  6.  The  correct  reading  here 
is  Xt,9o?  fJLvKiKo's,  a  millstone  /  not  a  great  millstone  as  Matt. 

Thrown  {eppiTrrat,).  Hurled:  with  an  underlying  sense  of 
violence,  called  out  by  so  great  an  outrage. 

3.  Rebuke.    See  on  stfraAtly  charged,  ch.  ix.  21. 


Ch.  XVII.]  LUKE.  401 

6.  Sycamine.  Or  mulberry.  Lnke  distinguishes  between 
this  and  a-vicoftopea,  the  fig-fiiulberry  (ch.  xix.  4).  The  names 
were  sometimes  confused,  but  a  physician  would  readily  make 
the  distinction,  as  both  were  used  medicinally. 

9.  I  trow  not.     Omitted  by  the  best  texts. 

10.  Unprofitable  {a-)(p€loi).  From  %/)6ta,  reguirement j 
something  which  the  master  must  pay.  Not  useless,  but  having 
rendered  no  service  beyond  what  was  due.  "  The  profit  does 
not  begin  until  the  servant  goes  beyond  his  obligation  "  (Meyer). 
"  A  servant  owes  all  things"  (Bengel). 

11.  Through  the  midst  of.  It  may  also  mean  hetween  or 
on  the  horders  of.     The  Am.  Rev.  insists  on  the  latter. 

12.  Lepers.     See  on  ch.  v.  12. 

20.  With  observation  (jieTh  TraparTtprjaew;).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  The  progress  of  the  kingdom  cannot  be  de- 
fined by  visible  marks  like  that  of  an  earthly  kingdom.  Its 
growth  in  the  world  is  a  process  oi pervasion,  like  the  working 
of  the  leaven  through  the  lump. 

21.  Within.  Better,  in  the  midst  of.  Meyer  acutely  re- 
marks that  ^'■you  refers  to  the  Pharisees,  in  whose  hearts  nothing 
certainly  found  a  place  less  than  did  the  ethical  kingdom  of 
God."  Moreover,  Jesus  is  not  speaking  of  the  inwardness  of 
the  kingdom,  but  of  it& presence.  "  The  whole  language  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  being  within  men,  rather  than  men  being 
within  the  kingdom,  is  modern"  (Trench,  after  Meyer). 

24.  Lighteneth  (da-TpdirTova-a).     Only  here  and  ch.  xxiv.  4-. 

25.  Rejected.  See  on  disallowed,  1  Pet.  ii.  4;  and  tried, 
1  Pet.  i.  Y. 

31.  Goods.     See  on  Matt.  xii.  29. 
26 


402  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ca  XVm. 

On  the  house-top.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  17. 

33.  Shall  preserve  {^mojov^aei,).  Only  here  and  Acts  vii. 
19.  Originally  to  engender  ;  thence  to  produce  alvve  ov  endue 
with  life,  and  so  to  j)reserve  alive.     Wye,  shall  quicken  it. 

37.  Eagles.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  28. 


CHAPTER  XYIII. 

1-14.  The  Parables  of  the  Unjust  Judge  ajnb  the  Phari 
SEE  AND  Publican.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

1.  To  the  end  that  men  ought  (tt/so?  to  Seiv).     Lit,  with 
reference  to  its  heing  necessary  always  to  pray,  etc. 

Faint  {iyicaKeiv).     To  turn  coward  or  lose  heart. 

2.  Regarded  (ivTpeTTOfievo'i).     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  37. 

3.  Avenge  (eKBiicrja-ov).     The  word  is  too  strong.     It  means 
do  me  justice.     See  on  Kom.  xii.  19. 

5.  Lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  weary  me  (Jva  fif)  ek 
TeXo9  epxofievTj  vTrwrnd^r}  /ie).  Ek  r6\,o<;,  lit.,  unto  the  end,m.a,j 
mean  continually  ;  but  weary  or  wear  out  for  vTrairid^ri  is  more 
than  doubtful  That  word  is  from  vTranriov,  the  part  of  the 
face  under  the  eyes,  and  means  to  strike  under  the  eye;  to  give 
one  a  black  eye.  It  is  used  only  once  again,  by  Paul,  1  Cor. 
ix.  27,  and  in  its  literal  sense :  "  I  huffet  my  body ; "  treat  it  as 
the  boxer  does  his  adversary.  The  more  literal  sense  of  this 
word,  and  of  eh  reXo^,  in  the  end,  ov  finally,  give  a  sound  and 
much  livelier  meaning  here.  "  Lest  at  last  she  come  and  as- 
somU  me."  So  G-oebel  and  Meyer,  and  so  Wye,  "  Lest  at  the 
last  she,  coming,  strangle  me ; "  and  Tjmd.,  "  Lest  at  the  last 
she  come  and  rail  on  me."     The  judge  fears  lest  importunity 


Ch.  xvrn.]  LUKE.  403 

may  culminate  in  personal  violence.     Perhaps,  also,  as  Goebel 
suggests,  he  intentionally  exaggerates  his  fear. 

6.  The  unjust  judge.  JAt,,  the  judge  of  injustice.  See  on 
ch.  xvi.  8. 

7.  And  shall  not  God.  The  emphasis  is  on  God.  In  the 
Greek  order,  "  and  God,  shall  he  not,"  etc. 

Though  he  bear  long  with  them.  A  very  difficult  pas- 
sage, and  interpretations  vary  greatly. 

(1.)  The  verb  fJuiKpo^vftem  means  to  he  long-suffering,  or  to 
endure  patiently .  Such  is  its  usual  rendering  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. 

(2.)  Them  {avToTs)  refers  not  to  the  persecutors  of  God's  elect, 
but  to  the  elect  themsel/ues.  The  Rev.  cuts  the  knot  by  the  most 
literal  of  renderings :  "  and  he  is  long-suffering  over  (eVt)  them." 

(3.)  The  secondary  meaning  of  restraining  or  delaying  may 
fairly  be  deduced  from  the  verb,  and  explained  either  {a)  of 
delaying  punishment,  or  (5)  of  delaying  sympathy  or  help. 

The  Am.  Rev.  adopts  the  former,  and  throws  the  sentence 
into  the  form  of  a  question :  "  And  is  he  slow  to  punish  on 
their  behalf  "  {eir  avroK)  ?  I  venture  to  suggest  the  following : 
Kal  not  infrequently  has  the  sense  of  yet,  or  and  yet.  So 
Euripides :  "  Thou  art  Jove-bom,  and  yet  {kuI)  thy  utterance 
is  unjust "  ("  Helena,"  1147).  Aristophanes :  "  O  crown,  depart, 
and  joy  go  with  thee :  yet  (Kal)  I  part  from  thee  unwillingly  " 
("  Knights,"  1249).  So  John  ix.  30  :  "  Ye  know  not  from 
whence  he  is,  and  yet  {Kal)  he  hath  opened  my  eyes."  John 
xvi.  32 :  "  Ye  shall  leave  me  alone,  and  yet  (Kal)  I  am  not 
alone,"  etc.  Render,  then,  "  Shall  not  God  avenge  his  own 
elect,  which  cry  unto  him  day  and  night ;  yet  he  delayeth  help 
on  their  behalf,"  even  as  the  unjust  judge  delayed  to  avenge  the 
widow  ?  Surely  he  will,  and  that  ere  long.  This  rendering, 
instead  of  contrasting  God  with  the  judge,  carries  out  the 
parallel.  The  judge  delays  through  indifference.  God  delays 
also,  or  seems  to  delay,  in  order  to  try  his  children's  faith,  or 


404  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XVHL 

because  his  purpose  is  not  ripe ;  but  he,  too,  will  do  justice 
to  the  suppliant.     Tynd.,  Yea,  though  he  defer  them. 

' '  He  hides  himself  so  wondrously, 
As  though  there  were  no  God  ; 
He  is  least  seen  when  all  the  powers 
Of  ill  are  most  abroad. 

O  there  is  less  to  try  our  faith, 

In  our  mysterious  creed, 
Than  In  the  godless  look  of  earth 

In  these  our  hours  of  need. 

It  is  not  so.  but  so  it  looks ; 

And  we  lose  courage  then ; 
And  doubts  will  come  if  God  hath  kept 

His  promises  to  men." 

Faber. 

8.  Nevertheless.  Notwithstanding  God  is  certain  to  vindi- 
cate, will  the  Son  of  man  find  on  earth  a  persistence  in  faith 
answering  to  the  widow's  ? 

9.  Despised  {i^ov^evovvTtn;).  Lit.,  made  nothing  of.  Kev., 
set  at  nought. 

Others  {rov'i  Xonroii';).  The  expression  is  stronger.  Lit., 
the  rest.  They  threw  all  others  beside  themselves  into  one 
class.     E.ev.,  correctly,  all  others. 

10.  The  other  (ere/so?).  With  an  implication  of  his  being 
a  different  man.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 

Publican.     See  on  ch.  iii.  12. 

11.  Stood  {a-ra^6l<i).  Lit.,  havimg  leen  placed.  Took  his 
stand.  It  implies  taking  up  his  position  ostentatiously  ;  striking 
an  attitude.  But  not  necessarily  in  a  bad  sense.  See  on  ch. 
xix.  8  :  and  compare  Acts  v.  20.  Standing  was  the  ordinary 
posture  of  the  Jews  in  prayer.  Compare  Matt.  vi.  5 :  Mark 
xi.  25. 


Ch.  xvm.]  LUKE.  405 

P ra.y ed  {irpoarjiixero).  Imperfect:  iegan  to  pray,  ov  pro- 
ceeded to  pray. 

Other  men  {olXoiirol  tSiv  dvS-pdoTrmv).  Lit.,  the  rest  of  men. 
See  on  ver.  9.  A  Jewish  saying  is  quoted  that  a  true  Eabbin 
ought  to  thank  God  every  day  of  his  life  ;  1,  that  he  was  not 
created  a  Gentile ;  2,  that  he  was  not  a  plebeian  ;  3,  that  he  was 
not  born  a  woman. 

Extortioners.    As  the  publicans. 

This  publican.  Lit.,  this  {one),  the  publican.  This  publi- 
can here.  "He  lets  us  see,  even  in  the  general  enumeration, 
that  he  is  thinking  of  the  publican,  so,  afterward,  he  does  not 
omit  directly  to  mention  him  "  (Goebel). 

12.  Twice  in  the  week.  The  law  required  only  one  fast 
in  the  year,  that  on  the  great  day  of  Atonement  (Lev.  xvi.  29  ; 
Num.  xxix.  7) ;  though  public  memorial  fasts  were  added,  dur- 
ing the  Captivity,  on  the  antiiversaries  of  national  calamities. 
The  Pharisees  fasted  every  Monday  and  Thursday  during  the 
weeks  between  the  Passover  and  Pentecost,  and  again  between 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  and  that  of  the  Dedication  of  the 
Temple. 

I  give  tithes  {a-n-oBeKarm).     See  on  Matt,  xxiii.  23. 

Possess  {KT&fiat,).  "Wrong.  The  Israelite  did  not  pay  tithes 
of  his  possessions,  but  only  of  his  gains — ^his  annual  increase. 
See  Gen.  xxviii.  22  ;  Deut.  xiv.  22.  Besides,  the  verb,  in  the 
present  tense,  does  not  mean  to  possess,  but  to  acquire ;  the 
ineaning  possess  being  confined  to  the  perfect  and  pluperfect. 
Eev.,  g/et.  Compare  Matt.  x.  9  (Kev.) ;  Acts  xxii.  28 ;  Luke 
xxi.  19  (on  which  see  note) ;  1  Thess.  iv.  4  (Rev.). 

13.  Standing  (eo-rw?).  In  a  timid  attitude:  merely  standing, 
not  postmring  as  the  Pharisee.     See  on  ver.  11. 


406  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XVHL 

Afar  off.     Some  explain,  from  the  sanctuary;  others,  from 

the  Pha/risee. 

Lift  up  his  eyes.    As  worshippers  ordinarily. 

Be  merciful  {iKcur^Ti).     Lit.,  ie  ^qpitiated. 

A  sinner  (to3  dfiaprcoXm).  "With  the  definite  article,  "the 
sinner."     "  He  thinks  about  no  other  man  "  (Bengel). 

16-17.  Compare  Matt.  xix.  13-15  ;  Mark  x.  13-16. 

15.  Infants  (t^  ^peifyrf).     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  2. 

Touch.  So  Mark.  Matthew  has  lay  his  hands  on  them  amd 
pray. 

16.  Suffer.  See  on  Matt.  xix.  14.  Only  Mark  notes  the 
taking  in  his  arms. 

18-30.  Compare  Matt.  xix.  16-30 ;  xx.  1-16 ;  Mark  x.  17-31. 

18.  Ruler.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

20.  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?     See  on  Matt.  xix.  17. 

Do  not  commit  adultery,  etc.  Compare  the  different  ar- 
rangement of  the  commandments  by  the  three  synoptists. 

22.  Yet  lackest  thou  one  thing  (eVt  ev  aoi  Xeiirei).  Lit., 
still  one  thing  is  lacking  to  thee.  Mark  alone  adds  that  Jesus,, 
looking  upon  him,  loved  him. 

Come  (Bevpo).    Lit.,  hither. 

23.  He  was  very  sorrowful.  Eev.,  more  correctly  renders 
eyevijS^,  he  became.     See  on  Mark  x.  22. 


Ch.  xvm.]  LUKE.  407 

Very  rich.  The  Greek  order  forms  a  climax  :  "  rich,  eooceed- 
mglyP 

25.  Camel.    See  on  Matt.  xix.  24. 

To  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  (hih  Tp^fiaToi  ^eXoV??? 

€t<reX-9etv).  Kev.,  more  literally,  to  enter  in  through  a  needles 
eye.  Both  Matthew  and  Mark  use  another  word  for  needle 
(joa^i?) ;  see  on  Mark  x.  25.  Luke  alone  has  ^eXovr),  which,  be- 
sides being  an  older  term,  is  the  peculiar  word  for  the  surgical 
needle.  The  other  word  is  condemned  by  the  Greek  gramma- 
rians as  barbarous. 

28.  All  {iravra).  The  best  texts  read  ra  iBia,  our  own.  So 
Eev. 

31-34.  Compare  Matt.  xx.  17-19.     Mark  x.  32-34. 

31.  By  the  prophets  {^i£).  Lit.,  through;  the  preposition 
expressing  secondary  agency. 

34.  Saying  {pn/ia).     See  on  ch.  i.  37. 

Were  said  (Keyofieva).  Or,  more  correctly,  which  were  he- 
ing  said  to  them  at  the  moment. 

35-43 ;  xix.  1.  Compare  Matt.  xx.  29-34.     Mark  x.  46-52. 

39.  Cried  (l/epafev).  A  stronger  word  than  e^6r)aev,  cried, 
in  the  previous  verse,  which  is  merely  to  cry  or  shout,  while  this 
is  to  cry  clamorously  ;  to  scream  or  shriek.  Compare  Matt.  xv. 
23  ;  Mark  v.  5 ;  Acts  xix.  28-34. 

To  be  brought  unto  {ay^vai  Trposi).  Used  by  Luke  alone 
in  the  sense  of  bringing  the  sick  to  Christ.  He  also  uses  the 
compound  verb  irpoadym,  which  was  a  common  medical  term 
for  bringing  the  sick  to  a  physician,  both  in  that  and  in  other 
senses.     See  ch.  ix.  41 ;  Acts  xvi.  20  ;  xxvii.  27. 


408 


WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIX. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 
1-10.  The  Stokt  of  Zacchaetjs.     Peculiar  to  Luke. 

1.  Jericho.  The  city  was  close  to  the  fords  of  the  Jordan, 
on  the  frontier  of  Peraea,  and  on  the  richest  plain  of  Palestine, 
abounding  most  in  the  choicest  productions,  especially  balsam  ; 
and  was,  therefore,  an  appropriate  seat  for  an  officer  of  supe- 
rior rank  to  preside  over  the  collection  of  revenues.  See  on 
Matt.  ix.  9  ;  Luke  iii.  12. 

2.  Named  (wo/iart  KaXov/xei/o?).  JAt.,  called  lyname.  Com- 
pare ch.  i.  61. 

Zacchaeus.     /S'acca^,  "the  just." 

3.  He  sought  (ef^jret).  Imperfect.  He  was  busy  seeking 
as  Jesus  passed. 

Who  he  was.  Lit.,  is.  Not  to  see  what  Tcvnd  of  a  person, 
but  which  one  of  the  crowd  he  was. 

Stature  {ffKbiciq).     See  on  ch.  xii.  25. 

4.  Sycamore  (a-vKOfiopeav).  From  avtcrj,  fig-tree,  and  fiopov, 
the  rmilberry.  The  fig-mulberry,  resembling  the  fig  in  its 
fruit,  and  the  mulberry  in  its  leaves.  Some  old  writers  de- 
rived it  from  fiwpo<s,  foolish,  because  it  produced  worthless  figs. 
Dr.  Thomson  says  that  it  bears  several  crops  yearly,  which  grow 
on  short  stems  along  the  trunk  and  the  large  branches.  They 
are  very  insipid,  and  none  but  the  poorer  classes  eat  them. 
Hence  Amos  expresses  the  fact  that  he  belongs  to  the  humblest 
class  of  the  community,  by  calling  himself  a  gatherer  of  syca- 
more fruit  (Amos  vii.  14).  It  grows  with  its  large  branches 
low  down  and  wide  open,  so  that  Zacchaeus  could  easily  have 
climbed  into  it.     It  is  a  favorite  and  pleasant  conceit  with  old 


Ch.  XIX.]  LUKE.  409 

commentators  that  Zacchaeus'  sycamore  that  day  bore  precious 
fruit. 

5.  I  must  abide.  "Adopting  the  royal  style  which  was 
familiar  to  him,  and  which  commends  the  loyalty  of  a  vassal  in 
the  most  delicate  manner  by  freely  exactinsj  his  services" 
("  Ecce  Homo  "). 

7.  To  be  guest  {KaraXva-ai).  More  correctly,  Eev.,  lodge. 
See  on  ch.  ix.  12. 

A  sinner.     See  on  ch.  iii.  12. 

8.  Stood  {a-To^eU).  See  on  ch.  xviii.  11.  Describing  a 
formal  act,  as  of  one  who  is  about  to  make  a  solemn  declara- 
tion. He  was  like  the  Pharisee  in  attitude,  but  not  in  spirit. 
The  more  formal  word  for  standing,  applied  to  the  Pharisee  in 
the  temple,  is  here  used  of  the  jpvhliccm. 

I  give.  Not,  It  is  my  practice  to  give.  Zacchaeus'  state- 
ment is  not  a  vindicaUon,  but  a  vow.  "  I  now  give  by  way  of 
restoration." 

If  I  have  taken  anything  by  false  accusation  {e'l  tl  e<rvKo- 
<f>dvTriaa).  If- — cmythmg  does  not  state  a  merely  possible  case 
as  if  Zacchaeus  were  unconscious  of  any  such  extortion  ;  but  is 
a  milder  way  of  saying  "  Whatever  I  have  taken."  See  on  ch. 
iii.  14.  It  is  an  odd  coincidence,  nothing  more,  that  the  fig- 
mulberry  (sycamore)  should  occur  in  connection  with  the  fig- 
shewer  (sycophant).  It  was  common  for  the  publicans  to  put  a 
fictitious  value  on  property  or  income,  or  to  advance  the  tax  to 
those  unable  to  pay,  and  then  to  charge  usurious  interest  on  the 
private  debt.  On  the  harsh  exaction  of  such  debts,  see  Matt, 
xviii.  28 ;  Luke  xii.  58. 

Fourfold.   The  restoration  required  of  a  ^A^e/'(Exod.  xxii.  1). 

11.  Appear  (dva^alvea^ai).  Only  here  and  Acts  xxi.  3.  It 
means  to  he  brought  to  light ;  shown  forth.  The  common  phrase 
show  wp  {pva)  represents  it. 


410  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIX. 

13.  His  ten  servants  {Seku  BovXov;  kavTov).  Eev.,  rightly, 
elianges  to  ten  servants  of  his,  since  the  his  is  emphatic ;  lit., 
his  own.  Moreover,  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  this 
nobleman,  of  consequence" enough  to  be  raised  to  a  royal  dig- 
nity, had  but  ten  servants.  The  number  of  slaves  in  a  Koman 
household  was  enormous,  sometimes  reaching  hundreds.  Toward 
the  end  of  the  Republic,  it  was  considered  reprehensible  not  to 
have  a  slave  for  every  sort  of  work. 

Pounds  (fiva^.)  Minas.  Between  sixteen  and  eighteen  dol- 
lars apiece.  Meyer  very  aptly  remarks :  "  The  small  sum 
astonishes  us.  Compare,  on  the  other  hand,  the  talents  (Matt. 
XXV.).  But  in  Matthew,  the  Lord  transfers  to  his  servant  his 
whole  property ;  here  he  has  ouly  devoted  a  definite  sum  of 
money  to  the  purpose  of  putting  his  servants  to  the  proof  there- 
with ;  and  the  smallness  of  the  amount  corresponds  to  what  is 
so  carefully  emphasized  in  our  parable,  viz.,  the  relation  of 
faithfulness  in  the  least  to  its  great  recompense  (ver.  17) ; 
which  relation  is  less  regarded  in  the  parable  in  Matthew" 
("  Commentary  on  Luke  "). 

Occupy  {TrpayfiaTevaaaSe).  The  word  occwpy  has  lost  the 
sense  which  it  conveyed  to  the  makers  of  the  A.  V. — that  of 
using  or  laying  out  %ohat  is  possessed.  An  occupier  formerly 
meant  a  trader.  Occupy,  in  the  sense  of  to  use,  occurs  Judges 
xvi.  11 :  "  new  ropes  that  never  were  occupied  ;  "  which  Kev. 
changes  to  wherewith  no  worJc  hath  ieen  done.  Compare  the 
Prayer-Book  version  of  the  Psalter,  Ps.  cvii.  23 :  "  ocaupy 
their  business  in  great  waters."  So  Latimer,  "  Sermons,"  "  He 
that  occupieth  usury."  Rev.,  trade  ye.  Wye,  merchcmdise  ye. 
Tynd.,  huy  and  sell.     See  on  traded,  Matt.  xxv.  16. 

Till  I  come  (Iw?  epxofiai).  It  is  strange  that  the  Eev.  follows 
this  reading  without  comment,  while  the  Revisers'  text  takes 
no  notice  whatever  of  the  reading  of  four  of  the  leading  manu- 
scripts, which  is  adopted  by  both  Tischendorf  and  Westcott 
and  Hort ;  eV  c5  epxo/j^ai,  "  while  I  come,"  a  condensed  form  of 
expression  for  while  I  go  and  return. 


Ch.  XIX.]  LUKE.  411 

15.  Had  gained  by  trading  (Siewpay/xaTeva-aTo).  Only  here 
in  New  Testament.     See  on  ver.  13. 

16.  Hath  gained  {Trpoarjpydaaro).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. Lit.,  hath  worked  besides  (Trpo?)  the  original  sum. 
Eev.,  made. 

Have  thou  authority  {hSi  i^ovcriav  excov).  Lit.,  Be  thou 
ha/vi/ng  authority. 

Cities.  "  A  city  for  a  poimd,  yet  not  even  a  cottage  could 
be  bought  for  a  pound  "  (Bengel). 

18.  Made  {em-ovqa-ev).     See  on  Matt.  xxv.  16. 

20.  I  kept  (elxov).  The  imperfect.  I  was  keeping  while 
thou  wert  absent. 

Napl<in  (aovhapi^).  The  Latin  suda/riMon,  from  sudor,  per- 
spiration :  a  cloth  for  wiping  off  the  sweat.  Trench  notes  that 
the  napkin  which  the  idle  servant  does  not  need  for  its  proper 
use  (Gen.  iii.  19)  he  uses  for  the  wrapping  up  of  his  pound. 

21.  Austere  {ava-Trip6<i).  From  ava,  to  dry.  Dry,  and 
thence  hard.     See  on  ha/rd.  Matt.  xxv.  24. 

Sow  (ea7reipa<;).     See  on  strawed.  Matt.  xxv.  24. 

22.  Thou  i<newest.  To  be  read  interrogatively.  "Didst 
thou  know  that  ?  Then,  for  that  reason,  thou  shouldst  have 
been  the  more  faithful." 

23.  Bank  (jpairet/xv).  Lit.,  the  table  of  the  money-changer. 
"Wye,  hoa/rd.     See  on  exchangers.  Matt.  xxv.  27. 

Usury  (t6k<p).  Better  interest,  as  Rev.  See  on  usury.  Matt 
xxv.  27. 


412  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIX. 

27.  But  {■jtXtjv).  Rev.,  hoioheit.  However  it  may  be  with 
the  unfaithful  servant. 

Slay  {KaTa(T^d^are).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  A 
strong  word :  slaughter ;  cut  them  down  {Kara). 

29-44.     Compare  Matt.  xxi.  1-11 ;  Mark  xi.  1-11. 

29.  Beth  phage.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  1. 

31.  The  Lord,     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  3. 

35.  Their  garments.  More  strictly,  their  own  garments 
(eavTwv),  in  their  reverence  and  love  for  their  Lord.  See  on 
Matt.  XXV.  7. 

36.  Spread  {vTreaTpcovvvov).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

37.  The  descent.  Two  distinct  sights  of  Jerusalem  are 
caught  on  this  route,  an  inequality  of  ground  hiding  it  for  a 
time  after  one  has  first  seen  it.  Verse  37  marks  the  Jlrst 
sight,  verse  41  the  second  and  nearer  view  (see  Introduction,  on 
Luke's  topographical  accuracy).  "At  this  point  (the  former)  the 
first  view  is  caught  of  the  southeastern  corner  of  the  city. 
The  temple  and  the  more  northern  portions  are  hid  by  the 
slope  of  Olivet  on  the  right :  what  is  seen  is  only  Mount  Zion, 
now,  for  the  most  part,  a  rough  field,  crowned  with  the  mosque 
of  David,  and  the  angle  of  the  western  walls,  but  then  covered 
with  houses  to  its  base,  and  surmounted  by  the  castle  of  Herod, 
on  the  supposed  site  of  the  palace  of  David.  ...  It  was 
at  this  point  that  the  shout  of  triumph  burst  forth  from  the 
multitude  "  (Stanley,  "  Sinai  and  Palestine  "). 

41.  He  drew  nigh.  "  Again  the  procession  advanced.  The 
road  descends  a  slight  declivity,  and  the  glimpse  of  the  city  is 
again  withdrawn  behind  the  intervening  ridge  of  Olivet.  A 
few  moments,  and  the  path  mounts  again ;  it  climbs  a  rugged 
ascent,  it  reaches  a  ledge  of  smooth  rock,  and  in  an  instant  the 


Ch.  XIX.]  LUKE.  413 

whole  city  bursts  into  view.  ...  It  is  hardly  possible  to 
doubt  that  this  rise  and  turn  of  the  road  was  the  exact  point 
where  the  multitude  paused  again,  and  He,  when  he  beheld  the 
city,  wept  over  it "  (Stanley). 

42.  Wept  (eK\ava-ev).     With  audible  weeping. 

43.  A  trench  (xapaKo).  Kev.,  correctly,  as  Tynd.,  a  lank. 
Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  word  literally  means  a 
pointed  stake,  used  in  fortifying  the  intrenchments  of  a  camp, 
and  thence  the  palisade  itself.  In  fortifying  a  camp  or  besieg- 
ing a  city,  a  ditch  was  dug  roimd  the  entii-e  circuit,  and  the 
earth  from  it  thrown  up  into  a  wall,  upon  which  sharp  stakes 
were  fixed.  Every  Roman  soldier  carried  three  or  four  of 
these  stakes  on  the  march.     Wye,  with  pale. 

Keep  thee  in  {a-wi^ovaiv).     See  on  ch.  iv.  38. 

44.  Lay  thee  even  with  the  ground  {iSa<j>iov<Tiv).  Only 
here  in  New  Testament.  Primarily,  to  beat  level,  like  a  thresh- 
ing-floor or  pavement.  The  Septuagint  uses  it  in  the  sense  of 
dashing  down  to  the  ground (Ps.  cxxxvii.  9,  and  elsewhere).  So 
Rev.,  from  the  succeeding  reference  to  the  children,  and  in 
allusion  to  the  Psalm. 

Visitation.    See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  12. 

45-48.  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  12-19 ;  Mark  xi.  12-19. 

46.  Thieves  {Xrja-T&v).  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  56  ;  Luke  x.  30; 
Mark  xi.  17. 

48.  Were  very  attentive  (e^eKpe/iaro).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  hung  upon  him.  Tynd.,  stuck  hy 
him. 


414  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XX 

CHAPTER  XX. 
1-8.  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  23-32 ;  Mark  xi.  27-33. 

5.  They  reasoned  {avviKo^icraino).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  preposition,  avv,  together^  and  the  additional 
with  themselves,  denote  a  very  close  conference. 

6.  Will  stone  (/caTaXi^ao-et).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
"  Stone  us  down''^  (KaTo) ;  i.e.,  stone  us  to  death. 

They  be  persuaded  {■7re'jrei,<rfievo<; ia-nv).  Lit.,  It  (the  people 
collectively)  is  having  heen persuaded.  Denoting  a  long-stand- 
ing and  settled  persuasion. 

9-19.  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  33-46  ;  Mark  xii.  1-12. 

9.  Let  it  out.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  33. 

Went  into  a  far  country.  Not  necessarily _/ar,  but  as  Eev., 
cmother  country.     See  on  Mark  xiii.  34. 

A  long  time  {UavoiK;).     See  on  ch.  vii.  6. 

10.  Of  the  fruit.     See  on  Mark  xii.  2. 

11.  He  sent  yet  {Trpoa-iBero  ■n-ifj.yfrai,).  Lit.,  he  added  to  send. 
A  Hebrew  form  of  expression. 

12.  Wounded  {Tpav/jLaTia-avTe<;).  Only  here  and  Acts  xix. 
16. 

13.  It  may  be  (IW?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
adverb  of  'ia-o<},  equal.  It  expresses  more  than  perhaps,  imply- 
ing rather  a  strong  probability.  Compare  the  phrase,  it  is  an 
even  chance  that. 


Ch.  XX.]  LUKE.  415 

Reverence.    See  on  Matt.  xxi.  37. 

16.  Destroy.     See  on  Matt.  21.  41. 

God  forbid  (jir)  yevoiro).    Lit.,  wiasy  it  not  he. 

17.  The  stone,  etc.     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  4r-1. 

18.  Shall  be  hrokem  {arvvS-Xaa-^i^treTai).  'Rev.,  Tightly,  Iroken 
to  pieces.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  44. 

Grind  him  to  powder  (XiK/jLija-ei,).     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  44. 

20-26.  Compare  Matt.  xxii.  15-22  ;  Mark  xii.  13-17. 

20.  Watched.     See  on  Mark  iii.  2. 

-Spies  {iyKaJ^irovs;).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  From 
iyKaShjfii,  to  send  in,  as  a  garrison  into  a  city.  Hence  of  per- 
sons sent  in  for  the  purpose  of  espionage. 

Which  should  feign  {viroKpivofievovi).  Lit.,  feigning.  Rev., 
which  feigned.  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  See  on  hypo- 
crites, Matt,  xxiii.  13. 

The  power  and  authority  (t^  apxH  icaX  rfj  i^ovala).  The 
former,  the  Roman  power  in  general ;  the  latter,  the  specific 
authority  of  the  official. 

21.  Acceptest  not  the  person.    See  on  Jas.  ii.  1. 

22.  Tribute  {(jyopov).  From  (jjepw,  to  bring.  Something, 
therefore,  which  is  brought  i/n  by  way  of  payment.  Luke 
uses  the  Greek  word  instead  of  the  Latin  Krjva-ov,  censios,  in 
Matthew  and  Mark. 

23.  Perceived.     See  on  considerest,  Matt.  vii.  3. 

Craftiness  (wavovpyiav).  From  -n-av,  every,  and  epyov,  deed. 
Eeadiness  for  every  and  any  deed.  Hence  wmcrwpulousness, 
and  so,  generally,  knavery. 


416  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXI 

24.   Penny.     See  on  Matt.  xx.  2. 

Image  and  superscription.     See  on  Matt.  xxii.  20. 

26.  His  words  (/37;yu,aTo?).   Singular  number.    Rev.,  properly, 

saying.     See  on  ch.  i.  37. 

27-40.  Compare  Matt.  xxii.  23-33  ;  Mark  xii.  18-27. 

27.  Asked.     See  on  Mark  xii.  18. 

36.  Equal  unto  the  angels  (la-dyyeXoi).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament. 

37.  Shewed  (i/jLi^vva-ev).  Originally  to  disclose  somethmg 
secret.     Hence,  generally,  to  make  known. 

At  the  bush  (eVt  t?}?  jScltov).  Wrong.  Render  as  Eev.,  m 
thejplace  concerning  the  hush.     See  on  Mark  xii.  26. 

41-44.  Compare  Matt.  xxii.  41-46  ;  Mark  xii.  35-37. 

48.  Of  thy  feet  {tSjv  ttoB&v  crov).     A.  V.  omits. 

46.  Chief  rooms.  Rev.,  correctly,  chief  places.  See  on 
Mark  xii.  39. 

47.  Widows'  houses.     See  on  Mark  xii,  40. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 
1-4.  Compare  Mark  xii.  41-44. 
1.  Treasury.     See  on  Mark  xii.  41. 

Rich.  Standing  last  and  emphatically  in  the  sentence,  "  Saw 
them  that  were  casting,  etc. — rich  men."  Not  the  rich  only 
were  casting  in.     Compare  Mark  xii.  41. 


Ch.  XXL]  LUKE.  417 

2.  Poor.     See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 
Mites.     See  on  Mark  xii.  42. 

3.  This  poor  widow.     See  on  Mark  xii.  43. 

4.  Offerings  of  God.  The  best  texts  omit  of  Ood.  Rev., 
more  simply,  unto  the  gifts. 

Penury  {i)<rrepTjfiaTo<;).    JAt,  lack.   Hev.,  neatij,  of  her  want. 

5-19.  Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  1-14 ;  Mark  xiii.  1-13. 

5.  Stones.     See  on  Mark  xiii.  1. 

Offerings  {dva^fiaa-iv).  Only  here  in  l^ew  Testament. 
From  avariSrjfii,  to  set  up.  Hence  of  something  set  up  in  the 
temple  as  a  votive  offering.  Such  were  the  golden  vines  pie- 
sented  by  Herod  the  Great,  with  bunches  of  grapes  as  large  as 
a  man,  and  mounted  above  the  entrance  to  the  holy  place.  The 
magnificent  porch  of  the  temple  was  adorned  with  many  such 
dedicated  gifts,  such  as  a  golden  wreath  which  Sosius  offered 
after  he  had  taken  Jerusalem  in  conjunction  with  Hei'od ;  and 
rich  flagons  which  Augustus  and  his  wife  had  given  to  the 
sanctuary.  Gifts  were  bestowed  by  princes  friendly  to  Israel, 
both  on  the  temple  and  on  provincial  synagogues.  The  word 
avdSe/ia  (Gal.  i.  8,  Rev.),  is  the  same  word,  something  devoted, 
and  so  devoted  to  evil  and  accursed.  Luke  uses  the  classical 
form.  The  other  is  the  common  or  Hellenistic  form.  The 
two  forms  develop  gradually  a  divergence  in  meaning ;  the  one 
signifying  devoted  in  a  good,  the  other  in  a  had  sense.  The 
same  process  may  be  observed  in  other  languages.  Thus  kna/ve, 
lad.,  becomes  a  rascal :  villain,  a,  farmer,  becomes  a  scoundrel : 
cumning,  skilful,  becomes  crafty. 

6.  Behold  (BewpeiTe).     See  on  ch.  x.  18. 

Thrown  down.     See  on  Mark  xiii.  2. 

27 


418  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW    TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXI. 

8.  Deceived.   Kev.,  rightly,  led  astray.   See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  4. 
In  my  name.     See  on  Matt,  xviii.  6. 

9.  Commotions  {aKaraaTaa-ias;).  From  a,  not,  and  ko^- 
IcTT'rjfii,  to  establish.  Hence  disestablishments;  unsettlements. 
Kev.,  tumults. 

Be  not  terrified  (/a^  rn-TorjSijre).     Only  here  and  ch.  xxiv.  37. 

By  and  by  (eiiBecos;).     Better  as  Eev.,  immediately. 

11.  Eartiiquakes.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  8. 

Famines  and  pestilences  (Xt/xot  xal  Xoifiol).  Some  texts 
reverse  the  order  of  the  words.  A  jiaronomasia  or  combination 
of  like-sounding  words :  limoi,  loimoi.  Especially  common  in 
Paul's  epistles. 

Fearful  sights  {^o^-qrpd).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
and  rare  in  classical  Greek.  In  Septuagint,  Isa.  xix.  17.  !Not 
confined  to  sights,  but  fearful  things.  Rev.,  better,  terrors. 
Used  in  medical  language  by  Hippocrates,  of  fearful  objects  im- 
agined by  the  sick. 

13.  It  shall  turn  {anro^rjo-eTaC).     Lit.,  turn  out;  issv^e. 

14.  To  answer.     See  on  answer,  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

19.  Possess  ye  (/cTjjo-ecr^e).  Wrong.  See  on  ch.  xviii.  12. 
Eev.  rightly,  ye  shall  win. 

20-36.  Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  15-42.     Mark  xiii.  14^37. 

22.  Vengeance  (eKSt/cTjo-eco?).  Of  rendering  y^Z^  justice,  or 
satisfaction.     See  on  avenge,  ch.  xviii.  3. 

23.  Distress  {avar/Kfj).  Originally  constraint,  necessity; 
thence /orce  or  violence,  and  in  the  classical  poets,  dist/ress, 
anguish. 


Ch.  XXI.]  LUKE.  419 

24.  Edge  {arofian).  Lit.,  the  mouth.  So  Wye.  Either  in 
the  sense  of  i\iQ  foremost  part,  or  picturing  the  sword  as  a  de- 
vouring monster.  In  Heb.  xi.  33,  34,  the  word  is  used  in  both 
senses :  "  the  mouths  of  lions ; "  "  the  edge  of  the  sword." 

Led  away  captive.     See  on  captvoes,  ch.  iv.  18. 

Trodden  down.  Denoting  the  oppression  and  contempt 
which  shall  follow  conquest. 

25.  Signs  {a-rifieta).     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  24. 

Distress  {a-woxv)-  Only  here  and  2  Cor.  ii.  4.  Kindred 
with  avvexofievt},  taken  (ch.  iv.  38),  on  which  see  note.  The 
original  idea  of  the  word  is  heing  held  in  a  tight  grasp. 

With  perplexity,  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring.    The 

A.  Y.  follows  the  reading  rixpva-T}'^,  the  participle,  roaring.  The 
proper  reading  is  r)xov'i,  the  noun,  the  roaring.  Render  jper- 
jplexity  for  the  roaring  of  the  sea,  etc.  'Hp^jw,  roaring,  is 
properly  a  returned  sound,  an  echo.  Generally  a  ri/ngi/ng  sound, 
as  of  the  blows  on  an  anvil. 

Waves  {(jaXov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  radical 
notion  of  the  word  is  unsteady  motion,  especially  the  rolling 
swell  of  the  sea.     Rev.,  better,  billows. 

26.  Failing  (dTroyjrvxovTcov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  originally  means  to  leave  off  hreathing ;  to  swoon. 
Thus  Homer,  when  Laertes  recognizes  Ulysses : 

' '  He  threw 
Round  his  dear  son  his  arms.     The  hardy  chief, 
Ulysses,  drew  hiva.  fainting  (iiro^ixovTo)  to  his  heart." 

y,  xxiv.,  346. 


So  also  Sophocles,  of  Hector  dragged  behind  Achilles'  chariot ; 

"  He  breathed  out  his  life  (dir«i|/u{e>'  $lov). 

jax,  1031. 


420  WORD  STUDIES  EST  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXL 

Matthew  alone  uses  the  simple  verb,  i/fvxw,  to  hreathe  or  llow. 
See  on  wax  cold,  Matt.  xxiv.  12.  Luke  uses  four  compounds  of 
this  simple  verb,  all  of  which  are  peculiar  to  him.  Compare 
cool,  ch.  xvi.  24 ;  refreshmg,  Acts  iii.  19 ;  game  wp  the  glws% 
Acts  V.  5,  10. 

Expectation  {irpoahoKLai).     Only  here  and  Acts  xii.  11. 

The  world.     See  on  ch.  ii.  1. 

Shall  be  shaken  {adXev^tJovrai).  Compare  Matt.  xi.  7j 
Luke  vi.  38 ;  Acts  iv.  31 ;  Heb.  xii.  26,  27.  The  root  of  the 
verb  is  the  same  as  that  of  hillows,  ver.  25. 

28.  Look  up.  See  on  ch.  xiii.  11.  Graphic,  as  implying 
being  previously  howed  down  with  sorrow. 

Redemption  {airoK.vTpmai,<i).     See  on  lettest  depart,  ch.  ii.  29. 

29.  Parable.     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  32. 

30.  Ye  see  {^eirovres;).  Lit.,  "  looTcing,  ye  know,"  etc.  Im- 
plying careful  dbseroation,  with  a  view  to  determine  the  progress 
of  the  season. 

Know  {r^ivoaaKeTe).     Perceime  would  be  better. 

31.  Come  to  pass  (7ti/6/u.6i/a).  The  present  participle.  Rev., 
more  correctly,  ^"^  comvng  to  pass:  "in  process  of  fulfilment. 
Compare  Mark  xiii.  29. 

34.  Overcharged  {fiaprj^&a-iv).  Weighed  down.  Compare 
ch.  ix.  32 ;  2  Cor.  v.  4. 

Surfeiting  {KpanroKr}).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Deri- 
vation uncertain :  akin  to  the  Latin  orapula,  intoxication. 
Trench  finds  an  equivalent  in  fulsomeness,  in  its  original  sense 
oi  fulness.  In  the  medical  writings  it  is  used  of  drunken 
nausea  or  headache. 


Ch.  XXII.]  LUKE.  421 

Drunkenness  (/i€%).  Compare  are  well  d/rxmh,  John  ii.lO. 
This  and  kindred  M'ords  in  the  New  Testament  always  refer  to 
intoxication,  or  that  which  intoxicates.     See  note  on  John  ii.  10. 

Cares  (/iepi/ii'ots).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  25. 

Of  this  life  (/Stwrtwat?).  The  rendering  is  too  general; 
though  it  might  be  diificult  to  give  a  better.  Btbs,  life,  means 
life  considered  either  as  to  its  duration  (1  Pet.  iv.  3) ;  the 
means  of  support  (Mark  xii.  44 ;  Luke  viii.  43  ;  xxi.  4  ;  1  John 
iii.  17) ;  or  the  manner  of  leading  it  (1  Tim.  ii.  2).  The  mean- 
ing here  is^ertaining  to  the  sujtport  or  luxury  of  life  ;  and  so 
in  the  only  other  passages  where  it  occurs,  1  Cor.  vi.  3,  4.  The 
parallel  is  Matt.  vi.  31.     Wye,  business  of  this  life. 

Suddenly  {al^vllwi).     Only  here  and  1  Thess.  v.  3. 

36.  As  a  snare.  Join  with  the  previous  sentence  :  "  come 
suddenly  as  a  snare."     Compare  entangle,  Matt.  xxii.  15. 

36.  Watch.     See  on  Mark  xiii.  33. 

37.  Abode  {rjvXi^ero).     Only  here  and  Matt.  xxi.  17. 

38.  Came  early  in  the  morning  {tip^pi^ev).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 
1-6.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  17-19.     Mark  xiv.  12-16. 

1.  Feast  {eopTrf).    Froperlj festival.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  1. 
Drew  nigh.    Imperfect:  "was  drawing  nigh." 

2.  Sought.   Imperfect,  were  seeKwg',  contemporaneously  with 
the  approach  of  the  feast. 


422  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXH. 

Kill  {aviXaariv).  Lit.,  to  take  up  <md  carry  off,  and  so  to 
make  way  with. 

3.  Satan.     See  on  ch.  xiii.  16. 
Iscariot.     See  on  Matt.  x.  5. 

4.  Captains  {<rrpaTri'yol<i).  The  leaders  of  the  temple-guards 
Compare  Acts  iv.  1. 

6.  Promised  (i^afioTuiyrjaev).  See  on  Matt.  iii.  6  ;  xi.  25. 
The  idea  is  that  of  an  open  and/air  consent  or  pledge. 

10.  A  man— pitcher.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  13. 

11.  Guest-chamber.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  14. 

12.  And  he  (/cawetj/o?).     See  on  Mark  xiv.  15. 
Furnished.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  15.     Wjc,  sfy-ewed. 
14-18 ;  24-30.     Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  20  ;  Mark  xiv.  17. 

14.  The  apostles.     Both  Matthew  and  Mark  have  the  twelve. 

15.  With  desire  I  have  desired.  Expressing mfeTwe desire. 
Compare  John  iii.  29,  re^oiceth  with  joy  ;  Acts  iv.  17,  threaten 
with  threatening. 

19-20.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  26-29.  Mark  xiv.  22-25.  1  Cor. 
xi.  23-25. 

19.  B  read  {dprov).     Better,  a  loaf. 

20.  The  cup.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  28. 

Testament  (Sto^-^Kjy)— shed.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  28. 

21.  Betrayeth  (■Tra/jaStSoi'To?).  The  present  participle:  is  noM» 
engaged  in  betraying. 


Ch.  XXII.  ]  LUKE.  423 

With  me.  "He  does  not  say  with  you:  thus  separating 
the  traitor  from  the  rest  of  the  disciples,  and  showing,  that  now 
he  alone  has  to  do  with  that  wretch,  as  with  an  enemy  "  (Ben- 
gel). 

24.  A  strife  (^tXovetKia).  Properly,  "  an  eager  contention." 
Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Greatest.     Strictly,  greater. 

26.  Doth  serve.     See  on  minister.  Matt.  xx.  26. 

28.  Continued  {Biafj.efievTjKore';).  Lit,  "have  remained 
through  "  (Sta). 

29.  I  appoint  {ZiarL^eiJLai).  Implying  allotment:  assigning 
in  the  course  of  distribution  {hid).  Wye,  dispose.  Luke  is 
especially  fond  of  compounds  with  hia. 

31.  Hath  desired  {i^riTriaaTo).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. It  sometimes  means  to  ohtam,  by  asking,  or  to  heg  off. 
So  Xenophon,  "  Anabasis,"  i.,  1,  3.  The  mother  of  Cyrus,  who 
is  charged  with  an  attempt  to  kill  his  brother,  begged  him,  off 
{i^aiTrjo-afiivT]).  Rev.,  in  margin,  obtained  you  by  ashing.  The 
i-esult  proved  that  Satan  had  obtained  him  for  the  time. 

Sift  (a-ivida-ai).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Wheat  (o-trov).     A  general  term,  grain. 

32.  Prayed  {eherj^v).     See  onjyrayers,  ch.  v.  33. 

Art  converted  (eVto-Tjoe'i/ra?).  Converted  is  simply  the  Lat- 
inized rendering  of  the  word  to  turn  round  [convertere).  Rev. 
renders  the  aorist  participle,  denoting  a  delinite  act,  by  once : 
"  when  once  thou  hast  turned  again." 

Strengthen  {aT^piaov).     See  on  ch.  xvi.  25,  and  1  Pet.  v. 


424  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXII. 

10.     Rev.,  stahUsh,  which  is  much  better.     Strengt/ien  may  de- 
note only  a  tempora/ry  effect.     The  word  vav^\QS,  fixedness. 

34.  Peter.  The  only  instance  of  Christ's  directly  addressing 
him  as  Peter.     He  refers  to  him  by  that  name,  Mark  xvi.  7. 

The  cock.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  34 

Deny.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  30. 

36.  He  that  hath  no  sword,  etc.  But  sword  is  not  gov- 
erned by  hath.  It  is  too  far  off  in  the  sentence.  The  meaning 
is,  he  that  hath  not  a, purse  or  scrip  (and  is  therefore  penniless), 
let  him  sell  his  garment  and  buy  a  sword.     So  Wye. 

37.  Have  an  end  {reKo'i  exei).  The  phrase  is  synonymous 
with  he  aocoTnplished  {TeXeaSijvai,  Rev.,  fvlfilled).  In  classical 
Greek  this  latter  word  is  often  used  of  the  fulfilment  of  an 
oracle :  also  of  things  which  are  settled  beyond  controversy. 
The  two  expressions  here  give  the  two  meanings.  The  proph- 
ecy i&  fulfilled ;  the  things  concerning  me  a,ve  finally  settled. 

39-46.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  30,  36-46;  Mark  xiv.  26, 
32-42. 

40.  The  place.     See  on  Gethsemane,  Matt.  xxvi.  36. 

41.  Was  withdrawn  {airea-irda-ST]).  The  Yulgate has  a/vulsus 
est,  "  he  was  torn  away,"  as  by  an  inward  urgency.  Godet 
adopts  this  view,  and  so,  apparently.  Wye,  he  was  taken  away. 
Meyer  inclines  to  it ;  De  Wette  decidedly  rejects  it.  Compare 
Acts  xxi.  1. 

Prayed.     Imperfect,  began  tojpray. 

43.  There  appeared  {co^Br]).  The  word  most  commonly 
used  in  the  New  Testament  of  seeing  visions.  See  Matt.  xvii. 
3 ;  Mark  ix.  4  ;  Luke  i.  11 ;  xxii.  43  ;  Acts  ii.  17 ;  vii.  35.    The 


Ch.  XXn.]  LUKE.  425 

kindred  noun  oTTTOurLa,  wherever  it  occurs  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, means  a  vision.     See  Luke  i.  22 ;  xxiv.  23,  etc. 

Strengthening  (eVto-^^uwi/).  Only  here  and  Acts  ix.  19.  See 
on  was  not  able,  ch.  xiv.  30  ;  and  cannot,  ch.  xvi.  3.  Commonly 
intransitive;  to  prevail  in  or  among.  Used  transitively  only 
by  Hippocrates  and  Luke. 

44.  Being  in  an  agony  {^^oyi.evo'i  iv  ayasvia).  There  is  in 
the  aorist  participle  a  suggestion  of  a  growing  intensity  in  the 
struggle,  which  is  not  conveyed  by  the  simple  being.  Literally, 
though  very  awkwardly,  it  is,  Tia/oi/ng  become  in  an  agony :  hav- 
ing progressed  from  the  first  prayer  {began  top^^ay,  ver.  41)  into 
an  intense  struggle  of  prayer  and  sorrow.  "Wyeliffe's  rendering 
hints  at  this :  and  he,  made  in  agony,  prayed.  Agony  occurs 
only  here.  It  is  used  by  medical  writers,  and  the  fact  of  a 
sweat  accompanying  an  agony  is  also  mentioned  by  them. 

More  earnestly  {eKreveaTepov),  See  on  fervently,  1  Pet. 
i.  22. 

Was  {iyevero).  More  correctly,  as  Kev.,  beca/me.  See  on  y^vd- 
lievo<!,  being,  above. 

G  reat  d  ro  ps  (Bpofi^oi).  Only  here  in  New  Testament :  gouts 
or  clots.  Yery  common  in  medical  language.  Aristotle  men- 
tions a  bloody  sweat  arising  from  the  blood  being  in  poor  condi- 
tion ;  and  Theophrastus  mentions  a  physician  who  compared  a 
species  of  sweat  to  blood. 

45.  For  sorrow.  The  mention  of  the  cause  of  the  drowsi- 
ness is  characteristic. 

47-63.     Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  47-56 ;  Mark  xiv.  43-52. 

47.  Multitude— one  of  the  twelve.    See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  47. 

To  kiss.     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  47. 


426  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXH 

60.  The  servant.    See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  61. 

His  right  ear.  Lit.,  Ms  ear,  the  right  one.  See  on  Matt, 
xxvi.  51 ;  and  compare  Mark  xiv.  47.  Both  Matthew  and  Mark 
use  diminutives. 

51.  Suffer  ye  thus  far.  This  is  variously  interpreted.  I 
think  the  text  requires  that  the  words  should  be  addressed  to 
the  disciples,  and  taken  as  the  answer  to  the  question,  shall  we 
smite,  etc.  The  meaning  then  is,  permit  them,  to  go  so  far  as  to 
seizeme.     The  expression  thus  corresponds  with  Matt.  xxvi.  52, 

Ear  (toTi'ou).  This  time  Luke  uses  the  diminutive.  Wye., 
Uttle  ear. 

Healed.     Only  Luke  records  the  healing. 

62.  Thief  (Xj^o-t^i/).  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  65;  Luke  x.  30; 
Mark  xi.  17. 

54-62.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  57,  68,  69-75 ;  Mark  xiv.  63, 
54,  66-72. 

55.  Kindled  (7r6j0ta'»|rai»Ta)z').  JAt.,kmdled  all  round {irepl)'. 
set  in  full  blaze. 

Hall.     Or  court.     See  on  Mark  xiv.  54. 

56.  By  the  fire  (tt/so?  to  <^m<i).     See  on  Mark  xiv.  64. 

63.  Smote  (Sipovre^).  Originally  to  flay  ;  thence  to  cudgd. 
Compare  our  vulgarism,  to  tan  or  hide. 

66.  The  elders  {irpea^vrkpiov).  More  correctly,  the  assembly 
of  the  elders.     So  Kev. 


Ch.  xxni.]  LUKE.  437 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

1-5.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  1,  2  ;  11,  14;  Mark  xv.  1-6. 

2.  We  found.  In  a  judicial  sense:  as  the  result  of  their 
examination  before  the  council. 

5.  Were  the  more  fierce  {hriayyov).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  verb  means,  literally,  to  grow  strong.  See  on 
ch.  xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  3.  Here  the  sense  is,  they  were  Tuore  energetic 
cmd  envphatic.     Kev. ,  urgent.     Wye,  waxed  stronger. 

Stirreth  up  {dvaa-eiei).  See  on  Mark  xv.  11.  The  in- 
creased urgency  is  shown  by  the  use  of  a  stronger  word  than 
jperverteth  (ver.  2). 

6.  Of  Galilee.     The  best  texts  omit. 

7.  Sent  {aviirefi'ylrev).  Lit.,  sent  him  up  (avd).  Used  of 
sending  up  to  a  higher  court.  Compare  Acts  xxv.  21,  of  send- 
ing Paul  to  Caesar.  It  also  means  to  send  hack,  as  in  ver.  11, 
and  Philem.  11. 

8.  Of  a  long  time  (e|  iKavov).     See  on  ch.  vii.  6. 

Hoped  {^XTTt^ev).  Imperfect;  was  hoping — all  this  long 
time. 

Miracle  {ar]fieiov).  See  on  Matt.  xi.  20;  and  compare  Acts 
ii.  22,  Eev. 

9.  IVIany  (iKavois:).     Compare  long,  ver.  8. 

10.  Vehemently  (eirovco^).  Only  here  and  Acts  xviii.  28, 
of  the  preaching  of  Apollos.  Originally  the  word  means  well- 
strung  ;  hence,  in  medical  language,  of  a  well-toned  body. 


428  WORD   STUDIES  m  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXHl 

11.  Gorgeous  {\a/nrpav).  Lit.,  bright  or  hiUiant.  Com- 
pare Acts  X.  30  ;  Apoc.  xv.  6.  "Wye.  and  Tynd.,  white.  Mark 
has  jmr^le  {rrop^vpav),  and  Matthew  scarlet  (kokkIvijv). 

Apparel  (iffSriTa).  The  general  term  for  raiment.  Matthew 
specifies  the  garment  (xxvii.  28).  Mark  has  simply  jmrple 
(xv.  17). 

13-26.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  15-26  ;  Mark  xv.  6-15. 

14.  Perverteth  {a-iroaTpetftovTa).  Another  compound  of 
crrpe^co,  to  turn  ;  hia<npk^vTa  is  rendered  by  the  same  word 
in  ver.  2.  Probably  the  words  are  nsed  without  any  intentional 
distinction  of  meaning.  Aia<7Tpk^ovTa  implies  more  of  the  idea 
of  distraction  (compare  Wye,  turning  upside  down) ;  turning 
different  ways ;  while  d7roa-rpe<f>ovTa  emphasizes  the  turning 
away  [airo)  of  the  people  from  their  civil  and  religious  alle- 
giance.    So  Wye,  turning  away. 

Examined  {avuKpiva'i).  Originally  implying  a  thorough  ex- 
amination ;  dvd,  up,  from  bottom  to  top.  Technically,  of  a 
legal  examination. 

16.  Chastise  (TratSeva-ai;).  Originally  to  bring  up  a  child 
{iral^).  Hence,  to  instruct ;  so  Acts  vii.  22,  of  Moses  instructed 
in  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians ;  and  Acts  xxii.  3,  of  Paul  in- 
structed in  the  law.  To  discipline  or  correct,  as  Heb.  xii.  6,  7. 
The  word  is  not  synonymous  with  punish,  since  it  always  im- 
plies an  infliction  which  contemplates  the  subject's  amendment ; 
and  hence  answers  to  chastise  or  chasten.  So  Heb.  xii.  10 ; 
Apoc.  iii.  19.  In  popular  speech  chastise  &nd  punish  are  often 
confounded.  Chasten  is  from  the  Latin  castus,  "pure," 
"  chaste  ; "  and  to  chasten  is,  properly,  to  purify.  This  meaning 
underlies  even  the  use  of  the  word  by  Pilate,  who  was  not 
likely  to  be  nice  in  his  choice  of  words.  Instead  of  punishing 
him  with  death,  he  will  chastise  him,  in  order  to  teach  him 
better.     So  Wye,  I  shall  deliver  him  amended. 


Ch.  XXIII.]  LUKE.  429 

18.  All  together  (Tra/ATrXTj^Jet).  The  whole  multitude  (7rX,^,9o?) 
of  them.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Away  {aipe).  Lit.,  take  away.  Compare  Acts  xxi.  36 ; 
xxii.  22. 

19.  Who  (oo-tk).  Classifying  him.  One  of  such  a  kind  as 
that  he  had  been  imprisoned,  etc. 

20.  Spake  {"Kpoa-e^rnvrjaev).  Addressed.  Compare  Acts  xxi. 
40  ;  xxii.  2.  Always  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of  to 
accost,  whether  an  individual  or  a  crowd. 

21.  Shouted  {iire^mvow).  Imperfect.  ICept  shouting.  Used 
by  Luke  only.     Compare  Acts  xii.  22  ;  xxii.  24. 

22.  Said  (ehrev).  Dropping  the  speech-making  tone,  and 
simply  asking  a  question. 

23.  They  were  instant  {eTri/ceivTo).  Instant,  in  the  sense  of 
urgent,  pressing.  See  on  ch.  vii.  4.  Compare  Rom.  xii.  12 ;  2 
Tim.  iv.  2;  Luke  vii.  4;  Acts  xxvi.  7.  The  verb  means  to  lie 
upon,,  and  answers  to  our  vulgarism,  to  lay  one's  self  down  to 
work.  Compare  Aristophanes,  "  Knights,"  253  :  KairiKeifievoi}^ 
^6a,  roar  with  all  your  might.     Lit.,  roar,  lying  down  to  it. 

Their  voices.     Omit  of  the  chief  priests. 

Prevailed  {KaTia-xvov).  Had  power  {la-xv<i)  to  bear  down. 
{tcaTo)  the  remonstrances  of  Pilate.  Only  here  and  Matt. 
xvi.  18. 

24.  Gave  sentence  {iireKpivev).  Pronounced  the  final  sen- 
tence.    Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

26-33.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  31-34  ;  Mark  xv.  20-23. 

26.  Laid  hold  on  (iiriXa^ofievoi).  Compare  the  peculiar  word 
used  by  Matthew  and  Mark.     See  on  Matt.  v.  41. 


430  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXTTT 

27-32.  Peculiar  to  Luke.  See  Introduction,  on  the  gospel  of 
womanhood. 

30.  Hills  (j3ovvok).     Only  here  and  ch.  iii.  5. 

31.  Tree  (fuX?)).  Originally  wood,  timber.  In  later  Greek, 
a  tree.  Used  of  the  cross  by  Peter,  Acts  v.  30  ;  x.  39 ;  and  1  Pet. 
ii.  24.     Compare  Gal.  iii.  13. 

32.  Two  other.  The  possible  omission  of  a  comma  before 
malefactors  in  the  A.  V.  might  make  a  very  awkward  and  un- 
pleasant statement.     Better  Rev.,  two  others,  malefactors. 

Put  to  death  {dvaipeSTJvai).  Lit.,  to  talce  up  amd carry  away; 
so  that  the  Greek  idiom  answers  to  our  taken  off.  So  Shak- 
speare : 

' '  The  deep  damnation  of  his  taking  off. " 

Macbeth,  i.,  7. 

"  Let  her  who  would  be  rid  of  him,  devise 
His  speedy  taking  off." 

Lear,  v.,  1. 

33.  Calvary  (Kpaviov).  The  Greek  word  is  the  translation 
of  the  Hebrew  Golgotha.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  33. 

35^3.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  39-44  ;  Mark  xv.  29-32. 

35.  Beholding.     See  on  ch.  x.  18. 
Scoffed.     See  on  ch.  xvi.  14. 

If  he.  The  A.  V.  does  not  give  the  contemptuous  emphasis 
on  oiiTo<i,  this  fellow. 

36.  Coming  to  him.     Coming  up  close  to  the  cross. 
Vinegar.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  34. 

38.  Superscription.     See  on  Mark  xv.  26. 


Ch.  XXm.]  LTJKK  431 

39.  Railed  {ifiXaa-fjt'qfiei).    Imperfect:  kept  itp  a  railing. 

41.  Receive.    Are  receiving  would  be  better. 

Amiss  {aTOTTov).  Lit.,  out  of  place,  and  so  strange,  eccentric, 
perverse  ;  as  in  2  Thess.  iii.  2,  where  it  is  rendered  unreasonable. 
The  expression  here  answers  nearly  to  our  familiar  phrase,  "  has 
done  nothing  out  of  the  way."  Compare  Acts  xxviii.  6 ;  no 
harm. 

42.  Into  thy  kingdom.  Some  texts  read  for  ek,  into,  iv,  m. 
So  Eev.  In  that  case  we  must  understand,  "  in  thy  kingly 
glory." 

43.  In  Paradise  (jrapaSeiero)).  Originally  an  enclosed  park, 
or  pleasure-ground.  Xenophon  uses  it  of  the  parks  of  the  Per- 
sian kings  and  nobles.  "  There  (at  Celaenae)  Cyrus  had  a 
palace  and  a  great  park  {TrapdSeiao<i),  full  of  wild  animals,  which 
he  hunted  on  horseback.  .  .  .  Through  the  midst  of  the 
park  flows  the  ]-iver  Maeander  ("  Anabasis,"  i.,  2,  7).  And  again : 
"  The  Greeks  encamped  near  a  great  and  beautiful  ^a/-^,  thickly 
grown  with  all  kinds  of  trees"  (ii.,  4, 14.)  In  the  Septuagint, 
Gen.  ii.  8,  of  the  garden  of  Eden.  In  the  Jewish  theology,  the 
department  of  Hades  where  the  blessed  souls  await  the  resur- 
rection ;  and  therefore  equivalent  to  Abraham's  bosom  (ch.  xvi. 
22,  23).  It  occurs  three  times  in  the  New  Testament :  here  ;  2 
Cor.  xii.  4 ;  Apoc.  ii.  7 ;  and  always  of  the  abode  of  the  blessed. 

' '  Where'er  thou  roam'st,  one  happy  soul,  we  know, 
Seen  at  thy  side  in  woe, 
Waits  on  thy  triumph — even  as  all  the  blest 

With  him  and  Thee  shall  rest. 
Each  on  his  cross,  by  Thee  we  hang  awhile, 

Watching  thy  patient  smile. 
Till  we  have  learn'd  to  say,   '  'Tis  justly  done. 
Only  in  glory,  Lord,  thy  siuful  servant  own.' " 

Kbble,  Christian  Yea/r. 

44-46.     Compare  Matt,  xxvxi.  45-50 ;  Mark  xv.  33-37. 


432  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXIIL 

44.  Sixth  hour.    Midday. 

Ninth  hour.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  46. 

45.  Veil.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  51. 

46.  I  commend  {■jrapaTlSefmi).     See  on  ch.  ix.  16. 

Gave  up  the  ghost  {i^eirveva-ev).  Lit.,  breathed  out  (his 
life).     Wye,  sent  out  the  spirit.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  50. 

47-49.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  51-56  ;  Mark  xv.  38-41. 

49.  That  followed  {a-waKoXov^ovaaC).  Lit.,  followed  with 
{avv).     So  Eev.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  55. 

50.  Councillor.  See  on  Mark  xv.  43.  Matthew  calls  him 
rich  ;  Mark,  honorable  ;  Luke,  good  and  just. 

51.  Consented  {avyKaraTe^^eifievoi;).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Another  of  Luke's  numerous  compounds.  The 
Greek  student  will  be  struck  with  the  array  of  compounds, 
from  ver.  49  to  56,  inclusive.  The  verb  means  to  put  {riSrifii), 
down  {KaTo),  along  with  {avv).  Hence  to  put  down  the  same 
vote  or  opinion  with  another :  to  agree  with  or  assent  to. 

53.  Linen  (aivSovi).  See  on  Mark  xiv.  51 ;  and  compare 
Luke  xvi.  19. 

Hewn  in  stone  (X^fevrw).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
and  not  at  all  in  classical  Greek. 

56.  Returned  (uTToa-Tpei/raffat).  This  word  occurs  thirty-two 
times  in  Luke,  and  only  three  times  in  the  rest  of  the  New 
Testament.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that,  reckoning  the  aggregate 
space  occupied  by  the  four  Gospels,  nearly  one-sixth  of  the 
whole  amount  is  occupied  with  the  account  of  the  twenty-four 
hours  beginning  with  the  last   supper   and  ending  with  the 


Ch.  XXIV.]  LUKE.  433 

burial  of  Jesus.  There  is  no  day  in  all  Bible  history  narrated 
with  the  fulness  of  that  day.  If  we  possessed  the  whole  life  of 
Christ,  written  with  the  same  detail,  the  record  would  occupy 
one  hundred  and  eighty  volumes  as  large  as  the  whole  Bihle. 


CHAPTER  XXIY. 
1-3.  Compare  Matt,  xxviii.  1 ;  Mark  xvi.  2-4. 

I.  Very  early  in  the  morning  {opS^pov  (So^ew?).  Lit,  at 
deep  dawn,  or  the  dawn  ieing  deep.  It  is  not  uncommon  in 
Greek  to  find  ^aSv<;,  deep,  used  of  time  ;  as  deep  or  late  even- 
ing. Plutarch  says  of  Alexander,  that  he  supped  "  at  deep 
evening ;  "  i.e.,  late  at  night.  Philo  says  that  the  Hebrews 
crossed  the  Red  Sea  "  about  deep  dawn  (as  here),  while  others 
were  yet  in  bed."  So  Socrates,  in  prison,  asks  Crito  the  time 
of  day.  He  replies,  6p$po<}  /3a^u9,  the  dawn  is  deep,  i.e.  breaking 
(Plato,  "  Crito,"  43). 

4-8.  Compare  Matt,  xxviii.  5-7 ;  Mark  xvi.  5-7. 

4.  Shining  {oaTpairTova-ai'i).  Only  here  and  ch.  xvii.  24. 
Akin  to  aa-Tpdirt},  lightninxf.  See  on  bright  shining,  ch.  xi.  36 ; 
and  compare  ch.  xvii.  24. 

II.  To  them  {ivm-n-iov  avT&v).     Eev.,  literally,  in  their  sight. 

Idle  tales  {\ripo<;).  Lit,  silh/  talk;  nonsense.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  Used^in  medical  language  of  the  wild  talk  of 
delirium.     Wye,  madness.     Tynd.,  feigned  things. 

12.  Stooping  down.  See  on  loolceth,  Jas.  i.  25.  The  best 
texts  omit  this  verse. 

Clothes.    Not  garments,  but  the  linen  bandages  in  which 
the  body  had  been  rolled.     So  Rev.,  cloths. 
28 


434  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXIV. 

13.  Threescore  furlongs.    Seven  miles. 

15.  Went  with  {ffwevopeveTo).  The  use  of  the  imperfect 
here  is  very  beautiful.  Jesus  drew  near  while  they  were  ab- 
sorbed in  their  talk,  and  was  already  walking  with  them  when 
they  observed  him. 

17.  Ye  have  {dvri^dWeTe).  Lit.,  throw  hack  and  forth; 
exchange. 

"Discussed  a  doubt  and  tossed  it  to  and  fro  "  (Tennyson). 

And  are  sad  {aKvS-pasTroi).  Only  here  and  Matt.  vi.  16,  on 
which  see  note.  The  best  texts  piit  the  interrogation  point 
after  walk,  add  xal  eaTo^a-av,  and  render,  and  they  stood  still, 
looking  sad.     So  Kev. 

18.  Art  thou  only  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem  (o-v  /two? 
TrapocKel^  'lepovtyaXrjfi).  Hapoiicelv,  to  dwell  as  a  stranger,  is 
used  in  later  Greek  of  strangers  who  have  no  rights  of  citi- 
zenship, and  no  settled  home.  Compare  Heb.  xi.  9.  See  on 
strangers,  1  Pet.  i.  1 ;  and  compare  sojourning,  1  Pet.  i.  17. 
The  only  of  the  A.  Y.  is  commonly  understood  adverbially : 
"  Are  you  nothing  hut  a  stranger  ?  "  But  the  emphasis  of  the 
question  falls  there,  and  the  word  is  an  adjective.  Render 
"  Dost  thou  alone  dwell  as  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem  ? "  Are  you 
the  only  one  who  sojourns  as  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem,  and  who 
does  not  know,  etc.  So,  nearly,  Wye,  Thou  alone  art  a  pilgrim 
in  Jerusalem. 

18.  What  things  (TToia).     Lit.,  '^  what  kind  oi  things." 

21.  Trusted  {rjX-TTL^ofiev).  More  correctly,  hoped.  Imper- 
fect :  were  hoping  all  the  while. 

Should  have  redeemed.  Eev.,  more  correctly,  should  re- 
deem (XvTpova-^ai).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  18. 

Beside  all  this  (a-w  irdatv  tovtok;).  Lit.,  with  aU  these 
things :  his  betrayal  and  crucifixion,  etc. 


Ch.  XXIV.]  LUKE.  435 

To-day  is  the  third  d&y/ {rpiTijv  TavTTjv^iJbipav  Sryei  a-'^fiepov). 
The  best  texts  omit  to-day.  The  phrase  forms  an  idiom  which 
cannot  be  neatly  rendered.  Literally  it  is,  "He  (Christ)  is 
jfossing  (dyet)  this  day  as  the  third."  Rev.,  It  is  now  the  thi/rd 
day  since,  etc. 

22.  Made  us  astonished  {i^iarvtrav).  Literally  the  verb 
means  to  jmt  out  of  place ;  and  so,  to  drwe  one  out  of  his 
senses.     Hence  the  A.  V.  is  feeble.     Eev.,  better,  amased  us. 

Early  {op^pival).  Lit.,  ea/rly  ones.  Only  here  and  Apoc. 
xxii.  16.     Compare  op&po^,  davm,  ver.  1. 

23.  That  they  had  seen— which  said.  Cleopas,  absorbed 
in  his  story,  throws  himself  back  to  the  time  of  his  interview 
with  the  women.  Lit.,  "  They  came  saying  that  they  home  seen 
a  vision  of  angels  which  say  "  Q^eyova-iv). 

25.  Fools  and  slow  of  heart  (avoTjroi  xal  ^paSei^  rfi  KapSia). 
This  is  an  unfortunate  translation,  in  the  light  of  the  ordinary, 
popular  use  of  the  word  fool.  Jesus  would  never  have  called 
those  sorrowful  disciples /bofe  in  that  sense.     The  word  is  com- 

,  ponnded  of  d,  not,  and  voeco,  which  implies,  besides  seeing,  per- 
ception of  the  mind  as  consequent  upon  sight.  It  is  therefore 
equivalent  to  dull  of  perception.  They  had  read  what  the 
prophets  had  spoken,  but  had  failed  to  perceime  its  application 
to  Christ.  While  this  rebuke  relates  to  the  understanding,  the 
following  one,  slow  of  heart,  goes  deeper,  and  contemplates  the 
region  oi  feeling  and  jnoral  susceptibility.  Your  heart  is  dull 
and  slow  to  respond  to  these  testimonies  of  your  own  prophets. 
Compare  ha/rdness  of  heart,  Mark  xvi.  14. 

All  (eVi  iraa-iv).  He  v.,  rightly,  in  all/  relying  upon  {iiri)  all 
the  utterances  of  the  prophets. 

26.  Ought  not  {ovxl  eSei).  The  A.  V.  does  not  convey  the 
precise  meaning,  which  is,  that,  in  the  eternal  order  of  things, 
and  in  fulfilment  of  the  eternal  counsel  of  God  as  expressed  in 


436  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXIV. 

the  prophecies,  it  was  essentially  fitti-ng  that  Christ  should  suffer. 
Eev.  is  clumsy  but  correct :  hehoved  it  not  the  Christ  to  suffer  ? 

27.  He  expounded  {Biep/Ji'nvvev).  Or  interpreted :  through- 
out {Sid).  Imperfect,  he  went  on  interpreting  from  passage  to 
passage. 

28.  They  went  (iiropevovro).  Imperfect,  were  going.  So 
Eev. 

Made  as  though  {Trpoa-eTroiija-aTo).  The  verb  means  origi- 
nally to  add  or  attach  to;  hence  to  take  to  one's  self  what  does 
not  belong  to  him  ;  and  so,  to  jpretend  ;  though  pretending  as 
implying  anything  false,  does  not  attach  to  this  act  of  Jesus. 
He  was  going  on,  and  would  have  gone  on  but  for  their  invita- 
tion.   Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

29.  They  constrained  {irape^Loa-avTo).  Contrary  to  {irapd) 
his  apparent  intention  of  going  on.     Only  here  and  Acts  xvi.  15. 

Is  far  spent  (Ke/cXiKev).  Lit.,  has  declined.  Wye,  is  now 
iowed  down. 

30.  And  gave  (eTreSiSov).  A  very  beautiful  use  of  the  im- 
perfect, indicating  that  while  he  was  in  the  act  of  distributing 
they  recognized  him.  He  blessed,  and  having  broken,  was  giv- 
ing it  to  them,  when,  in  an  instant,  their  eyes  were  opened 
(aorist  tense). 

31.  They  knew  {eiriyvaxj-av).     Clearly  recognized. 

And  he  vanished  out  of  their  sight  (auros  a^avro?  iyevero 
air  avr&v).  Lit.,  he,  invisible,  became  away  from  them.  It  is 
not  simply,  he  suddenly  departed  from  them,  but  he  passed 
away  from  them  invisibly.  The  iyevero,  became,  is  construed 
with  onr  avTa)v,from  them.* 

•NotS^wTos  aJroir,  became  invisible  to  tliem,  which  would  imply  that  his 
body  remained,  but  invisibly  ;  but  o-tt'  airHv,  away  from  them,  implying  a  real 
removal  (Beza,  cited  by  Alford  and  Meyer). 


Ch.  XXIV.]  LUKE.  437 

32.  Did  not  our  heart  burn— while  he  talked— opened. 
{oirxi  ^  KapSia  '^fi&v  Kaio/Mevt}  rjv — w?  eXahei—hirivoir^ev).  The  A. 
v.,  as  usual,  pays  no  attention  to  the  graphic  imperfects  here. 
They  are  speaking  of  something  which  was  in  progress  :  "  was 
not  our  heart  burning  (finite  verb  and  participle)  while  he  was 
speaking,  and  was  opening  the  scriptures  ? " 

34.  Is  risen  (^76/j^)— appeared  (w0^).  Bothaorists.  The 
Lord  rose  and  appeared.  So  Wye.  See  on  appea/red,  ch. 
xxii.  43. 

35.  They  told  (i^yovvro).  'Rev.,  rehearsed  is  better,  be- 
cause the  verb  means  to  tell  at  length  or  relate  in  full. 

36.  Jesus  himself.  The  best  texts  omit  Jesus.  Eender  as 
Kev.,  "  he  himself  stooA?^ 

And  saith  unto  them,  Peace  be  unto  you.  The  best  texts 
omit. 

38.  Thoughts  {SiaXoyia-fiol).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  4,  and  deceiming, 
Jas.  i.  22.  Eev.,  reasonings.  As  if  he  had  said,  "  Why  do  you 
reason  about  a  matter  which  your  spiritual  perception  ought  to 
discern  at  once."     Compare  note  on.  fools,  ver.  26.* 

39.  Handle  {■\lrT]\a(j)'^craTe).  Compare  1  John  i.  1.  The 
word  occurs  also  Acts  xvii.  27 ;  Heb.  xii.  18.  "  It  never  ex- 
presses the  so  handling  an  object  as  to  exercise  a  moulding, 
modifying  influence  upon  it,  but  at  most  a  feeling  of  its  sur- 
face ;  this,  it  may  be,  with  the  intention  of  learning  its  com- 
position (Gen.  xxvii.  12,  21,  22) ;  while,  not  seldom,  it  signifies 

*  Beaaonings,  doubtings,  serupUs,  are  more  or  less  distinctly  implied  in  every 
ooourrenoe  of  the  word  in  the  New  Testament.  In  Phil.  ii.  14,  dispuiings  (Ee v. ) 
is,  as  Meyer  observes,  unsuitahle  to  the  reference  of  murmurings  to  God,  and 
means  rather  sorwpidous  considering  or  hesitations,  indicating  uncertainty  in 
the  consciousness  of  duty.  So  in  1  Tim.  ii.  8,  the  A.  V.  doubting  is  better. 
Rom.  xiv.  1,  is  decisions  of  doubts  (Eev. ,  marginj  or  scruples.  So  Meyer,  Godet, 
Lange,  Beet,  Shedd,  Hodge,  Tholuck,  Alford,  De  Wette. 


438  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXIV. 

no  more  than  a  ieelmg  J'ar  or  after  an  object,  without  any  actual 
coming  in  contact  with  it  at  all "  (Trench,  "  Synonyms  ")•  Com- 
pare Acts  xvii.  2T.  Used  of  groping  in  the  dark.  Job  v.  14 ; 
of  the  blind,  Isa.  lix.  10 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  29 ;  Judges,  xvi.  26. 
See  on  Heb.  xii.  18. 

41.  Meat  (0pd>ai/j,ov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit., 
omyihing  eatable.  Wye,  anything  that  shall  he  eaten.  Rev., 
better,  anything  to  eat,  as  the  word  meat  has  largely  lost,  in 
popular  usage,  its  old  sense  otfood  in  general. 

42.  Broiled.     Only  here  in  JSTew  Testament. 
Of  an  honey-comb.    The  best  texts  omit. 

44.  The  words.     The  best  texts  insert  my. 
Must  (Set).     See  on  ought  not,  ver.  26. 

45.  Understanding  {vovv).  Which  had  been  closed.  See 
on  fools,  ver.  25. 

46.  Thus  it  behoved.  The  best  texts  omit.  Render,  as 
Rev.,  thus  it  is  written  that  the  Christ  should  suffer. 

Christ  {tov  Xpia-rov).  Note  the  article,  the  Christ,  and  see 
on  Matt.  i.  1. 

47.  Should  be  preached.     See  on jareacher,  2  Pet.  ii.  5. 

In  his  name.  On  the  foundation  oi  {eirl).  See  on  Matt, 
xxiv.  5. 

Remission.    See  on  ch.  iii.  3 ;  and  on  forgiven,  Jas.  v.  15. 

Beginning  from  Jerusalem.    Some  editors  place  a  period 


Ch.  XXIV.]  LUKE.  439 

after  nations,  and  join  these  words  with  the  next  sentence, 
omitting  and :  "  beginning  from  Jerusalem  ye  are  witnesses."  * 

49.  I  send  (eyo)  i^airoa-TeWo)).  Rev.,  better,  send  forth, 
giving  the  force  of  e^.     /emphatic. 

Endued  with  power.  The  Rev.  has  properly  substituted 
the  simpler  clothed,  which,  to  the  English  reader,  conveys  the 
exact  figure  in  the  word.  This  metaphorical  sense  of  clothed  is 
found  in  classical  Greek.  Aristophanes  has  clothed  with  audac- 
ity ;  Homer,  clothed  with  strength;  Plutarch,  clothed  with 
nohility  and  wealth. 

51.  And  was  carried  up  into  lieaven.     Some  texts  omit. 

*  Tischendorf  (8tli  ed.),  Westoott  and  Hort,  and  Rev.  text  read  ip^d/ifyoi, 
referring  to  the  disciples.  The  old  reading,  &p^dfi.ei>oii,  is  explained  as  the  im- 
personal accusative  neuter,  referring  to  Knpvx^vcu. 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  Th<i  former  (tw  Tr/aajToi/).  JAi.,  theji/rst.  Luke  refers  to 
his  Gospel. 

Treatise  {\6yov).     Or  narrative. 

Began  (^p^aTo).  This  is  interpreted  in  two  ways.  Either, 
(1),  as  a  simple  historical  statement  equivalent  to  "  all  that  Jesus 
did  and  taught."  In  favor  of  this  is  the  fact  that  the  synoptists 
often  record  that  which  is  done  or  said  according  to  its  moment 
of  commencement,  thus  giving  vividness  to  the  account.  See 
Matt.  xi.  20  ;  xxvi.  22,  37 ;  Mark  vi.  7 ;  xiv.  19  ;  Luke  vii.  38, 
etc.  According  to  this  explanation  the  word  serves  "  to  recall 
to  the  recollection  from  the  Gospel  all  the  several  incidents  and 
events,  up  to  the  ascension,  in  which  Jesus  had  apj>eared  as 
doer  and  teacher  "  (Meyer).  Or,  (2),  as  indicating  that  the  Gos- 
pel contains  the  ieginnhig,  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  the 
continuation,  of  the  doings  and  teachings  of  Jesus.  ' '  The 
earthly  life  of  Jesus,  concluded  with  the  ascension,  has  its 
fruit  and  continued  efficacy ;  and  his  heavenly  life,  commencing 
with  the  ascension,  has  its  manifestation  and  proof  in  the  acts 
and  experiences  of  the  apostles  and  first  churches.  The  history 
of  the  Church  was  under  the  immediate  control  of  the  exalted 
Redeemer,  and  may  justly  he  considered  as  the  continuation  in 
heaven  of  the  work  which  he  had  begun  on  earth  "  (Baum- 
garten  and  Gloag).  While  the  truth  and  importance  of  this 
statement  are  admitted,  it  is  objected  that  such  an  intention  on 


442  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

Luke's  part  would  have  been  more  clearly  intimated,  and  not 
left  to  be  inferred  from  a  single  doubtful  phrase.  As  regards 
Luke's  intention,  I  think  the  first  explanation  is  more  likely  to 
be  correct.  The  second,  however,  states  a  truth,  the  value  and 
importance  of  which  cannot  be  overestimated,  and  which  should 
be  kept  in  mind  constantly  in  the  study  of  the  book  of  Acts. 
This  is  well  put  by  Bernard  ("  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  New 
Testament,"  Leet.  lY.) :  "  Thus  the  history  which  follows  is 
linked  to,  or  (may  I  not  rather  say)  welded  ^i\h,  the  past ;  and 
the  founding  of  the  Church  in  the  earth  is  presented  as  one 
continuous  work,  begun  by  the  Lord  in  person,  and  perfected 
by  the  same  Lord  through  the  ministry  of  men.  .  .  .  '  The 
former  treatise'  delivered  to  us,  not  all  that  Jesus  did  and 
taught,  but  '  all  that  Jesus  legan  to  do  and  teach  until  the  day 
when  he  was  taken  up.'  The  following  writings  appear  in- 
tended to  give  us,  and  do,  in  fact,  profess  to  give  us,  that  which 
Jesus  continued  to  do  and  teach  after  the  day  in  which  he  was 
taken  up." 

2.  Had  given  commandment  {ivTei,\dfj,evo<:).  Special  in- 
junctions or  charges.  Compare  Matt.  iv.  6  ;  Mark  xiii.  34 ; 
Heb.  xi.  22. 

Through  the  Holy  Ghost.  Construe  with  had  given  com- 
mandment :  by  means  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  inspired  him. 
Not,  as  some  interpreters,  with  whom  he  had  chosen. 

3.  Shewed  himself  (•n-apeo-Tijo-ei').  This  verb  is  rendered  in 
a  variety  of  ways  in  the  New  Testament,  as  gwe  or  furnish,  pre- 
sent, provide,  assist,  commend.  The  original  meaning  is  to  place 
leside,  and  so  commend  to  the  attention.  Hence,  to  set  hefore 
the  mind;  jpresent,  shew. 

Infallible  proofs  {TeKfJujploK).  The  word  is  akin  to  rixfiap, 
a  fixed  boundary,  goal,  end;  and  hence  a  fixed  or  sure  sign  or 
token.  The  Rev.  omits  infallible,  probably  assuming  that  a 
jyroqf  implies  certainty. 


Ch.  I]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  443 

Being  seen  {oirravoft.evo'i).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Eev.,  appearing. 

Forty  days  (St'  rjfiep&v  Teaa-epdicovTa).  Lit.,  ^Hhrough  forty 
days."  Rev.,  by  the  space  of.  The  only  passage  where  the  in- 
terval between  the  resurrection  and  the  ascension  is  given. 

4.  Being  assembled  together  (o-waXtgo/iei/09).  From  o-w, 
together,  and  a\j$s,  thronged  or  crowded.  Both  the  A.  V.  and 
Kev.  give  eati/rvg  together  in  margin,  following  the  derivation 
from  <Tvv,  together,  and  aX?,  salt:  eating  salt  together,  and 
hence  generally  of  association  at  table. 

Commanded  {nraprf/yeiXev).  Originally  to  pass  on  or  t/rams- 
mit ;  hence,  as  a  military  term,  of  passing  a  watchword  or 
command  ;  and  so  generally  to  command. 

To  wait  for  {irepiijueveiv).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

The  promise  {i-jrayyeXiav).  Signifying  a  free  promise,  given 
without  solicitation.  This  is  the  invariable  sense  of  the  word 
throughout  the  New  Testament,  and  this  and  its  kindred  and 
compound  words  are  the  only  words  for  promise  in  the  New 
Testament.  'Tiria-xveofiai,  meaning  to  promise  in  response  to  a 
reqitest,  does  not  occur ;  and  ofjLoXojea,  Matt.  xiv.  7,  of  Herod 
promising  Salome,  really  means  to  acknowledge  his  obligation 
for  her  lascivious  performance.     See  note  there. 

Not  many   days  hence  (ov  /lera  TroWas  Taina<i  ■^fiepa';). 
'  Lit.,  not  after  many  of  these  days.     Not  after  many,  but  after  a 
few. 

6.  Asked  {e-rri^pwrav).  The  imperfect,  denoting  the  repeti- 
tion and  urging  of  the  question. 

1.  The  times— the  seasons  {-xpovov; — Kaipoixs).  Eev.  prop- 
erly omits  the  article.     The  former  of  these  words,  time  also- 


444  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

lutely,  without   regard  to  circumstances ;  the  latter,  definite  pe- 
riods, with  the  idea  of  fitness. 

His  own  (t^  t'St'a).  Stronger  than  the  simple  possessive  pro- 
noun. The  adjective  mQ2iU.'&  ^p-ivate,  personal.  Often  used  ad- 
verbially in  the  phrase  war  lliav,  apart,  privately.  See  Matt, 
xvii.  1 ;  xxiv.  3. 

8.  Unto  me  (/xot).  The  best  texts  read  ^jlov,  of  me ;  or,  as 
Kev.,  my  witnesses. 

Samaria.  Formerly  they  had  been  commanded  not  to  enter 
the  cities  of  the  Samaritans  (Matt.  x.  5). 

10.  Looked  steadfastly  (aT6j/^foj^T6?^a-ai').  See  on  Luke  i  v.  20. 

12.  A  Sabbath-day's  journey  (aa^^arov  exov  6B6p).  Lit., 
having  a  Sabbath^s  way.  The  way  conceived  as  belonging  to 
the  mountain  ;  connected  with  it  in  reference  to  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Jerusalem.  A  Sabbath-day's  journey,  according  to 
Jewish  tradition,  was  abont  three-quarters  of  a  mile.  It  was 
the  supposed  distance  between  the  camp  and  the  tabernacle  in 
the  wilderness  (Josh.  iii.  4). 

13.  An  upper  room  {ro  virepmov).  "With  the  article,  de- 
noting some  well-known  place  of  resort.  It  was  tlie  name  given 
to  the  room  directly  under  the  flat  roof.  Such  rooms  were 
often  set  apart  as  halls  for  meetings.  In  such  an  apartment 
Paul  delivered  his  farewell  address  at  Troas  (Acts  xx.  8.),  and 
the  body  of  Dorcas  was  laid  (Acts  ix.  3Y).     Used  by  Luke  only. 

Abode  {^aav  Karaiu.evovTes;).  The  participle  and  finite  verb, 
denoting  continuance  or  habitual  residence.  Hence  more  cor- 
rectly, as  Rev.,  "  where  they  were  abiding." 

14.  Continued  {^a-av  Trpoa-KapTepovvTef).  Participle  and 
finite  verb,  as  above.  The  verb  is  from  xaprepof,  strong, 
stanch,  and  means  originally  to  persist  obstinately  in.     In  this 


Ch.  I.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  443 

sense  here,  and  in  Rom.  xii.  12  ;  xiii.  6.  Hence  to  adhere  firmly 
to.  So  in  Mark  iii.  9,  "  that  a  small  ship  should  wait  on  him;  " 
i.e.,  keep  near  at  hand.  The  idea  of  steady  'persistence  is  sup- 
plied by  the  Kev.,  steadfastly. 

With  one  accord  {6fioSv/iaB6v).  See  on  agree,  Matt,  xviii. 
19. 

In  prayer.     The  best  texts  omit  and  supplication. 

Mary.  Mentioned  here  for  the  last  time  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

15.  Of  the  disciples  {rwv  tia^rwv).  The  best  texts  read 
aBeXipwv,  brethren. 

The  number  of  the  names  together  were  about,  etc. 
{^v  re  o')(\o<s  ovofidrasv  iirl  to  avrb).  Much  better  as  Rev.,  and 
there  was  a  multitude  of  persons  gathered  together,  about,  etc. 
"0)(\o^,  multitude,  would  not  be  used  of  a  number  about  to  be 
stated. 

16.  Men  and  brethren  (ai/SpeyaSeX^ol).  Lit.,  men,  brothers. 
Brother-men.  More  dignified  and  solemn  than  the  simple 
brethren. 

This  scripture.  The  best  texts  substitute  i!Ae.  SeeonMark 
xii.  10. 

The  Holy  Ghost  {t6  Uvev/ia  to  "Ayiop).  Lit.,  ITie  Spirit, 
the  Holy. 

Guide.     See  on  lead,  Luke  vi.  39. 

17.  Numbered  {Karrjpt^iJ/qiievo';).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

With  {(Tvv).     The  best  texts  read  iv, among.     So  Rev. 


446  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

Obtained  {eXaxe).  Strictly,  "received  hy  lot."  Eev.,  better, 
received.  Compare  Luke  i.  9.  In  classical  Greek,  of  receiving 
public  magistracies. 

Part  {tov  KKrjpov).  The  A.  V.  does  not  give  the  force  of  the 
article,  the  lot  which  was  his.  So  Eev.,  "  his  portion  : "  lit, 
lot. 

Ministry.  See  on  minister,  Matt.  xx.  26.  Compare  JM- 
opric,  ver.  20. 

18.  Purchased  {etcrriaaTo).  See  on  possess,  Luke  xviii.  12. 
Better,  as  Eev.,  obtained.  Judas  did  not  purchase  the  field,  but 
the  priests  did  with  the  money  which  he  returned  to  them 
(Matt,  xxvii.  7).  The  expression  means  merely  that  the  field 
was  purchased  with  the  money  of  Judas. 

Falling  headlong  (tt/jt^i'^s  76v6/iei/o?).  Lit.,  Jiawing  hecome 
headlong. 

He  burst  asunder  (iXaKriae).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. Lit.,  to  crack,  to  burst  with  a  noise.  So  Homer,  of  the 
bones  cracking  beneath  a  blow  ("Iliad,"  xiii.,  616).  Compare 
Aristophanes,  "  Clouds,"  410. 

19.  Aceldama.  Or,  more 'properly,  Akeldamach.  The  word 
is  Aramaic,  the  language  then  spoken  in  Palestine. 

20.  Habitation  (eVai/Xt?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  is  used  in  classical  Greek  of  a  place  for  cattle.  So 
Herodotus  (i.,  Ill) :  "  The  herdsman  took  the  child  in  his  arms, 
and  went  back  the  way  he  had  come,  till  he  reached  the yold" 
(eTravKiv).     Also  of  aj'arm.-huilding,  a  country-house. 

Bishopric  {eTriaKOTrrjv).  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  12.  Eev.,  better, 
office,  with  overseershijp  in  margin.     Compare  Luke  xix.  44. 

Another  (erepo?).     And  different  person.     See  on  ch.  ii.  4. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  447 

21.  Went  in  and  went  out.  An  expression  for  constant 
intercourse.  Compare  Deut.  xviii.  19 ;  Ps.  cxxi.  8  ;  John  x.  9 ; 
Acts  ix.  28. 

Among  us  (e<^'  17/u.a?).  The  margin  of  Rev.,  over  us,  i.e.,  as 
our  head,  is  a  sound  rendering,  and  supported  by  Matt.  xxv.  21, 
23 ;  Luke  ix.  1.  The  rendering  before,  m  the  presence  of,  occurs 
Matt.  X.  18 ;  Luke  xxi.  12. 

22.  Witness  {jidprvpa).  One  who  shall  bear  testimony:  not 
a  spectator,  a  mistake  often  made  on  Heb.  xii.  1.  Compare 
Acts  ii.  32. 

23.  Barsabas.  A  Tpatronymic,  son  of  Saba .'  like  Bar  Jona, 
Matt.  xvi.  17. 

24.  Which  knowest  the  hearts  (/ea/jStovj/wcTTa).  Only  here 
and  ch.  xv.  8.     Lit.,  hea/rt-Tcnower. 

25.  That  he  may  tai<e  part  (Xa/Sety  tov  Kkrjpov).  Lit.,  to 
take  the  lot.  But  the  best  texts  read  rov  tottov,  the  place.  Kev., 
to  take  the  place. 

By  transgression  fell  {m-ape^).  See  on  trespasses,  Matt.  vi. 
14.  The  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  is  explanatory.  Rev.,  better, 
fell  amoAj. 

His  own  place.  Compare  "the  place  in  this  ministry."  Tov 
tStov,  his  own,  is  stronger  than  the  simple  possessive  pronoun.  It 
is  the  place  which  was  peculiarly  his,  as  befitting  his  awful  sin 
— Gehenna. 

26.  He  was  numbered  {a-vyKaTeyjrrj<f)icr3i]).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.     See  on  counteth,  Luke  xiv.  28. 


448  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  Was  fully  come  (a-v/MirXTjpovcrJ^ai).  Used  by  Luke  only. 
See  on  Luke  ix.  51.  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  margin,  was  being  fulfilled. 
The  day,  according  to  the  Hebrew  mode,  is  conceived  as  a 
measure  to  be  filled  up.  So  long  as  the  day  had  not  yet  ar- 
rived, the  measure  was  not  full.  The  words  denote  in  jprocess 
of  fulfilment. 

Pentecost.  'M.ea.nmg fiftieth  ,•  because  occurring  on  the  fif- 
tieth day,  calculated  from  the  second  day  of  unleavened  bread. 
In  the  Old  Testament  it  is  called  the  feast  of  weeks,  and  the 
feast  of  harvest.  Its  primary  object  was  to  thank  God  for  the 
blessings  of  harvest.     See  Deut.  xvi.  10,  11. 

With  one  accord  (ofioS^v/MaBbv).  The  best  texts  substitute 
ofiov,  together.     So  Rev. 

2.  A  sound  (^^o?).     See  on  Luke  iv.  37. 

Of  a  rushing  mighty  wind  {<f)epo/j,evri<:  ■jrvofj-;  ySma?).  Lit., 
of  a  mighty  wind  home  along.  Uvorj  is  a  hlowing,  a  Uast. 
Only  here  and  ch.  xvii.  25.  Rev.,  as  of  the  rushvng  of  a  mighty 
wind. 

The  house.     Not  merely  the  room.     Compare  ch.  i.  13. 

Were  sitting.     Awaiting  the  hour  of  prayer.     See  ver.  15. 

3.  There  appeared.     See  on  Luke  xxii.  43. 

Cloven  tongues  {Siafj.epi,^6fi€vai  jXaiaa-ai).  Many  prefer  to 
render  tongues  distributing  themselves,  or  being  distributed  Simong 
the  disciples,  instead  of  referring  it  to  the  cloven  appearance  of 
each  tongue.     Rev.,  tongues  parting  asunder. 


Ch.  II.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  449 

Like  as  of  fire.    Not  consisting  of  fire,  hnt  resembliny  {aael). 

It  sat.  Note  the  singular.  One  of  these  luminous  appear- 
ances sat  upon  each. 

4.  Began.  Bringing  into  prominence  the  first  impulse  of  the 
act.     See  on  hegan,  cli.  i.  1. 

With  other  tongues  {eTepai<;  jXcocrcrat'i).  Strictly  different, 
from  their  native  tongues,  and  also  different  tongues  spoken  hy 
the  different  apostles.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24. 

Gave  (eStSov).  A  graphic  imperfect ;  Jce^t  giving  them  the 
language  and  the  appropriate  words  as  the  case  required  from 
time  to  time.  It  would  seem  that  each  apostle  was  speaking 
to  a  group,  or  to  individuals.  The  general  address  to  the  mul- 
titude followed  from  the  lips  of  Peter. 

Utterance  {aTro^Myyea^^ai).  Used  only  by  Luke  and  in  the 
Acts.  Lit.,  to  utter.  A  peculiar  word,  and  purposely  chosen  to 
denote  the  clear,  loud  utterance  under  the  miraculous  impulse. 
It  is  used  by  later  Greek  writers  of  the  utterances  of  oracles  or 
seers.  So  in  the  Septuagint,  of  prophesying.  See  1  Chron.  xxv. 
1 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  2  ;  Zech.  x.  2 ;  Ezek.  xiii.  19. 

5.  Dwelling  (icaToiKovvTes:).  Denoting  an  abiding;  but 
here  it  must  be  taken  in  a  wide  sense,  since  among  these  are 
mentioned  those  whose  permanent  residence  was  in  Mesopo- 
tamia, etc.     See  ver.  9. 

Devout.     See  on  Luke  ii.  26. 

6.  When  this  was  noised  abroad  {jevofievrjg  Be  tjj?  ^wv^? 
TavTTj';).  Wrong.  Lit.,  And  this  sound  ha/ving  taken  j>lace. 
Rev.,  correctly,  when  this  sownd  was  heard.  The  sound  of  the 
rushing  wind. 

Were  confounded  {awe-xv^)-  I^it-j  '"'««  pou/red  together ; 
so  that  confound  (Latin,  confundere)  is  the  most  literal  render- 


450  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H. 

ing  possible.     Used  only  by  Luke  and  in  the  Acts.     Compare 
xix.  32 ;  xxi.  31. 

Heard  {fjKovov).     Imperfect,  were  hearing. 

Language  {hiaXeKrtp).  Eather,  dialect ;  since  the  foreign- 
ers present  spoke,  not  only  different  languages,  but  different  dia- 
lects of  the  same  language.  The  Phrygians  and  Pamphylians, 
for  instance,  both  spoke  Greek,  but  in  different  idioms ;  the 
Parthians,  Medes,  and  Elamites  all  spoke  Persian,  but  in  differ- 
ent provincial  forms. 

7.  Amazed  and  marvelled  (e^laravTO  koI  iSavfia^ov).  The 
former  word  denotes  the  first  overwhelming  surprise.  The  verb 
is  literally  to  put  out  of  place  ;  hence,  out  of  one's  senses.  Com- 
pare Mark  iii.  21:  ^^  He  is  ieside  himself.''^  The  latter  word, 
marvelled,  denotes  the  continuing  wonder  ;  meaning  to  regard 
with  amazement,  and  with  a  suggestion  of  beginning  to  specu- 
late on  the  matter. 

Galllaeans.  Not  regarded  as  a  sect,iov  the  name  was  not 
given  to  Christians  until  afterward  ;  but  with  reference  to  their 
nationality.  Thej'  used  a  peculiar  dialect,  which  distinguished 
them  from  the  inhabitants  of  Judaea.  Compare  Mark  xiv. 
70.  They  were  blamed  for  neglecting  the  study  of  their  lan- 
guage, and  charged  with  errors  in  grammar  and  ridiculous  mis- 
pronunciations. 

9.  Parthians,  Medes,  and  Elamites.  Kepresen ting  portions 
of  the  Persian  empire. 

Judaea.  The  dialect  of  Galilee  being  different  from  that  of 
Judaea. 

Asia.  Not  the  Asiatic  continent  nor  Asia  Minor.  In  the 
time  of  the  apostles  the  term  was  commonly  understood  of  the 
proconsular  province  of  Asia,  principally  of  tlie  kingdom  of 
Pergamus  left  by  Attalus  III.  to  the  Eomans,  and  including 


Ch.  n.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  451 

Lydia,  Mysia,  Caria,  and  at  times  parts  of  Phrygia.  The  name 
Asia  Minor  did  not  come  into  use  until  the  fourth  century  of 
our  era. 

10.  Egypt.  Where  the  Jews  were  numerous.  Two-fifths 
of  the  population  of  Alexandria  were  said  to  have  been  Jews. 

Cyrene.    In  Libya,  west  of  Egypt. 

Strangers  {einhr)iJ-ovvTe<s).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  1.  Rev.,  rightly, 
sojov/rners. 

11.  Arabians.  "Whose  coimtry  bordered  on  Judaea,  and 
must  have  contained  many  Jews. 

Speak  (^mKovvtcov).  Rev.,  rightly,  gives  the  force  of  the 
participle,  speaking. 

Wonderful  works  (fieyaXeia).  See  on  majesty,  2  Pet.  i.  16. 
From  fiiyoM,  great.     Rev.,  mighty  works.     Used  by  Luke  only. 

12.  Were  in  doubt  {Sirj-jropow).  Used  by  Luke  only.  See 
on  Luke  ix.  7.     Better,  as  ^ev.,perpIeosed. 

13.  Others  {erepoi).  Of  a  different  class.  The  first  who 
commented  on  the  wonder  did  so  curiously,  but  with  no  preju- 
dice. Those  who  now  spoke  did  so  in  a  hostile  spirit.  See  on 
ver.  4. 

Mocking,(Sta%\6uafoi'T€?;  so  the  best  texts).  From  'xKem\, 
a  joke.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

New  wine  (7\eu«:ou9).  Lit.,  "st/^ee^  swine."  Of  course  in- 
toxicating. 

14.  Standing  up  (o-ro^ek).     See  on  Luke  xviii.  11 ;  xix.  8. 


Said  (aTre^^eyfaro).      See   on  ver.  4.     Better,  Eev.,  sj 
forth.    "  This  most  solemn,  earnest,  yet  sober  speech  "  (Bengel) 


452  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  11 

Hearken  {evmriaacr^e).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  From 
iv,  in;  and  oS?,  the  ear.     Kev.,  gwe  ear. 

Words  {prjiiaTa).     See  on  Luke  i.  37. 

15.  Third  hour.  Nine  in  the  morning  :  the  hour  of  morn- 
ing prayer.     Compare  1  Thess.  v.  7. 

17.  All  flesh.    "Without  distinction  of  age,  sex,  or  condition. 

Visions  (opdcrei?).     Waking  visions. 

Dream  dreams  {ivimvia  ivvn-vuia-^a-ovTai).  The  best  texts 
read  iwirvioK,  with  d/reams.  The  verb  occurs  only  here  and 
Jude  8.     The  reference  is  to  visions  in  sleep. 

19.  I  will  shew  (Sftio-ft)).     Lit.,  I  will  give. 
Wonders  {repaTo).     Or  jportenis.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 
Signs.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 

20.  That  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord  come.  The 
Kev.  heightens  the  emphasis  by  following  the  Greek  order,  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  that  great  and  notable  day.  Notable  (iiri^avfj) 
only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  kindred  noun  iiri^dveia, 
appearing  (compare  our  word  Epiphany),  is  often  used  of  the 
second  coming  of  the  Lord.  See  1  Tim.  vi.  14  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  1 ; 
Tit.  ii.  13. 

22.  Approved  {aTroBeSetyfievov).  The  verb  means  to^om^ 
out  or  shew  forth.     Shewn  to  be  that  which  he  claimed  to  be. 

Miracles  {Svvdfiecrt).      Better,  Rev.,  mighty  works.      Lit.,. 

powers.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20. 

23.  Being  delivered  (e/eSoToi/).  An  adjective:  gi/ven  forth, 
betrayed. 

Ye  have  taken.    The  best  texts  omit. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  453 

Wicked  hands.    The  best  texts  read  by  the  hand  of  lawless 


men. 


Crucified  {Trpoffirri^avre';).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  verb  simply  means  to  affix  to  or  on  anything.  The  idea  of 
the  cross  is  left  to  be  supplied. 

Have  slain  {ave'CKere).  See  on  Luke  xxiii.  32.  Eev.,  ren- 
dering the  aorist  more  closely,  did  slay. 

24:.  Pains  {mSivasi).  The  meaning  is  disputed.  Some  claim 
that  Peter  followed  the  Septuagint  mistranslation  of  Ps.  xviii. 
5,  where  the  Hebrew  word  for  s^mres  is  rendered  by  the 
word  used  here,  pains  ^'  and  that,  therefore,  it  should  be  ren- 
dered snares  of  death  ;  the  figure  being  that  of  escape  from  the 
snare  of  a  Kuntsman.  Others  suppose  that  death  is  represented 
in  tramail,  the  birth-pangs  ceasing  with  the  delivery  ;  i.e.,  the 
resurrection.  This  seems  to  be  far-fetched,  though  it  is  true 
that  in  classical  Greek  the  word  is  used  commonly  of  birth- 
throes.  It  is  better,  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  to  take  the  expres- 
sion in  the  sense  of  the  A.  V.,  and  to  make  the  pains  of  death 
stand  for  death  generally. 

25.  I  foresaw  {Trpoa)pa>iJ,r]v).  Not  to  see  heforehand,  but  to 
see  before  one's  self,  as  in  Ps.  xvi.  8. 

I  should  not  be  moved  [fir]  aaXevSS)).  Or  be  shaken. 
Generally  so  rendered  in  the  New  Testament.  See  Matt.  xi. 
7  ;  xxiv.  29 ;  Heb.  xii.  26,  etc. 

26.  Rejoiced  {'^yaWida-aro).  Eev.,  was  glad.  See  on  1 
Pet.  i.  6. 

Shall  rest  (/eaTao-Ki^vfflcret).  See  on  wesfe,  Matt.  viii.  20.  Bet- 
ter, as  Eev.,  dwell.  Lit.,  dwell  in  a  tent  or  tabernacle.  Een- 
dered  lodge,  Matt.  xiii.  32  ;  Mark  iv.  32 ;  Luke  xiii.  19.  It  is 
a  beautiful  metaphor.     My  flesh  shall  encamp  on  hope;  pitch 


454  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  [Ch.  TL 

its  tent  there  to  rest  through  the  night  of  death,  until  the  morn- 
ing of  resurrection. 

In  hope  (eV  eKvlSi,).  Lit.,  on  hope :  resting  on  the  hope  of 
resurrection  ;  his  body  being  poetically  conceived  as  hoping. 

27.  Leave  (eyKaraXeA/ret?).     Lit.,  leave  iehind. 
Suffer  (8c()<76ts).     Lit.,  give. 

29.  Let  me  speak  {i^bv  el-n-elv).  Lit.,  it  is  permitted  me. 
Rev.,  I  may.  It  is  allowable  for  him  to  speak,  because  the 
facts  are  notorious. 

Freely  (/iera  irappriaia';).  Lit.,  vnth  freedom.  ,  The  latter 
word  from  Trav,  all,  and  prja-i.<i,  speech  ;  speahmg  everything,  and 
therefore  without  reserve. 

The  patriarch  {iraTpidp'Xpv).  From  ap-)(o),  to  hegi/n,  and 
iraTpid,  a  pedigree.  Applied  to  David  as  the  father  of  the 
royal  family  from  which  the  Messiah  sprang.  It  is  used  in  the 
New  Testament  of  Abraham  (Heb.  vii.  4),  and  of  the  sons  of 
Jacob  (Acts  vii.  8). 

He  is  dead  and  buried  {l-riKevT'qcye  koI  era^).  Aorists, de- 
noting what  occurred  at  a  definite  past  time.  Eev,,  rightly,  he 
hoth  died  and  was  huried. 

His  sepulchre  is  with  us.  Or  among  us  (eV  rnuv).  On 
Mount  Zion,  where  most  of  the  Jewish  kings  were  interred  in 
the  same  tomb. 

30.  According  to  the  flesh,  he  would  raise  up  Christ. 

The  best  texts  omit.     Eender  as  Eev.,  he  wovld  set  one  upon 
his  throne. 

34.  Is  not  ascended  {oi  dvi^r,).    Aorist,  did  not  ascend. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  455 

35.  Thy  footstool.     A.  Y.  omits  of  thy  feet. 

36.  Assuredly  (a(T^dX5)<i).  From  d,  7wt,  and  o-(^o\\q>,  to 
cause  to  fall.     'B.eviCQ,jvrmly,  steadfastly. 

37.  They  were  pricked  {Karevvyrja-av).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  word  does  not  occur  in  profane  Greek.  It  is 
found  in  the  Septnagint,  as  Gen.  xxxiv.  7,  of  the  grief  of  the 
sons  of  Jacob  at  the  dishonor  of  Dinah.  See,  also,  Ps.  cix.  (Sept. 
cviii.)  16 :  "  iroken  in  heart."  The  kindred  noun  Kardw^K 
occurs  Kom.  xi.  8,  in  the  sense  of  slwmber  (Rev.,  stupor). 
Compare  Isa.  xxix.  10.  See,  also,  Ps.  Ix.  (Sept.  lix.)  3  :  olvov 
KaTavv^eQ)<;,  the  wine  of  astonishment  {B.e'<f.,wiiie  of  staggering). 
The  radical  idea  of  the  word  is  given  in  the  simple  verb  vva-aa, 
to  prick  with  a  sharp  point.  So  Homer,  of  the  puncture  of  a 
spear  ;  of  horses  dinting  the  earth  with  their  hoofs,  etc.  Here, 
therefore,  of  the  sharp,  painful  emotion,  the  sting  produced  by 
Peter's  words.  Cicero,  speaking  of  the  oratory  of  Pericles,  says 
that  his  speech  left  stings  in  the  minds  of  his  hearers  ("  De 
Oratore,"  iii.,  34. 

38.  Repent.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  2. 

In  the  name  {iirl  rm  ovofian).  Lit,  upon  the  name.  See 
on  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

Ren^ission.     See  on  Luke  iii.  3 ;  Jas.  v.  15. 

39.  Afar  off  {ek  fiaKpciv).  Lit.,  unto  a  long  way.  Referring 
probably  to  the  Gentiles,  who  are  described  by  this  phrase  both 
in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  See  Zech.  vi.  15 ;  Eph.  ii. 
11-13.  Peter  knew  the  fact  that  the  Gentiles  were  to  be  re- 
ceived into  the  Church,  but  not  the  mode.  He  expected  they 
would  become  Christians  through  the  medium  of  the  Jewish  re- 
ligion. It  was  already  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament  that  they 
should  be  received,  and  Christ  himself  had  commanded  the 
apostles  to  preach  to  all  nations. 


456  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  U 

Shall  call  {■n-poaicaXia-rjTM).    Kev.  gives  the  force  of  wpo?, 

to :  "  shall  call  unto  him." 

40.  Other  (Ire/jot?).     And  various. 

Did  he  testify  {BiefiapTvpeTo).  The  preposition  Scd  gives  the 
force  of  solemnly,  earnestly. 

Save  yourselves  {a-w^Te).     More  strictly,  he  ye  saved. 

Untoward  {aKo\ia<;).  Lit.,  crooked.  Toward  in  earlier 
English  meant  doaile,  apt.  The  opposite  is  froward  {from- 
ward).     So  Shakespeare : 

"  'Tis  a  good  hearing  when  children  are  toward, 
But  a  harsh  hearing  when  women  are  froward." 

Taming  of  the  Shrew,  v.,  2. 

"Spoken  like  a  toward  prince." 

3  Henry  VI.,  il.,  3. 

TJntowa/rd,  therefore,  meant  vntractaMe,  perverse.     So  Shake- 
speare : 

"What  means  this  scorn,  thou  most  untoward  knave  ?  " 

K.  John,  i.,  1. 

"  And  if  she  be  froward, 
Then  hast  thou  taught  Hortensio  to  be  untowa/rd." 

Taming  of  the  Shrew,  iv. ,  5. 

Compare  Deut.  xxxii.  5. 

42.  Continued  steadfastly.     See  on  ch.  i.  14. 

Doctrine  {inZayri).     Better,  teaching. 

Fellowship  (jcoivatvia).  From  /cotj/o?,  common.  A  relation 
between  individuals  which  involves  a  common  interest  and  a 
mutual,  active  participation  in  that  interest  and  in  each  other. 
The  word  answers  to  the  Latin  communio,  from  communis^ 


Ch.  n.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  457 

common.  Hence,  sometimes  rendered  communion,  as  1  Cor.  x. 
16  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14.  Fellowship  is  the  most  common  rendering. 
Thus  Philip,  i.  5  :  "  your  fellowship}  in  the  gospel,"  signifying 
co-operation  in  the  widest  sense ;  participation  in  sympathy, 
suffering,  and  labor.  Compare  1  John  i.  3,  6,  7.  Occasionally 
it  is  used  to  express  the  particular  form  which  the  spirit  of  fel- 
lowship assumes ;  as  in  Eom.  xv.  26 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16,  where  it  sig- 
nifies the  giving  of  alms,  but  always  with  an  emphasis  upon  the 
principle  of  Christian  fellowship  which  underlies  the  gift. 

Breaking  {KKdaei).  Used  by  Luke  only,  and  only  in  the 
phrase  hreaking  of  hread.  The  kindred  verb  Kkd^m  or  Kkcm, 
to  irealc,  occurs  often,  but,  like  the  noun,  only  of  breaking 
bread.  Hence  used  to  designate  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's 
Supper. 

Prayers  (Trpoo-eup^aw).  Always  of  prayer  to  God.  Compare 
on  heria-ei<;,jprayers,  Luke  v.  33  ;  and  hesought,  Luke  viii.  38. 

43.  Fear  (^6/3o9).  Not  terror,  but  reverential  awe :  as  Mark 
iy.  41 ;  Luke  vii.  16 ;  1  Pet.  i.  17,  etc. 

44.  Common  {icoiva).    Compare  fellowship,  ver.  42. 

45.  Possessions  {KTrniaTo).     Landed  property. 
Goods  {virdp^eK).     Possessions  in  general ;  movables. 

46.  With  one  accord  {o/iol^vfiaSbv).    See  on  Matt,  xviii.  19. 

From  house  to  house  {kut  oIkov).  Better,  as  Kev.,  athome, 
contrasted  with  in  th^e  temple.  Compare  Philem.  2 ;  Col.  iv. 
15  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19. 

Did  eat  their  meat  (jiereXd/i^avov  Tpo(f)r}<s).  Kev.,  take  their 
food.  Partake  would  be  better,  giving  the  force  of  fierd, 
with.    ISTote  the  imperfect :  "  continued  to  partake." 


458  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Ill 

Singleness  (a^eXoTjjTt).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  De- 
rived from  a,  not,  and  (fiiKKev's,  stony  ground.  Hence  of  some 
thing  simjple  or^lain. 

47.  Added  {■n-pocreTiBei).     Imperfect :  kept  adding. 

Such  as  should  be  saved  (row  a-co^ofievov^).  Lit.,  as  Eev., 
those  that  were  being  saved.  The  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  would 
require  the  verb  to  be  in  the  future,  whereas  it  is  the  present 
participle.  Compare  1  Cor.  i.  18.  Salvation  is  a  thing  of  the 
present,  as  well  as  of  iliepast  &Tvdi  future.  The  verb  is  used  in 
all  these  senses  in  the  New  Testament.  Thus,  we  were  sawed 
(not  a/re,  as  A.  V".),  Eom.  viii.  24 ;  shall  or  shall  be  saved,  Eom.  x. 
9,  13 ;  ye  are  heing  saved,  1  Cor.  xv.  2.  "  Godliness,  righteous- 
ness, is  life,  is  salvation.  And  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that 
the  divorce  of  morality  and  religion  must  be  fostered  and  en- 
couraged by  failing  to  note  this,  and  so  laying  the  whole  stress 
either  on  the  past  or  on  the  future — on  the  first  call,  or  on  the 
final  change.  It  is,  therefore,  important  that  the  idea  of  salva- 
tion as  a  rescue  from  sin,  through  the  knowledge  of  God  in 
Christ,  and  therefore  a  progressive  condition,  a  present  state, 
should  not  be  obscured,  and  we  can  but  regret  such  a  translation 
as  Acts  ii.  47,  'The  Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such  as 
should  he  samed^  where  the  Greek  implies  a  different  idea" 
(Lightf oot,  "  On  a  Fresh  Eevision  of  the  New  Testament "). 

To  the  church.    See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Went  up  {avk^aivov).  The  imperfect:  were  going  wp. 
So  Eev.,  ascending  the  terraces,  on  the  highest  of  which  the 
temple  stood. 

Ninth  hour.  The  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice  ;  or,  as  the 
words  of  prayer  indicate,  half  an  hour  later,  for  the  prayer 
which  accompanied  the  offering  of  incense. 


Ch.  ni.]         THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  459 

2.  That  was  {inrdpxiov).    Lit.,  hemg.     See  on  Jas.  ii.  15. 

Was  carried  (e/SaffTa^eTo).  Imperfect:  "was  being  carried 
as  they  were  going  up  (ver.  1). 

They  laid  (kTi^ovv).     Imperfect :  "  they  were  wont  to  lay." 

4.  Fastening  his  eyes  (oTeviVa?).  See  on  Luke  iv.  20  ;  and 
compare  Acts  i.  10. 

Look  {^\i-\}rov).     Attentively.     See  on  Matt.  vii.  3. 

6.  Silver  and  gold  {apyvpiov  koI  '^(pvalov).  Properly,  silver 
and  gold  money.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  18. 

7.  He  took  (TTiao-a?).  The  verb  means  originally  to  jc>ress  or 
squeeze ;  and  hence  implies  taking  hold  with  ?».f/rm  grasp. 

Feet  {^da-ei'}).  A  peculiar,  technical  word,  used  by  Luke 
only,  and  described  by  Galen  as  the  part  of  the  foot  lying 
beneath  the  leg,  upon  which  the  leg  directly  rests,  as  distin- 
guished from  the  rapao'i,  the  flat  of  the  foot  between  the  toes 
and  heel,  and  ireSiov,  the  part  next  the  toes. 

Ankle-bones  {a-(f>vpd).  Only  here  in  'Hew  Testament.  Also 
technical.  Some  of  the  best  texts  read  a-<f)vSpd,  but  the  mean- 
ing is  the  same. 

Received  strength  {ia-repem^aav).  Used  by  Luke  only. 
Compare  "  the  churches  were  established  (ch.  xvi.  5),  and  the 
kindred  noun  a-repiafia,  steadfastness  (Col.  ii.  5).  In  medical 
language  applied  to  the  bones  in  particular. 

8.  Leaping  up  (e'^aWo/teKo?).  Strictly,  leaping  forth.  Only 
here  in  New  Testament.  Used  in  medical  language  of  the 
sudden  starting  of  a  bone  from  the  socket,  of  starting  from 
sleep,  or  of  the  sudden  bound  of  the  pulse. 


460  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Ut 

Walked  {TreptetrdTeC).  The  imperfect.  Correctly,  as  Kev., 
began  to  walk;  or,  perhaps,  continued  walking  about,  testing 
his  newly  acquired  power. 

The  medical  notes  of  the  case  are,  that  the  disease  was  con- 
genital, had  lasted  over  forty  years  (ch.  iv.  22),  and  the  progres- 
sive steps  of  the  recovery — leaped  up,  stood,  walked. 

10.  They  knew  {iireyivaaKov).  Or  recognized.  Kev.,  took 
knowledge. 

Wonder  {^dii^ovi).    Used  by  Luke  only.    See  on  Luke  iv.  36. 

Amazement  (e'/coTao-eo)?).  See  on  Mark  v.  42 ;  and  compare 
Luke  V.  26. 

11.  The  lame  man  which  was  healed.  The  best  texts 
omit.     Render  as  he  held. 

Held  {KpaTovvro<;).  Held  them^TO^y,  took  fast  hold.  The 
verb  from  Kpdro<;,  strength. 

Greatly  wondering  {eK^aii^oi).  "Wondering  om<  ^measure 
(eV).     Compare  wonder  (ver.  10). 

12.  He  answered.  The  question  expressed  in  the  people's 
explanations  of  surprise. 

Men  of  Israel.  Lit.,  men,  Israelite's.  An  honorable  and 
conciliatory  form  of  address.  The  term  Israelite  gradually 
gave  place  to  that  of  Jew  ;  but  Israel  was  the  sacred  name  for 
the  Jews,  as  the  nation  of  the  theocracy,  the  people  under  God's 
covenant,  and  hence  was  for  the  Jew  his  especial  badge  and 
title  of  honor.  "  To  be  descendants  of  Abraham,  this  honor 
they  must  share  with  the  Ishmaelites  ;  of  Abraham  and  Isaac, 
with  the  Edomites  ;  bnt  none  except  themselves  were  the  seed 
of  Jacob,  such  as  in  this  name  of  Israelite  they  were  declared  to 
be.  Nor  was  this  all,  but  more  gloriously  still,  their  descent 
was  herein  traced  up  to  liim,  not  as  he  was  Jacob,  but  as  he  was 


Ch.  III.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE   APOSTLES.  461 

Israel,  who,  as  a  prince,  had  power  with  God  and  with  men, 
and  had  prevailed"  (Trench,  "Synonyms").  So  Paul,  in 
enumerating  to  the  Philippians  his  claims  to  have  confidence  in 
the  flesh,  says  he  was  "  of  the  stock  of  Israel."  It  is  said  that 
the  modern  Jews  in  the  East  still  delight  in  this  title. 

Our  own  (tS/a).     See  on  ch.  i.  T. 

13.  His  son  {iralha).  Eightly,  servant,  as  Eev.  See  on 
Luke  i.  54.  The  A.  V.  renders,  in  Matt.  xii.  18,  servant,  quot- 
ing from  Isa.  xlii.  1 ;  but  elsewhere,  where  applied  to  Jesus, 
son  or  child,  which  Kev.  in  every  case  has  changed  to  servant. 
The  word  is  continually  used,  like  the  Latin  pieer,  in  the  sense 
of  servant,  and  in  the  Septuagint  as  the  servant  of  God.  See  2 
Sam.  vii.  5,  8,  19,  20,  21,  25,  26.  Compare  Luke  i.  69.  The 
term  servant  of  Jehovah,  or  servant  of  the  Lord,  is  applied  in 
the  Old  Testament  (1)  to  a  worshipper  of  God,  Weh.  i.  10 ; 
Dan.  vi.  21 ;  so  to  Abraham,  Ps.  cv.  6,  42  ;  to  Joshua,  Josh, 
xxiv.  29  ;  to  Job,  Job  i.  8.  (2)  To  a  minister  or  ambassador 
of  God  called  to  any  service,  Isa.  xlix.  6 ;  of  JSTebuchadnezzar, 
Jer.  xxvii.  6  ;  of  the  prophets,  Amos  iii.  7 ;  of  Moses,  Deut. 
xxxiv.  5.  (3)  Peculiarly  of  the  Messiah,  Isa.  xlii.  1 ;  Iii.  13  ; 
as  God's  chosen  servant  for  accomplishing  the  work  of  re- 
demption. "  Unless  we  render  servant  m  the  passages  where 
the  phrase  Trat?  Qeov  occurs  in  the  New  Testament,  there  will 
be  no  allusion  throughout  it  all  to  that  group  of  prophecies 
which  designate  the  Messiah  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  who 
learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered  "  (Trench, 
"  On  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  New  Testament  "). 

When  he.  He  is  sKeCvov,  the  pronoun  of  more  definite  and 
emphatic  reference,  the  Latter,  Pilate,  "  in  order  to  make  the 
contrast  felt  between  what  Pilate  judged  and  what  they  did."^ 
This  is  further  emphasized  in  the  next  verse. 

14.  Desired  (^TT^o-aeTiJe).     Or  demanded.     See  on  Luke  xi.  9. 

A  murderer  {dvBpa  (f>ovea).  Lit.,  a  man  who  was  a  mur- 
derer. 


462  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HI 

To  be  granted  {x°'pi,a^vai).    Bj  way  of  favor  (xapw)- 

15.  The  Prince  of  \'\ie{apxrtovTri';  fo)?)?).  The  Greek  brings 
out  by  the  position  of  these  words  what  Bengel  calls  "  the  mag- 
nificent antithesis  "  between  a  murderer  and  the  Prince  of  life. 
"  Ye  demanded  a  murderer,  but  the  Prvrvce  of  life  ye  killed." 
This  is  the  only  place  where  the  phrase  occurs.  ' Ap')(7]^6<!, 
though  sometimes  rendered  ^/"mce,  means,  primarily,  'beginning, 
and  thence  originator,  author.  Better  here  as  Eev.,  in  margin, 
author,  and  so  by  Rev.  at  Heb.  ii.  10  ;  xii.  2. 

16.  Through  faith  {kiii  t§  iriarei).  ISTote  the  article:  the 
faith  which  we  had  ;  not  the  cripple's  faith,  which  was  not  de- 
manded as  a  condition  of  his  cure.  Through  faith  (eV/)  is 
rather  on  account  of,  or  on  the  iasis  of.  Kev.,  by.  Compare 
ch.  ii.  38  ;  and  see  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

Made  strong  {ia-Tepecoa-e).     See  on  ver.  7. 

Ye  see  (Sewpetre).     See  on  Lukex.  18. 

Perfect  soundness  {oXoKXrjpuiv).  Only  here  in ISTewTesta- 
ment.  From  oXo<;,  entire,  and  xXripo^,  a  lot.  Denoting,  there- 
fore, the  condition  of  one  who  has  his  entire  allotment. 

19.  Be  converted  {i-TnaTpiylrare).  Not  a  good  rendering, 
because  the  verb  is  in  the  active  voice.  Better  as  Eev.,  turn 
again.     See  on  Luke  xxii.  32. 

Blotted  out  (e^aXei^S^vat).  Forgiveness  of  sins  under  the 
figure  of  the  erasure  of  hand-writing.  The  word  is  used  thus 
in  Ps.  Ii.  (Sept.  1.),  1 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25.  Also  at  Col.  ii.  14.  In 
classical  Greek  the  verb  is  opposed  to  iyypd<j)eiv,  to  enter  a  name. 
So  Aristophanes:  "They  do  things  not  to  be  borne,  entering 
(ejypd(l>ovTe<;)  some  of  us,  and  others,  erasing  {e^aXe{^ovT€<i) 
up  and  down,  twice  or  thrice"  ("Peace,"  1180).  More  espe- 
cially with  reference  to  an  item  in  an  account. 


Ch.  hl]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  463 

When  (oTTft)?  av).  "Wrong.  Render  in  order  that,  or  thai 
(so  there  may  come),  as  Rev. 

Times  (Kaipol).     Better,  seasoiis.     See  on  ch.  i.  7. 

Of  refreshing  (am'x/rwfews).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  means  coolmg,  or  r&oivmg  with  fresh  air.  Compare 
the  kindred  verb,  to  wax  cold,  Matt.  xxiv.  12,  and  see  note. 

Presence  {irpoa-vyirov).     Lit.,  the  face. 

20.  Which  before  was  preached  {rov  7rpoKeKripvyiJ,evov). 
But  the  best  texts  read  'Trpoice'xeipicr/jLevov,  appointed.  Compare 
ch.  xxii.  14.  Used  by  Luke  only,  ch.  xxii.  14 ;  xxvi.  16.  The 
verb  originally  means  to  take  in  hand. 

21.  Of  restitution  {anroKaTaaToaew'i).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  kindred  verb,  to  restore,  occurs  Matt.  xvii.  11 ; 
Acts  i.  6,  etc.  As  a  technical  medical  terra,'  it  denotes  complete 
restoration  of  health  ;  the  restoring  to  its  place  of  a  dislocated 
joint,  etc. 

Since  the  world  began  (ott  alStvoi).  The  American  Re- 
visers insist  on  from  of  old. 

23.  Shall  be  destroyed  {i^oXoSpevS^a-erai).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  Rev.,  "  utterly  destroyed,"  giving  the  force 
of  i^,  out. 

25.  Covenant  {BiaS^K7]<s).     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  28. 

Made  (Ste^ero).  The  Rev.  gives  covenanted  in  margin.  The 
noun  covenant  is  derived  from  the  verb  SiariS^fii,  originally  to 
distribute  or  arrange.  Hence  to  arrange  or  settle  mutuaWy;  to 
make  a  covenant  with. 

26.  His  Son  Jesus.     The  best  texts  omit  Jesus.    Rendef'/ 
servant  for  son,  and  see  on  ver.  13. 


464  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 


CHAPTER  IT. 

1.  Captain  of  the  temple.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Levites 
to  keep  guard  at  the  gates  of  the  temple,  in  order  to  prevent 
the  unclean  from  entering.  To  them  the  duties  of  the  temple- 
police  were  entrusted,  under  the  command  of  an  official  known 
in  the  New  Testament  as  "  the  captain  of  the  temple,"  but  in 
Jewish  writings  chiefly  as  "  the  man  of  the  temple  mount."  Jo- 
sephus  speaks  of  him  as  a  person  of  such  consequence  as  to  be 
sent,  along  with  the  high-priest,  prisoner  to  Rome. 

Came  upon  {iireaT'qaav).  Or  stood  hy  them,  suddenly.  Com- 
pare Luke  xxiv.  4;  Acts  xxii.  20;  xxiii.  11.  Of  d/rearm  or 
visions,  to  appear  to. 

2.  Being  grieved  {hiairovoviievoC).  Only  here  and  ch.  xvi. 
18.  The  Rev.  renders  the  force  of  Sta  by  "sore  troubled;" 
vexed  through  amd  through. 

Tlie  resurrection.  The  Sadducees  denied  both  the  resur- 
rection and  a  future  state.  "  In  the  Gospels  the  Pharisees  are 
represented  as  the  great  opponents  of  Christ ;  in  the  Acts  it 
is  the  Sadducees  who  are  the  most  violent  opponents  of  the 
apostles.  The  reason  of  this  seems  to  be,  that  in  the  Gospels 
Jesus  Christ  came  in  direct  collision  with  the  Pharisees,  by 
unmasking  their  hypocrisies  and  endangering  their  influence 
among  the  people ;  whereas  the  apostles,  in  testifying  to  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  opposed  the  creed  of  the  Sadducees. 
Perhaps,  also,  in  attacking  the  apostles,  who  taught  the  resur- 
rection of  that  Jesus  whom  the  Pharisees  had  persecuted  and 
crucifled,  the  Sadducees  aimed  an  indirect  blow  at  the  favorite 
dogma  of  their  rival  sect"  (Gloag,  "  Commentary  on  Acts"). 

3.  In  hold  (et?  Ti^prjo-iv).  A  somewhat  antiquated  rendering. 
Better,  as  Rev.,  in  ward.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

4.  The  number  was  about  five  thousand.  Translate 
ijevi]S7)  as  Rev.,  came  to  ie;  indicating  the  addition  to  the 
original  number  of  the  many  that  helieved. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  465 

7.  What  power— what  name.  Lit.,  what  sort  of  power ; 
what  hind  of  name. 

Have  ye  done.  The  ye  closes  the  sentence  in  the  Greek 
with  a  contemptuous  emphasis :  youjpe(yple. 

12.  Salvation  (ij  a-coTTjpia).  ISTote  the  article  :  the  salvation ; 
the  Messianic  deliverance. 

13.  Boldness.     See  onfreely,  ch.  ii.  29. 

Perceived  (KaTaXa^ofievoi).  The  word,  meaning  originally 
to  seise  upon  or  lay  hold  of,  occurs  frequently  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment in  different  phases  of  this  original  sense.  Thus,  to  appre- 
hend or  grasp,  Eph.  iii.  18  ;  Philip,  iii.  12,  13;  Eom.  ix.  30: 
of  seizure  by  a  demon,  Mark  ix.  18  :  of  something  coming  upon 
or  overtaking,  John  xii.  35  ;  1  Thess.  v.  4 :  of  comprehending, 
grasping  mentally,  as  here,  Acts  x.  34 ;  xxv.  25. 

Unlearned  (a7/3a/tyuaT0t).  Or,  very  literally,  unlettered.  With 
special  reference  to  Kabbinic  culture,  the  absence  of  which  was 
conspicuous  in  Peter's  address. 

Ignorant  {Ihi&TaC).  Originally,  one  in  a  private  station,  as 
opposed  to  one  in  office  or  in  public  affairs.  Therefore  one 
without  professional  knowledge,  a  layman ;  thence,  generally, 
ignorant,  ill-informed ;  sometimes  plebeian,  common.  In  the 
absence  of  certainty  it  is  as  well  to  retain  the  meaning  given  by 
the  A.  v.,  perhaps  with  a  slight  emphasis  on  the  want  of  pro- 
fessional knowledge.  Compare  1  Cor.  xiv.  16,  23,  24 ;  2  Cor. 
xi.  6. 

Took  knowledge  {iirer^CvcocTKov).  Or  recognized.  See  on 
ch.  iii.  10. 

16.  Conferred  (jxvve^aXov).     See  onpondered,  Luke  ii.  19. 

17.  It  spread  {Siave/j/r]^).  Only  here  in  l^ew  Testament. 
Lit.,  he  distributed.     In  2  Tim.  ii.  37,  "  their  word  will  eat  as  a 

30 


466  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ck.  V. 

canker,"  is,  literally,  will  have  dist/rihution  or  spreadmg  {vofirjv 
efet).  Bengel,  however,  goes  too  far  when  he  represents  the 
members  of  the  council  as  speaking  in  the  figure  of  a  canker. 
"  They  regard  the  whole  as  a  canker." 

18.  To  speak  {<l>Myy€a-^ai).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  16. 

21.  Punish  {KoXda-oovrai).  OrigmaWy,  to  curiadl  or  dock ;  to 
jprune  as  trees :  thence  to  check,  Jceep  in  hounds,  punish. 

24.  Lord  (Seo-Trora).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

25.  Servant  (TratSo?).     See  on  ch.  iii.  13. 

Rage  {i<f>pva^av).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Origi- 
nally, to  neigh  or  snort  like  a  horse.  Of  men,  to  give  one's  self 
haughty  airs,  and  to  act  and  speak  insolently.  Philo  describes 
a  proud  man  as  "  walking  on  tiptoe,  and  bridling  {<f>pvaTT6fievo<i), 
with  neck  erect  like  a  horse." 

27.  Didst  anoint  {expo(Ta<;).     See  on  Christ,  Matt.  i.  1. 

28.  Thy  hand.     Thy  disposing  power. 

32.  Heart  and  soul.     See  on  Mark  xii.  30. 

33.  Gave  {airehihow).  Lit.,  ga/ve  iach  {airo) ;  as  something 
which  they  were  in  duty  bound  to  give. 

3Y.  The  money  {to  'xprjixa).     The  sum  of  money. 


CHAPTER  Y. 

2.  Kept  back  {kvoa^LuaTo).  Only  here,  ver.  3,  and  Tit.  ii. 
10,  where  it  is  rendered  purloining.  From  z/6o-^(,  aloof,  apa/rt. 
The  verb  means  to  set  ajtartfor  on^s  self;  hence  to  appropriate 
wrongfully. 


Ch.  v.]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  467 

3.  To  lie  to  (i/rewo-aff-^ot).  Eather,  to  decewe.  The  design 
of  Satan  was  to  decewe  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  lie  to  would  re- 
quire a  different  case  in  the  noun,  which  occurs  in  ver.  4,  where 
the  same  verb  is  properly  rendered  lie  (unto  God).  Satan  fills 
the  heart  to  decevve.     The  result  of  the  attempt  is  merely  to  lie. 

4.  Whiles  it  remained,  was  it  not  thine  own  (ovp^l/ierov? 
(Tol  efieve).  A  play  on  the  words.  Lit. ,  remaining,  did  it  not 
remain  to  thee  f  Eev.,  very  happily,  whiles  it  remained,  did  it 
not  rem,ain  thine  own  f 

Conceived  (e'.Jow).  lX\,.,pwtav  jmed.  Wherefore  didst  thou 
jwa  this  deed  in  thy  heart  ? — i.e.,  resolme  upon  it. 

5.  Gave  up  the  ghost  (i^eylrv^e).  Used  by  Luke  only.  A 
rare  word,  occurring  in  the  Septuagint,  and  in  medical  writers. 
See  Ezek.  xxi.  7,  "  Every  spirit  shall  faint."  See,  also,  on  fail- 
ing, Luke  xxi.  26. 

6.  Wound  him  up  (o-w6o-Tet\ai/).  Better,  as 'Rev.,  wrapped 
him  round.  The  verb  means  to  draw  together,  or  draw  in/ 
hence  used  for  shortening  sail,  reducing  expenses,  lowering  or 
humbling  a  person.  In  1  Cor.  vii.  29,  it  occurs  in  the  phrase, 
"  the  time  is  short  {a-vvea-ToX/j.ivo'i,  Eev.,  properly,  shortened) ; " 
i.e.,  drawn  together,  contracted.  In  the  sense  of  wrapping  up 
it  is  found  in  Aristophanes,  of  wrapping  cloaks  or  garments 
about  one,'  also  of  tucldng  up  the  garments  about  the  loins,  as  a 
preparation  for  service.  In  the  sense  of  shrouding  for  burial, 
it  occurs  In  Euripides  ("  Troades,"  382) :  "  They  were  not 
shrouded  {avveireaTaK'qa-av)  by  the  hands  of  a  wife."  In  medical 
language,  of  bandaging  a  limb  ;  of  the  contraction  of  tumors, 
and  of  organs  of  the  bodj',  etc.  Some,  however,  as  Meyer, 
refer  the  word  here  to  thepressimg  together  of  the  dead  man's 
limbs. 

8.  Answered.  "  The  woman,  whose  entrance  into  the  as- 
sembly of  the  saints  was  like  a  speech  "  (Bengel). 


468  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

For  SO  much  {roaomov).  Perhaps  pointing  to  the  money 
still  lying  at  his  feet. 

9.  Ye  have  agreed  together  {a-vvetpcov^STj  vfiiv).  The  verb 
is  passive.  Lit.,  was  it  agreed  ly  you.  The  figure  in  the  word 
is  that  of  concord  of  sounds.  Your  souls  were  atPuned  to  each 
other  respecting  this  deceit.     See  on  music,  Luke  xv.  25. 

To  tempt  {ireipdaai).  To  put  it  to  the  proof  whether  the 
Holy  Spirit,  ruling  in  the  apostles,  could  be  deceived.  See  on 
ver.  3. 

The  feet.  Graphic.  The  steps  of  the  young  men  returning 
from  the  burial  are  heard  at  the  door. 

12.  Were  wrought  (eyej^ero).  The  best  texts  read  eyivero, 
the  imperfect,  were  ieing  wrought  from  time  to  time. 

All.     The  whole  body  of  believers. 

13.  The  rest.  Unbelievers,  deterred  by  the  fate  of  Ananias 
from  imiting  themselves  to  the  church  under  false  pretences. 

Join  himself  (KoWaa-^ai).  See  on  Luke  xv.  15  ;  x.  11.  In 
all  but  two  instances  (Rom.  xii.  9  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  17),  the  word  im- 
plies a  forced,  unnatural,  or  unexpected  union.  Thus  Philip 
would  not,  without  a  special  command,  have  "  joined  himself  " 
to  the  chariot  of  the  Ethiopian  prince  (Acts  viii.  29).  Saul's 
attempt  to  join  himself  to  the  apostles  was  regarded  by  them 
with  suspicion  (Acts  ix.  26) ;  and  the  fact  that  certain  persons 
"  clave  to "  Paul  in  Athens  is  expi-essly  contrasted  with  the 
attitude  of  the  citizens  at  large.  The  sense  of  an  unnatural 
union  comes  out  clearly  in  1  Cor.  vi.  16. 

14:.  Were  added  {irpoaeTl^evTo).  Imperfect;  Jcej)t  being 
added. 

15.  Couches  {icpa^^dTwv).     See  on  Mark  ii.  4. 


Ch.  v.]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  469 

The  shadow  of  Peter  passing  by.  But  the  proper  ren- 
dering is,  as  Peter  passed  hy,  his  shadow  might,  etc.* 

18.  In  the  common  prison  {evrrjp'^aeiSri/xoala).  Incorrect. 
Trjpri<yt,<s  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of  jyrison,  but  is  an  abstract 
term  meaning  ward  or  keeping,  as  in  ch.  iv.  3.  There  is  no 
article,  moreover.  Note,  too,  that  another  word  is  used  for  the 
prison  in  the  next  verse  (t^s  <^v'kaKri<i).  Eev.,  therefore,  cor- 
rectly, im,  public  ward. 

19.  By  night  {Zia  -rris  wkto^).  More  correctly,  during  the 
night :  Sid,  m  the  course  of.     Compare  ch.  xvi.  9. 

20.  Stand.  Compare  ch.  ii.  14;  and  see  on  Luke  xviii.  11 ; 
xix.  8. 

Of  this  life.  The  eternal  life  which  Christ  revealed.  It  is 
a  peculiar  use  of  the  phrase,  which  is  commonly  employed  in 
contrast  with  the  life  to  come,  as  1  Cor.  xv.  19.  Compare  John 
vi.  63,  68.     Not  equivalent  to  these  words  of  life. 

21.  Early  in  the  morning  (i/tto  rhv  op^pov).  'Ttto,  beneath, 
is  often  used  in  the  sense  of  just  about,  or  Tiear.  "OpSpov  is  from 
opvvfjLi,  to  cause  to  arise :  the  dawn.  See  on  Luke  xxiv.  1.  Ren- 
der as  Rev.,  about  daybreak. 

Taught  {iSiSaa-Kov).     Imperfect :  began  teaching. 

The  council  {a-vveSpiov).     The  Sanhedrim. 

The  senate  (yepovaiav).  From  yepcov,  an  old  man,  like  the 
Latin  senatus,  from  senex,  old.  Taking  on  very  early  an  offi- 
cial sense,  the  notion  of  age  being  merged  in  that  of  dignity. 
Thus  in  Homer  yepovrei;  are  the  chiefs  who  form  the  king's 
council.     Compare   the  Latin  pat/res,  fathers,   the  title  used 

*  The  construction  is  plainly  the  genitive  absolute,  ipxo/ieyou  Tlerpov,  Peter 
pamng  by. 


470  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

in  addressing  the  Eoman  senate.  The  word  in  this  passage  is 
the  name  of  the  Spartan  assembly,  Gerousia,  the  assembly  of 
elders,  consisting  of  thirty  members,  with  the  two  kings.  "  The 
well-known  term,"  as  Meyer  remarks,  "  is  fittingly  transferred 
from  the  college  of  the  Greek  gerontes  to  that  of  the  Jewish 
presbyters."  They  summoned,  not  only  those  elders  of  the 
people  who  were  likewise  members  of  the  Sanhedrim,  but  the 
whole  council  {all  the  senate)  of  the  representatives  of  the  people. 

Prison  {Bea-/MmT^pwv).  Still  another  word  for  prison.  Com- 
pare vv.  18,  19.  'Rev., prison-house.  The  different  words  em- 
phasize different  aspects  of  confinement.  Tijprjo-K  is  keeping, 
as  the  result  of  guarding.  See  on  ver.  18.  0vXaKij  emphasizes 
the  being  put  under  guard,  and  Bea-fiwT'rjpiov  the  being  put  in 
ionds. 

22.  Officers  {inrrjpeTai).     See  on  Matt.  v.  26. 

24.  They  doubted  {SinjTropow).     See  on  Luke  ix.  5.     Eev.^ 

were  much  perplexed,  giving  the  force  of  Sta,  thoroughly  at  a 
loss.     Compare  Luke  xxiv.  4.* 

28.  Did  not.     The  best  texts  omit  ov,  not,  and  the  question. 

We  straitly  cliarged.  So  Rev.  {-jrapayYeXta  "n-aprjyyeiXa/iev)^ 
Lit.,  we  cha/rged  you  with  a  charge.  See  on  Luke  xxii.  15,  with 
desire  I  have  desired. 

Intend  {/SovXea-^e).    Or  ye  want.    See  on  willing.  Matt.  i.  19. 

This  man's.  The  phrase  is  remarkable  as  furnishing  the 
first  instance  of  that  avoidance  of  the  name  of  Christ  which 
makes  the  Talmud,  in  the  very  same  terms,  refer  to  him  most 
frequently  as  Pelom,  "so  and  so." 


*  Where,  however,  the  best  texts  read  the  simple  verb  dvope'iadai,  were  per- 
plexed, for  Siairopeio-aoi,  "  were  greaU/g  perplexed." 


Ch.  v.]  the  acts  op  the  apostles.  471 

29.  We  ought  (Set).     Stronger,  we  must. 

To  obey  (ireSapxelv).  Not  often  used  in  the  New  Testament 
to  express  obedience,  the  most  common  word  being  viraicova). 
Sometimes  irei^m  is  used.  But  this  word,  in  itself,  is  the  only 
one  of  the  several  in  use  which  expresses  the  conception  of 
obedience  exclusively.  'TiraKoveiv  is  to  obey  as  the  result  of  lis- 
tening to  another  :  ireil^ecrSai,  is  to  obey  as  the  result  oipersua- 
sion.  This  is  the  special  term  for  the  obedience  which  one  owes 
to  authority  {apxv)-  it  occurs  four  times  in  the  New  Testament : 
Acts  V.  29,  32  ;  xxvii.  21 ;  Tit.  iii.  1 ;  and  in  every  case,  of  obedi- 
ence to  established  authority,  either  of  Gqd  or  of  magistrates. 
In  Acts  xxvii.  21,  where  it  is  used  of  the  ship's  oflScers  hearken- 
ing to  Paul's  admonition  not  to  loose  from  Crete,  Paul  speaks 
of  his  admonition  as  divinely  inspired  ;  compare  xxvii.  10.  In 
ch.  iv.  19,  Peter  and  John  say  hearken  (a/coveiv).  That  is  a 
mere  listening  to  or  considering  the  proposition  made  to  them. 
This  is  a  deliberate  course  of  action. 

30.  Ye  slew  {Siexeipiffaa^e).  Only  here  and  ch.  xxvi.  21. 
To  slay  with  one's  own  hands. 

Tree.     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  31. 

31.  Prince.     See  on  ch.  iii.  15. 

Repentance — remission.  See  on  Matt.  iii.  2  ;  Jas.  v.  15  ; 
Luke  iii.  3. 

32.  Witnesses.     See  on  Acts  i.  22. 
Obey.     See  on  ver.  29. 

33.  They  were  cut  to  the  heart  {heirplovro).  Only  here 
and  ch.  vii.  54.  The  verb  means,  originally,  to  saw  ammder.  A 
strong  figure  for  exasperation. 

To  slay.     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  32. 


472  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

34.  The  apostles.     The  best  texts  substitute  tov<}  av^payrrov;, 

the  men. 

A  little  space  {^paxv).     Better  as  Eev.,  a  little  while. 

36.  Joined  themselves  (Trpoo-eKoW??^??).  The  best  texts  read 
irpoa-eKXiSi),  were  inclined ;  i.e.,  learned  to,  or  took  sides  with. 

37.  Obeyed.  ISTote  the  word  for  obeyed  {iirei^ovro),  imply- 
ing ^e  j)ersuasive  power  of  Theudas'  boasting.     See  on  ver.  29. 

Taxing  {a'7ro'ypa^y<;).     See  on  Luke  ii.  1,  2. 

Much  people.     The  best  texts  omit  mwcA. 

Were  dispersed  {Btea-Kopiria-Brja-av).     See  on  Matt.  xxv.  24. 

38.  Refrain  {airoa-TrjTe).     Lit.,  stand  off. 

Of  men  (e|  avSpm-rrcDv).  Out  of  men,  proceeding  out  of  their 
devices. 

It  will  come  to  naught  {KaraXv^creTai).  Lit.,  be  loosened 
down.  Used  of  the  dilapidation  of  the  temple  (Luke  xxi.  6), 
and  of  the  dissolution  of  the  body  under  the  figure  of  striking 
a  tent  (2  Cor.  v.  1).     See  on  Mark  xiii.  2. 

39.  To  fight  against  God  {Seofidxoi).  Lit.,  to  be  God- 
fighters. 

41.  They  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  (/carijf- 
i,a)^crav  aripiaa^vaC).  This  is  an  instance  of  what  rhetori- 
cians style  an  oxymoron,  from  of w,  sharp,  and  p.apo'i,  foolish ; 
&  pointedly  foolish  saying,  which  is  witty  or  impressive  through 
sheer  contradiction  or  paradox,  as  lahorious  idleness,  sublime 
indifference.  In  this  case  the  apostles  are  described  as  digni- 
fied by  indignity. 


Ch.  vl]  the  acts  op  the  apostles.  473 


CHAPTER  VL 

1.  And  (8e).  Better  iut,  as  a  contrast  is  now  introduced 
with  the  prosperous  condition  of  the  Church  indicated  at  the 
close  of  the  last  chapter. 

Was  multiplied  {'n-Xr]^vv6vT(ov).  Lit,  "when  the  disciples 
were  multiplying ; "  the  present  participle  indicating  something 
in  progress. 

A  murmuring  (70771/(7/^0?).  See  on  the  kindred  word  mw/-- 
murers,  Jiide  16. 

Grecians  (EXKrjviaTwv).  Kev.,  much  better,  Grecian  Jews, 
with  Hellenists  in  margin.  "  Grecians  "  might  easily  be  under- 
stood of  Greeks  in  general.  The  word  Hellenists  denotes  Jews, 
not  GreeJcs,  but  Jews  who  spoke  Greek.  The  contact  of  Jews 
with  Greeks  was  first  effected  by  the  conquests  of  Alexander. 
He  settled  eight  thousand  Jews  in  the  Thebais,  and  the  Jews 
formed  a  third  of  the  population  of  his  new  city  of  Alexandria. 
From  Egypt  they  gradually  spread  along  the  whole  Mediter- 
ranean coast  of  Africa.  They  were  removed  by  Seleucus  ISTica- 
tor  from  Babylonia,  by  thousands,  to  Antioeh  and  Seleucia,  and 
under  the  persecutions  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  scattered  them- 
selves through  Asia  Minor,  Greece,  Macedonia,  and  the  ^gean 
islands.  The  vast  majority  of  them  adopted  the  Greek  lan- 
guage, and  forgot  the  Aramaic  dialect  which  had  been  their 
language  since  the  Captivity.  The  word  is  used  but  twice  in 
the  New  Testament — here  and  ch.  ix.  29 — and,  in  both  cases,  of 
Jews  who  had  embraced  Christianity,  but  who  spoke  Greek  and 
used  the  Septuagint  version  of  the  Bible  instead  of  the  original 
Hebrew  or  the  Chaldaic  targum  or  paraphrase.  The  word 
"EWi/v,  Greek,  which  is  very  common  in  the  Ifew  Testament, 
is  used  in  antithesis,  either  to  "Barbarians"  or  to  "Jews."  In 
the  former  case  it  means  all  nations  which  spoke  the  Greek 
language  (see  Acts  xviii.  17 ;  Kom.  i.  14 ;  1  Cor.  i.  22,  23).  In 


474  WORD  STUDIES  LN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Vt 

the  latter  it  is  equivalent  to  Gentiles  (see  Eom.  i.  16 ;  ii.  9 ; 
1  Cor.  X.  32 ;  Gal.  ii.  3).  Hence,  in  either  case,  it  is  wholly 
different  from  Hellenist. 

Hebrews.  Hebrew  is  the  proper  antithesis  to  Hellenist.  A 
man  was  'lov^alo<i,  a  Jew,  who  traced  his  descent  from  Jacob, 
and  conformed  to  the  religion  of  his  fathers.  He  might  speak 
Greek  and  be  a  Hellenist.  He  was  'E^pato';,  a  Hebrew,  only  as 
he  spoke  Hebrew  and  retained  Hebrew  customs.  The  distinc- 
tion between  Hebrew  and  Hellenist  was  a  distinction  within 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  not  between  it  and  other  nations.  Thus 
Paul  calls  himself  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews ;  i.e.,  a  Hebrew  and 
of  Hebrew  parents  (Philip,  iii.  5  ;  compare  2  Cor.  xi.  22). 

Were  neglected  {-Trape^ecopovpTo).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. Lit.,  were  overlooked.  The  imperfect  denoting  some- 
thing habitual. 

Daily  {KcA^ixepivy).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Ministration  {BiaKovia).  Or  service.  See  on  minister,  Matt. 
XX.  26.     The  reference  is  to  the  distribution  of  provision. 

2.  Reason  (apea-Tov).    lAt.,  pleasing  or  agreeable. 

Leave  {KaTa\ei-\}ravTa^).  Hather  Jvrsake  or  abandon  :  leave 
in  the  lurch. 

Serve  tables.     Superintend  the  distribution  of  food. 

3.  Of  good  report  (jiapTvpovfievov^).  JAt.,  attested,  ha/oing 
witness  borne  them. 

4.  We  will  give  ourselves  continually  ('7rpo(7«ajOT6/3j;cro/iei'). 
See  on  ch.  i.  14.     Eev.,  continue  steadfastly. 

5.  Stephen,  etc.  The  names  are  all  Greek.  There  is  no 
reason  to  infer  from  this  that  they  were  all  Hellenists.     It  was 


Ch.  VI.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  475 

customary  among  the  Jews  to  have  two  names,  the  one  Hebrew 
and  the  other  Greek.  They  were  probably  partly  Hebrews  and 
partly  Hellenists. 

7.  To  the  faith  (t^  m-Ccnei,).  Opinions  differ  greatly  as  to 
whether  this  is  to  be  taken  as  meaning  faith  in  Jesus  Christ, 
ov  faith  considered  as  Christian  doctrine — the  Oosjpel;  the  faith 
in  the  ecclesiastical  sense.  This  passage  and  Gal.  i.  23  are  the 
strong  passages  in  favor  of  the  latter  view ;  but  the  general 
usage  of  the  New  Testament,  added  to  the  fact  that  in  both 
these  passages  the  former  meaning  gives  a  good,  intelligible, 
and  perfectly  consistent  sense,  go  to  confirm  the  former  inter- 
pretation. 

1.  In  the  great  majority  of  New  Testament  passages  faith 
is  clearly  used  in  the  sense  oi faith  in  Jesus  Christ:  "  the  con- 
viction and  confidence  regarding  Jesus  Christ  as  the  only  and 
perfect  mediator  of  the  divine  grace  and  of  eternal  life,  through 
his  work  of  atonement "  (Meyer). 

2.  This  interpretation  is  according  to  the  analogy  of  such 
expressions  as  obedience  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  x.  5),  where  the 
meaning  is,  clearly,  obedience  to  Christ :  obedience  of  the  truth 
(1  Pet.  i.  22).  Accordingly,  faith,  though  it  becomes  in  man 
the  subjectime  moral  power  of  the  new  life,  regenerated  through 
the  power  of  the  Spirit,  is  regarded  objectively  as  a  power — the 
authority  which  commands  submission. 

3.  This  interpretation  is  according  to  the  analogy  of  the  ex- 
pression hearing  of  faith  (Gal.  iii.  2),  which  is  to  be  rendered, 
not  as  equivalent  to  the  reception  of  the  Gospel,  but  as  the  report 
or  message  of  faith ;  i.e.,  which  treats  of  faith,  aKor],  hea/ring 
being  always  used  in  the  New  Testament  in  a  passive  sense, 
and  often  renderedyame,  rumor,  report  (see  Matt.  iv.  24 ;  xiv. 
1 ;  Mark  i.  28 ;  John  xii.  38 ;  Eom.  x.  16).  Compare,  also,  obedi- 
ence of  faith  (Rom.  i.  5  ;  xvi.  26),  where  faith  is  to  be  taken 
as  the  object,  and  not  as  the  source,  of  the  obedience ;  and  hence 
is  not  to  be  explained  as  the  obedience  which  springs  from 
faith,  but  as  the  obedience  rendered  to  faith  as  the  authoritative 
impulse  of  the  new  life  in  Christ. 

The  great  majority  of  the  best  modern  commentators  hold 


476  WOKD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VI 

that  faith  is  to  be  takeu  as  the  subjective  principle  of  Christian 
life  (though  often  regarded  objectively  as  a  spiritual  power), 
and  not  as  Christian  doctrine. 

8.  Did  (eVoiei).  Imperfect :  was  working  wonders  during 
the  progress  of  the  events  described  in  the  previous  verse. 

9.  Synagogue.     See  on  Church,  Matt.  xvi.  18. 

Of  the  libertines.  In  Jerusalem,  and  probably  in  other 
large  cities,  the  several  synagogues  were  arranged  according  to 
nationalities,  and  even  crafts.  Thus  we  have  in  this  verse  men- 
tion of  the  synagogues  of  the  Gyrenians,  Alexandrians,  Cilicians, 
and  Asiatics.  Libertines  is  a  Latin  word  {libertini,  freedmen), 
and  means  here  Jews  or  their  descendants  who  had  been  taken 
as  slaves  to  Home,  and  had  there  received  their  liberty  ;  and 
who,  in  consequence  of  the  decree  of  Tiberius,  about  19  a.d., 
expelling  them  from  Rome,  had  returned  in  great  numbers  to 
Jerusalem.  They  were  likely  to  be  the  chief  opponents  of 
Stephen,  because  they  supposed  that  by  his  preaching,  their 
religion,  for  which  they  had  suffered  at  Home,  was  endangered 
in  Jerusalem. 

10.  They  were  not  able  {ovk  laxvov).  See  on  Luke  xiv. 
30  ;  xvi.  3. 

11.  Suborned  {inri^aXov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  verb  originally  means  to  put  under,  as  carpets  under  one's 
feet ;  hence,  to  put  one  person  in  place  of  another  ;  to  substi- 
tute, as  another's  child  for  one's  own  ;  to  employ  a  secret  agent 
in  one^s place,  and  to  instigate  or  secretly  instruct  him. 

12.  They  stirred  up  the  people  (a-vveiclvqaav  tov  Xabv). 
The  verb  occurs  only  here  in  the  l^ew  Testament.  It  implies 
to  stir  up  as  a  mass,  to  move  them  together  (avv).  This  is  the 
first  record  of  the  hostility  of  the  people  toward  the  disciples. 
See  ch.  ii.  47. 


Ch.  VU.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  477 

Caught  {(TvvripTraarav).    Used  by  Luke  only.   Better  as  Rev., 
seized.     See  on  Luke  viii.  29. 

14.  This  Jesus  of  Nazareth.    Contemptuous. 


CHAPTER  TIL 

1.  Then  said  the  high-priest.  "  The  glorified  countenance 
of  Stephen  has  caused  a  pause  of  surprise  and  admiration, 
which  the  high-priest  interrupts  by  calling  upon  the  accused 
for  his  defence  "  (Gloag). 

2.  Brethren.     Addressing  the  audience  generally. 

Fathers.     Addressing  the  members  of  the  Sanhedrim. 

Of  glory.  Outward,  visiMe  glory,  as  in  the  shekinah  and 
the  pillar  of  fire. 

Appeared  (w^^).     See  on  Luke  xxii.  43. 

5.  Inheritance  (K\i7/3oi'OytiwM/).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Not  so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on  {oihe  ^rjfiairoho'i).  Lit, 
not  even  the  steppmg  of  a  foot.  From  the  original  meaning,  a 
pace  or  step,  which  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
comes  the  sense  of  a  step  considered  as  a  raised  place  or  seat, 
and  hence  a  tribune  oy:  judgment-seat,  which  is  its  meaning  in 
every  other  passage  of  the  New  Testament. 

Possession  (/carao-^eo-ti').  Only  here  and  ver.  4S.  See  on 
heep,  Luke  viii.  15.     It  denotes  &permam,ent  possession. 

8.  The  covenant  of  circumcision.  There  is  no  article, 
and  it  is  better  omitted  in  rendering.  He  gave  him  a  covenant, 
the  peculiar  character  of  which  is  defined  by  the  next  word — 


478  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VH. 

of  circumcision ;  i.e.,  of  which  circnmcision  was  the  completion 
and  seal. 

9.  Moved  with  envy  {^r]Xd)a-aine<}).  Compare  Jas.  iv.  1 ; 
and  see  on  envying,  Jas.  iii.  14. 

10.  Afflictions  {SXiyjrecov).     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  21. 

11.  Sustenance  {xopTdafiara).  For  their  cattle:  fodder. 
See  on  shall  he  filed,  Matt.  v.  6. 

12.  In  Egypt  (eV  AlyvTrrqi).  But  the  best  texts  read  el<s 
AtyvTTTov,  into  Egypt,  and  construe  with  sent  forth :  "  he  sent 
forth  our  fathers  into  EgyptP 

13.  Joseph's  race.  Note  the  repetition  of  the  name.  "A 
certain  sense  of  patriotic  pride  is  implied  in  it." 

14.  Threescore  and  fifteen.  Lit.,  "  mi  (ei;)  threescore  and 
fifteen ; "  the  idiom  expressing  the  sum  in  which  all  the  in- 
dividuals were  included. 

17.  When  {ica^iai).  Eev.,  more  correctly,  as;  the  word 
being  not  a  particle  of  time,  but  meaning  in  proportion  as. 

18.  Another  (ere/ao?).  Not  merely  a  successor,  but  a  monarch 
of  a  different  character. 

Knew  not.  As  sixty  years  had  elapsed  since  Joseph's 
death,  and  a  new  dynasty  was  coming  to  the  throne,  this  may 
be  taken  literally :  did  not  know  his  history  and  services. 
Some  explain,  did  not  recognise  his  merits. 

19.  Dealt  subtilely  {KaTacro(j}ia-dfj,evo^).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Lit.,  to  employ  cunning  against.  See  on  <ro^os, 
wise,  Jas.  iii.  13. 

So  that  they  cast  out  (toO  iroielv  eK^era).  Lit.,  maJce  ex- 
posed.    The  verb  eKTiS^/Mi,  to  set  out,  or  place  outside,  is  not 


Ch.  VII.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  479 

uncommon  in  classical  Greek  for  the  exposure  of  a  new-born 
child.  Thus  Herodotus,  of  Cyrus,  exposed  in  infancy:  "The 
herdsman's  wife  entreated  him  not  to  expose  {iK^eivai)  the 
babe  "  (i.,  112).  The  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  "  so  that  they  cast 
out,"  is  correct,  expressing  the  result,  and  not  Pharaoh's  design. 

Young  children  (fipejyq).  Incorrect.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  2. 
Eev.,  rightly,  hdbes. 

Live  (iJuoYoveicr^ai).  Or,  he  preserved  alme.  See  on  Luke 
xvii.  33. 

20.  Time  {icaipm).  Better,  season  or  juncture.  "Sad, 
seasonable  "  (Bengel).     See  on  Acts  i.  7. 

Exceeding  fair  (dtrreto?  rm  dew).  Lit.,  fair  unto  God:  a 
Hebrew  superlative.  Compare  Jon.  iii.  3  :  great  unto  God ; 
A.  v.,  exceeding  great.  Gen.  x.  9,  of  Nimrod :  a  mighty  hunter 
hefore  the  Lord.  2  Cor.  x.  4 :  mighty  unto  God;  i.e.,  in  God's 
sight.  ''Aardo'i^fair  (only  here  and  Heb.  xi.  23),  is  from  ao-ru, 
a  town,  and  means  originally  town-hred ;  hence  refined,  elegant, 
comely.  The  word  is  used  in  the  Septuagint  of  Moses  (Exod. 
ii.  2),  and  rendered  goodly.  The  Jewish  traditions  extol  Moses' 
beauty.  Josephns  says  that  those  who  met  him,  as  he  was  car- 
ried along  the  streets,  forgot  their  business  and  stood  still  to  gaze 
at  him. 

21.  Took  up  (aj/eiXero).  Used  among  Greek  writers  of  taking 
up  exposed  children ;  also  of  owning  new-born  children.  So 
Aristophanes :  "  I  exposed  (the  child)  and  some  other  woman, 
having  taken  it,  adopted  (aveiXeTo)  it  "  ("  Clouds,"  531).  There 
is  no  reason  why  the  meaning  should  be  limited  to  took  him 
up  from  the  water  (as  Gloag). 

23.  It  came  into  his  heart  (avk^r\  eirl  rfjv  KupSiav).  Lit., 
"  it  arose  into  his  heart."  "  There  may  be  something  in  the 
depth  of  the  soul  which  afterward  emerges  and  ascends  from 
that  sea  into  the  heart  as  into  an  island  "  (Bengel).     The  ex- 


480  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VII 

pression  is  imitated  from  the  Hebrew,  and  occurs  in  the  Sep- 
taagint:  "The  ark  shall  not  come  to  mind;"  lit,  go  itp  into 
the  heart  (Jer.  iii.  16).     See,  also,  Jer.  xxxii.  35 ;  Isa.  Ixv.  17. 

24.  Defended  {rifivvaro).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  means  originally  to  ward  off  from  one's  self,  with  a 
collateral  notion  of  requital  or  revenue. 

25.  Understood  (avviivat,).  See  on  understanding,  Mark 
xii.  33. 

26.  Appeared  (m^^ij).  With  the  suggestion  of  a  sudden 
appearance  as  in  a  vision ;  possibly  with  the  underlying  notion 
of  a  messenger  of  God.     See  on  Luke  xxii.  4:3. 

Would  have  set  them  at  one  {aw^'Xaa-ev  avrov^ ek  elpjjm^v). 
Lit.,  drove  them  together  to  peace;  urged  them. 

31.  The  sight  (to  opa/Mo).  Always  in  the  New  Testament 
of  a  vision.     See  on  Matt.  xvii.  9. 

To  behold  {Karavorja-at).  See  on  Matt.  vii.  3.  Compare 
Luke  xii.  24,  27. 

32.  Trembled  {evrpo/io';  yevo/jbevo'i).  Lit.,  having  iecome 
trembling  ;  having  fallen  into  a  tremor. 

34.  I  have  seen,  I  have  seen  {Ihibv  elBov).  Lit,  having 
seen  I  saw.  A  Hebraism.  See  Exod.  iii.  7  (Sept.).  Compare 
Judg.  i.  28:  utterly  drive  them  out;  lit.,  rem,oving  did  not 
utterly  remove.  Judg.  iv.  9  :  going  1  wUl  go  ;  i.e.,  /  will  surdy 
go.  Gen.  xxxvii.  8  :  reigning  shall  thou  reign;  i.e.,  shall  thou 
indeed  reign.     So  Rev.  here,  "  I  have  surely  seen." 

35.  Deliverer  (XvTpmrrjv).  Striciij,  a  ransomer  or  redeemer. 
Only  here  in  New  Testament.  See  on  ransom,  Matt.  xx.  28  ; 
and  7'ed^emed,  1  Pet.  i.  18, 


Ch.  VII.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  481 

By  the  hand  (eV  xeipt).  The  best  texts  read  <tvv  xeipl,  '^with 
the  hand ; "  i.e.,  im,  association  with  the  protecting  and  helping 
power  of  the  angeL 

38.  Lively.   Better,  living,  as  Eev.    Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  4,  6. 

39.  Turned  back  in  their  hearts.  Not  desiring  to  go 
back,  but  longing  for  the  idolatries  of  Egypt. 

40.  Shall  go  before  us.  As  symbols  to  be  borne  before 
them  on  the  march.     Compare  Neh.  ix.  18. 

41.  They  made  a  calf  (ifioa-'x^oiroiriaav).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament,  and  not  in  Septuagint.  Bengal  says,  "  A  very  noto- 
rious crime  is  denoted  by  an  extraordinary  and  newly-coined 
word."  This  was  in  imitation  of  the  Egyptian  bull-worship. 
Several  of  these  animals  were  worshipped  at  different  places  in 
Egypt.  Apis  was  worshipped  at  Memphis.  Herodotus  says: 
"  Now  this  Apis,  or  Epaphus,  is  the  calf  of  a  cow  which  is  never 
afterward  able  to  bear  young.  The  Egyptians  say  that  fire 
comes  down  from  heaven  upon  the  cow,  which  thereupon  con- 
ceives Apis.  The  calf  which  is  so  called  has  the  following 
marks  :  He  is  black,  with  a  square  spot  of  white  upon  his  fore- 
head, and  on  his  back  the  figure  of  an  eagle.  The  hairs  in  his 
tail  are  double,  and  there  is  a  beetle  upon  his  tongue  "  (iii.,  28). 
He  was  regarded  by  the  Egyptians,  not  merely  as  an  emblem, 
but  as  a  god.  He  was  lodged  in  a  magnificent  court,  orna- 
mented with  figures  twelve  cubits  high,  which  he  never  quitted 
except  on  fixed  days,  when  he  was  led  in  procession  through 
the  streets.  His  festival  lasted  seven  days,  and  all  came  for- 
ward from  their  houses  to  welcome  him  as  he  passed.  He  was 
not  allowed  to  reach  the  natural  term  of  his  life.  If  a  natural 
death  did  not  remove  him  earlier,  he  was  drowned  when  he 
reached  the  age  of  twenty-five,  and  was  then  embalmed  and 
entombed  in  one  of  the  sepulchral  chambers  of  the  Serapeum, 
a  temple  devoted  expressly  to  the  burial  of  these  animals. 

Another  sacred  bull  was  maintained  at  Heliopolis,  in  the  great 
Temple  of  the  Sun,  under  the  name  of  Mnevis,  and  was  hon- 
31 


482  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VII 

ored  with  a  reverence  next  to  Apis.  Wilkinson  thinks  that  it 
was  from  this,  and  not  from  Apis,  that  tlie  Israelites  borrowed 
their  notions  of  the  golden  calf.  "  The  offerings,  dancing,  and 
rejoicings  practised  on  the  occasion,  were  doubtless  in  imitation 
of  a  ceremony  they  had  witnessed  in  honor  of  Mnevis  during 
their  sojourn  in  Egypt "  ("  Ancient  Egyptians,"  2  ser.,  vol.  ii., 
p.  197).  A  third  sacred  bull,  called  Bacis,  was  maintained  at 
Hermonthis,  near  Thebes.  It  was  a  huge,  black  animal,  and 
its  hairs  were  said  to  grow  the  wrong  way.  Other  bulls  and 
cows  did  not  hold  the  rank  of  gods,  but  were  only  sacred. 

Offered  (avijjayov).     Lit.,  led  up.     See  on  Jas.  ii.  21. 

42.  To  worship  {XaTpeveiv).  Kev.,  more  correctly,  serve. 
See  on  Luke  i.  74. 

The  host  of  heaven.  Star-worship,  or  Sabaeanism,  the  rem- 
nant of  the  ancient  heathenism  of  Western  Asia,  which  con- 
sisted in  the  worship  of  the  stars,  and  spread  into  Syria,  though 
the  Chaldaean  religion  was  far  from  being  the  simple  worship 
of  the  host  of  heaven ;  the  heavenly  bodies  being  regarded  as 
real  persons,  and  not  mere  metaphorical  representations  of  as- 
tronomical phenomena.  It  is  to  the  Sabaean  worship  that  Job 
alludes  when,  in  asserting  the  purity  of  his  life  (xxxi.  26,  27), 
he  says :  "  If  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or  the  moon  walk- 
ing in  brightness,  and  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  enticed,  or 
my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  hands  :  this  also  were  an  iniquity  to 
be  punished  by  the  judge :  for  I  should  have  denied  the  God 
that  is  above."  Though  not  a  part  of  the  religion  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, Eawlinson  thinks  it  may  have  been  connected  with  their 
earlier  belief,  since  prayer  is  represented  in  hieroglyphics  by 
a  man  holding  up  his  hands,  accompanied  by  a  star  (Herodo- 
tus, vol.  ii.,  p.  291). 

43.  Tabernacle  of  Moloch.  The  portable  tent-temple  of 
the  god,  to  be  carried  in  procession.  Moloch  was  an  Ammonite 
idol  to  whom  children  were  sacrificed.  According  to  Rabbini- 
cal tradition,  his  image  was  hollow,  heated  from  below,  with  the 


ch.  vii.]  the  acts  op  the  apostles.  483 

head  of  an  ox  and  outstretched  arms,  into  which  children  were 
laid,  their  cries  being  stifled  by  the  beating  of  drums. 

Remphan.  The  texts  vary  between  Renvphan,  Rephan,  and 
Romphan.  It  is  supposed  to  be  the  Coptic  name  for  Saturn, 
to  which  the  Arabs,  Egyptians,  and  Phoenicians  paid  divine 
honors. 

45.  That  came  after  ihtahe^diievoC).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. The  verb  originally  means  to  recewefrom  one  another, 
in  succession  •  and  that  appears  to  be  the  more  simple  and 
natural  rendering  here :  homing  received  it  (from  Moses).  Rev., 
very  neatly,  in  their  turn. 

Jesus.  Joshua.  The  names  are  the  same,  both  signifying 
Sa/viour.     See  on  Matt.  i.  21. 

Into  the  possession  (eV  rfi  /caTaa-x^ea-ei).  Rev.,  when  they 
entered  on  the  possession.* 

Before  the  face  {airo  irpoaonrov).  More  strictly,  "amay 
from  the  face."  The  same  expression  occurs  in  the  Septuagint, 
Dent.  xi.  23. 

46.  Desired  {yrriaaTo).  More  correctly,  ashed:  through 
Nathan.     See  2  Sam.  vii.  2. 

Tabernacle  (vKr^vmiid).  It  was  not  a  tabernacle  or  tent 
which  David  proposed  to  build,  but  a  house.     See  2  Sam.  vii. 

*  The  A.  v.  apparently  assumes  that  sV,  in,  stands  for  cir,  into,  which  is  in- 
admissible. The  preposition  may  be  explained  as  combining  the  ideas  of  en- 
trance into  and  subsequent  rest ;  and  this  seems  to  be  the  explanation  adopted 
by  the  Rev.  Alford's  rendering,  at  tMiv  taking  possession  of  (he  Gentiles,  is 
condemned  by  the  fact  that  KaTdtrx^cis  does  not  mean  taking  possession,  but 
holding  possession,  which  is  clearly  the  meaning  in  ver.  5,  the  only  other  New 
Testament  passage  where  it  occurs.  Meyer,  in  his  anxiety  to  preserve  the 
strict  force  of  iy,  renders  during  the  possession  of  the  Gentiles,  or  while  the  Gen- 
tiles were  in  the  state  of  possession,  which,  though  grammatically  defensible,  I 
cannot  help  thinking  forced  and  unnatural.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  best  to 
hold  by  the  rendering  oi  the  Eev. 


484  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  VIL 

2.     Rev.,  rightly,  habitation.     Compare  oIkov,  a  house,  ver.  47. 
and  2  Chron.  vi.  18. 

48.  The  Most  High.  In  contrast  with  heathen  gods,  who 
were  confined  to  their  temples. 

Temples  made  with  hands  (;!^6tj0O7rowyTot?  vaoh).  The  best 
texts  omit  vook,  temples.  The  meaning  is  more  general :  in 
things  made  with  hands.  The  expression  is,  however,  used  of  a 
sanctuary  in  Isa.  xvi.  12  :  "  Moab  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary 
{to,  'x^etpoTrolrjTa)."  The  phrase  work,  or  works  of  tnen's  hands, 
is  common  in  the  Old  Testament  of  idols.  See  Deut.  iv.  28  ;  2 
Kings  xix.  18  ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  19  ;  Ps.  cxv.  4.  Compare  Mark 
xiv.  58  ;  Eph.  ii.  11 ;  Heb.  ix.  11,  24 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1. 

49.  What  house.  E,ev.,  more  correctly,  "  what  manner  of 
house"  (ttoiov). 

51.  Stiff-neclted  and  uncircumcised  {ffK\r)porpdx'n>^oi  koI 
aTrephfiTjToi,).     Both  only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Resist  {avTiTTiTTTeTe).  It  is  a  very  strong  expression,  imply- 
ing actwe  resistance.  Lit.,  to  fall  against  or  upon.  Used  of 
faUvng  upon  an  enemy.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Ye  have  been  {yey ivrjaJ^e).  More  correctly,  as  Rev.,  ye  ha/ve 
hecome. 

53.  Who  (oiTW'es).  Stronger  than  the  simple  relative  who,. 
and  emphasizing  their  sin  by  contrast  with  their  privileges :  in- 
asmuch as  ye  were  those  who  receimed,  etc. 

By  the  disposition  of  angels  (ek  huiTayh,<;  ayyeXmv).  Lit., 
unto  ordinances  of  angels.  Eh  means  with  reference  to.  Dis- 
position {Siarayiji)  is  used  by  A.  V.  in  the  sense  of  arrangement^ 
as  we  say  a  general  disposed  his  troops.  The  word  occurs  only 
here  and  Rom.  xiii.  2,  where  it  is  rendered  ordi7ianee.  The 
kindred  verb  BiaTacram  occurs,  often,  and  mostly  in  the  sense 


Ch.  VII.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  485 

of  command  or  ajppomt.  See  Matt.  xi.  1 ;  Luke  iii.  13.  In  1 
Cor.  xi.  34,  it  is  translated  set  in  order.  The  reference  is  most 
probabl}'  to  the  Jewish  tradition  that  the  law  was  given  through 
the  agency  of  angels.  See  Deut.  xxxiii.  2.  Compare  Ps.  Ixviii. 
17.  Paul  expressly  says  that  the  law  was  administered  hy  the 
msdAvmh  of  angels  (Gal.  iii.  19).  Compare  the  word  spohen  hy 
angels  (Heb.  ii.  2).  Render,  therefore,  as  Kev.,  as  it  was  or- 
dained hy  angels. 

54.  They  were  cut.  See  on  ch.  v.  33.  In  both  instances, 
of  am.ger.    A  different  word  is  used  to  express  remorse,  ch.  ii.  37. 

Gnashed  {e^pvxpv).  Originally  to  eat  greedily,  with  a  noise, 
as  wild  beasts :  hence  to  gnash  or  grind  the  teeth. 

55.  Being  {vTrapxtov).     See  on  Jas.  ii.  15. 

Looked  up  steadfastly.  Compare  ch.  i.  10  ;  iii.  4,  12  ;  vi. 
15  ;  and  see  on  Luke  iv.  20. 

Standing.  Rising  from  the  throne  to  protect  and  receive 
his  servant.  Usually  Jesus  is  represented  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  seated  at  the  Father's  right  hand.  See  Eph.  i.  20; 
Col.  iii.  1 ;  Heb.  i.  3. 

56.  I  see  {3-eiop&).     See  on  Luke  x.  18. 

The  Son  of  man.  A  title  never  applied  to  Christ  by  any 
of  the  apostles  or  evangelists,  except  here  by  Stephen.  See  on 
Luke  vi.  22. 

57.  Stopped  ((7wi'eff;!^oi').     Lit.,  held  together. 

58.  Stoned.  According  to  the  Eabbis,  the  scaffold  to  which 
the  criminal  was  to  be  led,  with  his  hands  bound,  was  to  be  twice 
the  size  of  a  man.  One  of  the  witnesses  was  to  smite  him  with 
a  stone  upon  the  breast,  so  as  to  throw  him  down.  If  he  were 
not  killed,  the  second  witness  was  to  throw  another  stone  at 


486  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THfi  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VII 

him.  Then,  if  he  were  yet  alive,  all  the  people  were  to  stone 
him  until  he  was  dead.  The  body  was  then  to  be  suspended 
till  sunset. 

A  young  man  {veaviov).  Which,  however,  gives  no  indica- 
tion of  his  age,  since  it  is  applied  up  to  the  age  of  forty-five. 
Thirty  years  after  Stephen's  martyrdom^  Paul  speaks  of  him- 
self as  the  aged  (Philem.  9). 

Saul.     The  first  mention  of  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles. 

59.  Calling  upon  God.  Ood  is  not  in  the  Greek.  From 
the  vision  just  described,  and  from  the  prayer  which  follows,  it 
is  evident  that  Jesus  is  meant.     So  Kev.,  t?ie  Lord. 

Jesus.     An  unquestionable  prayer  to  Christ. 

60.  Lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge  (/at;  a-T'^a-r]<s  avroK  rrjv 
afiapriav  TavTrjv).     jAt.,fix  not  this  sin  wpon  them. 

He  fell  asleep  {eKoifi'^Si]).  Marking  his  calm  and  peaceful 
death.  Though  the  pagan  authors  sometimes  used  sleep  to 
signify  death,  it  was  only  as  a  poetic  figure.  When  Christ,  on 
the  other  hand,  said,  "  Our  friend  Lazai-us  sleejpeih  {KSKolfji/qTai)," 
he  used  the  word,  not  as  a  figure,  but  as  the  expression  of  a 
fact.  In  that  mystery  of  death,  in  which  the  pagan  saw  only 
nothingness,  Jesus  saw  continued  life,  rest,  waking — the  ele- 
ments which  enter  into  sleep.  And  thus,  in  Christian  speech 
and  thought,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  struck  its  roots 
deeper,  the  word  dead,  with  its  hopeless  finality,  gave  place  to 
the  more  gracious  and  hopeful  word  sleep.  The  pagan  burying- 
place  carried  in  its  name  no  suggestion  of  hope  or  comfort.  It 
was  a  hurying-place,  a  hiding-place,  a  monumentum,  a  mere 
memorial  of  something  gone ;  a  columbarium,  or  dove-cot,  with 
its  little  pigeon-holes  for  cinerary  urns ;  but  the  Christian 
thought  of  death  as  sleep,  brought  with  it  into  Christian  speech 
the  kindred  thought  of  a  chamber  of  rest,  and  embodied  it  in 
the  word  cemetery  {Koi/j.rjT'^pi.ov) — the  place  to  lie  down  to  sleep. 


Ch.  viii.]  the  acts  op  the  apostles.  487 

CHAPTER    YIII. 

1.  Death  {avaipecreC).     Lit.,  taking  off.    See  on  Luke  xxiii.  32. 

2.  Devout.    See  on  Luke  ii.  25. 

Carried  to  his  burial  {a-vveicofiia-av).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Lit.,  to  carry  together ;  hence,  either  to  assist  in 
burying  or,  better,  to  bring  the  dead  to  the  company  {avv)  of 
the  other  dead.     The  word  is  used  of  bringing  in  harvest. 

Stephen  (Sri^avov).  Meaning  crown.  He  was  the  first 
who  received  the  martyr's  crown. 

Lamentation  («07reTw).  Lit.,  Jea^mp' (of  the  breast).  Only 
here  in  New  Testament. 

3.  Made  havoc  {eKv/iaivero).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
In  Septuagint,  Ps.  Ixxix.  13,  it  is  used  of  the  laying  waste  of  a 
vineyard  by  the  wild  boar.  Compare  Acts  ix.  21,  where  the 
A.  V.  has  destroyed,  but  where  the  Greek  is  ■jropS^a-a'i,  devas- 
tated. Canon  Farrar  observes  :  "  The  part  which  he  played  at 
this  time  in  the  horrid  work  of  persecution  has,  I  fear,  been 
always  underrated.  It  is  only  when  we  collect  the  separate 
passages — they  are  no  less  than  eight  in  number — in  which 
allusion  is  made  to  this  sad  period,*  it  is  only  when  we  weigh 
the  terrible  significance  of  the  expressions  used  that  we  feel 
the  load  of  remorse  which  must  have  lain  upon  him,  and  the 
taunts  to  which  he  was  liable  from  malignant  enemies"  ("Life 
and  Work  of  St.  Paul").  Note  the  imperfect,  of  continued 
action. 

5.  Philip.  The  deacon  (Acts  vi.  5).  Not  the  apostle.  On 
the  name,  see  on  Mark  iii.  18. 

*  See  Acts  viii.  3  ;  ix.  2  ;  xxii.  3,  4 ;  xxvi.  9,  10. 


488  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  VIU 

Christ  (tw  X/)fo-To'i').  Note  the  article,  '■Hhe  Christ,"  and 
see  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

He  did  {iiroiet).  Imperfect.  ICept  doing  from  time  to  time, 
as  is  described  in  the  next  verse. 

7.  Taken  with  palsies  {irapaXeKvfievoi).    Eev.,  more  neatly, 

palsied.     See  on  Luke  v.  18. 

Were  healed.    See  on  Luke  v.  15. 

9.  Used  sorcery  (jia^evmv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
One  of  the  wizards  so  numerous  throughout  the  East  at  that 
time,  and  multiplied  by  the  general  expectation  of  a  great 
deliverer  and  the  spread  of  the  Messianic  notions  of  the  Jews, 
who  practised  upon  the  credulity  of  the  people  by  conjuring 
and  juggling  and  soothsaying. 

Bewitched  (e'^to-Twi').  Better  a,a 'Rev.,  amased.  Seeonch. 
ii.7. 

10.  The  great  power  of  God.  The  best  texts  add  ■^  koXov- 
fievTj,  which  is  called,  and  render  that  power  of  God  which  is 
called  great.  They  believed  that  Simon  was  an  impersonated 
power  of  God,  which,  as  the  highest  of  powers,  they  designated 
as  the  great. 

11.  Bewitched.    Amazed,  z&ver.^. 

13.  Continued  with.     See  on  ch.  i.  14. 

Miracles  and  signs  (aT/fiela  koI  SvvdfjLei<;).  Lit.,  signs  and 
powers.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  20  ;  Acts  ii.  22. 

Which  were  done  (7ti/o/iei/as).  The  present  participle.  Lit, 
are  coming  to  pass. 

He  was  amazed.  After  having  amazed  the  people  by  his 
tricks.     See  ver.  9.     The  same  word  is  employed. 


Ch.  VXn.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  489 

14.  Samaria.    The  country,  uot  the  city.     See  vv.  5,  9. 

16.  They  were  {vir^p'xpv).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  16.  Rev.,  more 
literally,  had  been. 

In  the  name  (ew  to  ovofia).  Lit.,  "  into  the  name."  See  on 
Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

20.  Perish  with  thee  (<rw  <Toi  e'ir)  ek  avrnKeiav).  Lit.,  le 
along  with  thee  unto  destruction.  Destruction  overtake  thy 
money  and  thyself. 

21.  Part  nor  lot.  Lot  expresses  the  same  idea  as^osr^,  biit 
figuratively. 

Matter  (Xoyw).  The  matter  of  which  we  are  talking:  the 
subject  of  discourse,  as  Luke  i.  4  ;  Acts  xv.  6. 

Right  (ev^eta).     Lit.,  straight. 

22.  If  perhaps.  The  doubt  suggested  by  the  heinousness  of 
the  offence. 

Thought  fykirivoiob).  Only  here  in  ITew  Testament.  Lit.,  a 
thinking  on  or  contriving;  and  hence  implying  a,j)lan  or  design. 

23.  In  the  gall  (et?  ^oX^v).  Lit.,  into.  Thou  hast  fallen 
into  and  continuest  in.  Oall,  only  here  and  Matt,  xxvii.  34. 
Gall  qfhitterness  is  bitter  enmity  against  the  Gospel. 

Bond  of  iniquity  {a-vvBea-fiov  aSt/et'a?).  Thou  bast  fallen  into 
iniquity  as  into  fetters.  The  word  avvhea-fiov  denotes  a  close, 
firm  bond  {a-vv,  together).  It  is  used  of  the  bond  of  Christian 
peace  (Eph.  iv.  3) ;  of  the  close  compacting  of  the  church 
represented  as  a  body  (Col.  ii.  19) ;  and  of  love  as  the  hand  of 
perfectness  (Col.  iii.  14).     See  Isa.  Iviii.  6. 

26.  The  south  (fiea-rjii^piav).  A  contracted  form  of  fiea-rj- 
fiepia,  midday,  noon,  which  is  the  rendering  at  Acts  xxii.  6, 


490  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  VIH 

the  only  other  passage  where  it  occurs.  Rev.  gives  at  noon  in 
margin. 

Desert.  Kef  erring  to  the  route.  On  desert,  see  on  Luke 
XV.  4.  There  were  several  roads  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza.  One 
is  mentioned  by  the  way  of  Bethlehem  to  Hebron,  and  thence 
through  a  region  actually  called  a  desert. 

27.  Of  Ethiopia.  The  name  for  the  lands  lying  south  of 
Egypt,  including  the  modern  Nubia,  Cordofan,  and  Northern 
Abyssinia.  Eawlinson  speaks  of  subjects  of  the  Ethiopian 
queens  living  in  an  island  near  Meroe,  in  the  northern  part 
of  this  district.  Pie  further  remarks  :  "  The  monuments  prove 
beyond  all  question  that  the  Ethiopians  borrowed  from  Egypt 
their  religion  and  their  habits  of  civilization.  They  even 
adopted  the  Egyptian  as  the  language  of  religion  and  of  the 
court,  which  it  continued  to  be  till  the  power  of  the  Pha- 
raohs had  fallen,  and  their  dominion  was  again  confined  to  the 
frontier  of  Ethiopia.  It  was  through  Egypt,  too,  that  Christi- 
anity passed  into  Ethiopia,  even  in  the  age  of  the  apostles,  as  is 
shown  by  the  eunuch  of  Queen  Candace." 

Of  great  authority  {Svvd(TTr)s;).  A  general  term  for  a  po- 
tentate. 

Candace.  The  common  name  of  the  queens  of  Meroe :  a 
titular  distinction,  like  Pharaoh  in  Egypt,  or  Caesar  at  Rome. 

Treasure  {yd^r]^).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  A  Per- 
sian word. 

29.  Join  thyself  (/coXXtj^ijti).     See  on  Luke  xv.  15  ;  x.  11 ; 

Acts  V.  12. 

30.  Understandest  thou  what  thou  read  est  (apa  7674^0)- 

a-KeK  h  dvayivcoa-KeK) ;  The  play  upon  the  words  cannot  be 
translated.  The  interrogative  particles  which  begin  the  ques- 
tion indicate  a  doubt  on  Philip's  part. 


Oh.  IX.]         THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  491 

31.  How  can  I  (ttw?  7ap  av  hwaifi/rfvy.  Lit.,/w  how  should 
I  he  able  ?  the  for  connecting  the  question  with  an  implied 
negative  :  "  No  ;  for  how  could  I  understand  except,"  etc. 

32.  The  place  of  the  scripture  {f)  irepioxv  rrj^  ypacjyfjti). 
Strictlj,  the  contents  of  the  passage.  See  on  Mark  xii.  10;  1 
Pet.  ii.  6. 

He  read.     Eev.,  correctly,  was  reading ;  imperfect. 

33.  Humiliation.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  29. 

Generation.  His  contemporaries.  Who  shall  declare  their 
wickedness  ? 

35.  Opened  his  mouth.  Indicating  a  solemn  announce- 
ment.   Compare  Matt.  v.  2. 

37.  The  best  texts  omit  this  verse. 

39.  Caught  away.     Suddenly  and  miraculously. 

And  he  went,  etc.  (eVopevero  7^/9).  A  mistranslation.  Kev., 
rightly,  "for  he  went."  A  reason  is  given  for  the  eunuch's 
seeing  Philip  no  more.  He  did  not  stop  nor  take  another  road 
to  seek  him,  but  went  on  his  way. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  Breathing  out  {itnrvimv).  Lit.,  Ireathmg  wpon  or  at, 
and  so  corresponding  to  against  the  disciples. 

Threatenings  and  slaughter  {aireiXrj'i  kuI  ^ovov).  Lit., 
threatening;  so  Eev.  In  the  Greek  construction,  the  case  in 
which  these  words  are  marks  them  as  the  cause  or  source  of  the 
"  breathing; "  breathing  hard  omz!  ^  threatening,  and  murderous 
desire. 


492  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX 

2.  Of  this  way  (t^9  oBov).  Eev.,  more  correctly,  "the  way." 
A  common  expression  in  the  Acts  for  the  Christian  religion: 
"  the  characteristic  direction  of  life  as  determined  by  faith  on 
Jesus  Christ"  (Meyer).  See  ch.  xix.  9  ;  xxii.  4 ;  xxiv.  22.  For 
the  fuller  expression  of  the  idea,  see  ch.  xvi.  17 ;  xviii.  25. 

Women.  Paul  three  times  alludes  to  his  persecution  of 
women  as  an  aggravation  of  his  cruelty  (ch.  viii.  3 ;  ix.  2 ; 
xxii.  4). 

3.  There  shined  round  about  {irepiijaTpaylrev).  Only  here 
and  ch.  xxii.  6.     Flashed.     See  on  Luke  xi.  36 ;  xxiv.  4. 

A  light.     Compare  ch.  xxii.  6  ;  xxvi.  13. 

4.  Saying.  In  Paul's  own  account  he  says  that  the  words 
were  spoken  in  Hebrew  (ch.  xxvi.  14). 

5.  It  is  hard  for  thee,  etc.     Transferred  from  ch.  xxvi.  14, 

and  omitted  by  the  best  texts. 

6.  Trembling  and  astonished.     The  best  texts  omit. 

7.  Speechless  {eveot).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

11.  Street  (pvfirjv).  See  on  Luke  xiv.  21.  A  na/rrow  street 
or  lane. 

Straight.  So  called  from  its  running  in  a  direct  line  from 
the  eastern  to  the  western  gate  of  the  city. 

15.  Chosen  vessel  (o-Aceuo?  iKkoyfjs;).  Lit,  an  instrument 
of  choice.  On  vessel,  see  on  Matt.  xii.  29 ;  and  on  the  figure, 
compare  2  Cor.  iv.  7. 

16.  How  great  things  iftad).    Rev.,  more  correctly,  how 

many. 

17.  Brother.     In  Christ. 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  493 

18.  There  fell — scales  {airi-jreaov — XeTr/Se?).  Both  words 
occur  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  In  Paul's  own  account 
of  his  conversion  in  ch.  xxvi.  he  does  not  mention  his  blindness : 
in  ch.  xxii.  he  mentions  both  the  blindness  and  tlie  recovery  of 
sight,  but  not  the  particular  circumstances  which  Luke  records. 
The  mention  of  the  scales,  or  incrustations,  such  as  are  incidental 
to  ophthalmia,  is  characteristic  of  the  physician,  and  aironrlir- 
Teiv,  to  fall  off,  was  used  technically  by  medical  wi'iters  of  the 
falling  of  scales  from  the  skin,  and  of  particles  from  diseased 
parts  of  the  body.  "  We  may  suppose  that  Luke  had  often 
heard  Paul  relate  how  he  felt  at  that  moment"  (Hackett). 

20.  Christ.  The  correct  reading  is  Jesus,  the  individual  or 
personal  name  of  the  Lord.  Christ  was  not  yet  current  as  his 
personal  name.  Paul's  object  was  to  establish  the  identity  of 
Jesus  the  Nazarene  with  the  Messiah. 

21.  Destroyed  (■n-o/a.Siyo-a?).  'Ra,\\\ei;  laid  waste,  made  ha/ooo 
of,  as  Rev.  Compare  ch.  viii.  3.  Paul  uses  the  same  word  in 
Gal.  i.  13. 

22.  Confounded.     See  on  ch.  ii.  6. 

Proving  {a-vfi^i^d^mv).  The  verb  means  to  bring  or  put  to- 
gether :  hence  to  compare  and  examine,  as  evidence,  and  so  to 
prove.  Used  in  the  literal  and  physical  sense  in  Eph.  iv.  16. 
In  Col.  ii.  2,  of  being  hnit  together  in  love.  In  1  Cor.  ii.  16,  of 
instructing,  huildvng  up,  by  putting  together.  In  this  sense 
the  word  occurs  in  the  Septuagint.  See  Levit.  x.  11 ;  Judg. 
xiii.  8. 

The  Christ.  Note  the  article.  Not  a. proper  name,  but  an 
a/ppellatvoe.     See  on  ver.  20. 

23.  To  kill.     See  on  Lukexxiii.  32. 

24.  Laying  await  (eVi/SouX^).  So  rendered  by  A.  Y.  wher- 
ever it  occurs,  viz.,    ch.  xx.  3,  19 ;   xxiii.    30 ;  but  properly 


494  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IX. 

changed  by  Kev.,  in  every  case,  io  plot.     "  Laying  await "  refers 
rather  to  the  execution  of  the  plot  than  to  the  plot  itself. 

Watched.  See  on  Mark  iii.  2.  Inaperfect:  they  were  or 
hejit  watching,  day  and  night. 

.25.  By  the  wall  (Sta  rov  recxovi).  Eev.,  more  accurately, 
through  the  wall,  as  is  explained  by  2  Cor.  xi.  33.  Either 
through  the  window  of  a  house  overhanging  the  wall,  or  through 
a  window  in  the  wall  itself  opening  to  houses  on  its  inner  side. 
Hackett  says  that  he  observed  such  v^indows  in  the  wall  at 
Damascus.  On  the  mode  of  escape,  compare  Josh.  ii.  15 ;  1 
Sam.  xix.  12. 

Basket  {airvpihi).  See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20.  In  Paul's  account 
of  this  adventure  he  uses  crapjavrj,  a  plaited  or  braided  basket 
of  wicker-work ;  or,  as  some  think,  of  ropes. 

26.  Join  himself.     See  on  ch.  v.  13  ;  Luke  xv.  15  ;  x.  11. 

27.  Declared  {Sirjjija-aTo).  Related  throughout.  See  on 
Luke  viii.  39 ;   and  compare  on  declaration,  Luke  i.  1. 

Had  preached  boldly  {i-rrapprjo-ida-aTo).  See  oxv  freely,  ch. 
ii.  29. 

29.  Grecians.  Eev.,  correctly,  Grecian  Jews.  See  on  ch. 
vi.  1. 

Went  about  {iirexetpow).  Better,  attempted:  lit.,  took  in 
hand. 

31.  The  churches.  The  best  texts  read  the  church  ;  em- 
bracing all  the  different  churches  throughout  the  three  prov- 
inces of  Palestine. 

E  d  if i  e  d .     Or  built  up. 


Ch.  IX.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  495 

C  o  mf  0  rt  {irapaKkrirTet) .  From  irapaKoKiw,  to  call  toward  or  to 
one^s  side  for  help.  The  word  is  rendered  in  the  New  Testament 
both  exhortation  and  consolation.  Compare  Acts  xiii.  15  ;  Rom. 
xii.  8  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  17 ;  Heb.  xii.  5  ;  and  Luke  ii.  25  (see  note) ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  16 ;  Matt.  v.  4.  In  some  passages  the  meaning  is 
disputed,  as  Philip,  ii.  1,  where,  as  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  3,  it  is  joined 
with  Trapafiv^iov  or  vapafivS^ia,  the  meaning  of  which  also  varies 
between  incenti/oe  and  consolation  or  assuagement.  Here  ex- 
hortation is  the  rendering  approved  by  the  best  authorities,  to  be 
construed  with  was  multiplied :  was  mvltiplied  iy  the  exhorta- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  i.e.,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  inspiring  the 
preachers,  and  moving  the  hearts  of  the  hearers. 

32.  Lydda.  The  Lod  of  the  Old  Testament  (Ezra  ii.  33) ; 
about  a  day's  journey  from  Jerusalem. 

33.  Eight  years.  The  duration  of  the  malady,  and  the  fact 
of  his  having  been  bedridden  for  the  whole  time,  are  character- 
istic of  the  physician's  narrative. 

Bed.     See  on  Mark  ii.  14. 

Sick  of  the  palsy.  Better,  as  'Rqy., palsied.  See  on  Luke 
V.  18. 

34.  Jesus  Christ.  But  note  the  article  :  Jesus  ^Ae  Christ ; 
the  AnoiMed ;  Messiah. 

Maketh  thee  whole  (tara/ffe).  'Rev. ,healeth  thee.  See  on 
Luke  vi.  19. 

Make  thy  bed  (a-Tp&a-ov  ffeavrm).  Lit.,  stm-ew  for  thyself. 
Not,  hericeforth,  but  on  the  spot,  as  an  evidence  of  restoration. 

35.  Saron.  Eev.,  properly, /S'Aijit'ow.  Always  with  the  defi- 
nite article :  the  plaJin ;  extending  thirty  miles  along  the  sea 
from  Joppa  to  Oaesarea.. 


496  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

36.  Disciple  (jiaSijTpia).    A  feminine  form,  only  here  in 

New  Testament. 

Tabitha — Dorcas.  The  latter  word  being  the  Greek  equiv- 
alent of  the  former,  which  is  Aramaic,  and  meaning  gazelle, 
which  in  the  East  was  a  favoi'ite  type  of  beauty.  See  Song  of 
Solomon  ii.  9,  17 ;  iv.  5 ;  vii.  3.  It  was  customary  at  this 
time  for  the  Jews  to  have  two  names,  one  Hebrew  and  the 
other  Greek  or  Latin  ;  and  this  would  especially  be  the  case  in 
a  seaport  like  Joppa,  which  was  both  a  Gentile  and  a  Jewish 
town.     She  may  have  been  known  by  both  names. 

37.  Upper  chamber.    See  on  ch.  i.  13. 

38.  That  lie  would  not  delay  (/ii)  oKurjcrai).  The  best  texts 
read  oKvrjtrri';,  putting  the  request  in  the  form  of  a  direct  ad- 
dress, Delay  not. 

To  come  (^ie\^elv).     Lit.,  to  come  through.     Rev.,  come  on, 

39.  Coats  and  garments.    See  on  Matt.  v.  40. 
Which  (Sera).     Lit.,  as  many  as. 

Made  {iiroCeC).     The  imperfect :  was  accustomed  to  mahe. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  Centurion.    See  on  Luke  vii.  2. 

Band  {a-ij-elprf;).     See  on  Mark  xv.  16. 

Italian.    Probably  because  consisting  of  Roman  soldiers  and 
not  of  natives  of  the  country. 

2.  Devout  {eva-e^Tjs:).     See  on  godliness,  2  Pet.  i.  3. 


Ch.  X.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  497 

Prayed  (Seo/ici/o?).     See  onprayers,  Luke  v.  33. 

"  XJnheard  by  all  but  angel  ears 
The  good  Cornelius  knelt  alone, 
Nor  dream'd  his  prayers  and  tears 
Would  help  a  world  undone. 

"  The  while  upon  his  terrac'd  roof 
The  lov'd  apostle  to  his  Lord, 
In  silent  thought  aloof 

For  heavenly  vision  soared." 

Kbble,  Christian  Tear. 

3.  A  vision.    See  on  ch.  vii.  31. 

Evidently  {(jiavepm).    Better,  clearly  or  distinctly,  as  op 
posed  to  a  fancy. 

4.  When  he  looked  (dT6i»icra?).  Eev.,  more  accurately, /as- 
tening  his  eyes.     Compare  ch.  vii.  55  ;  and  see  on  Luke  iv.  20. 

6.  A  tanner.  Showing  that  the  strictness  of  the  Jewish  law 
was  losing  its  hold  on  Peter ;  since  the  tanner's  oecnpation  was 
regarded  as  unclean  by  strict  Jews,  and  the  tanners  were  com- 
manded to  dwell  apart.  "  If  a  tanner  married  without  men- 
tioning his  trade,  his  wife  was  permitted  to  get  a  divorce.  The 
law  of  levirate  marriage  might  be  set  aside  if  the  brother-in-law 
of  the  childless  widow  was  a  tanner.  A  tanner's  yard  must  be  at 
least  fifty  cubits  from  any  town  "  (Farrar,  "  Life  and  Work  of 
St.  Paul"). 

By  the  seaside.  Outside  the  walls,  both  for  proximity  to 
the  business,  and  because  of  the  ceremonial  requirement  re- 
ferred to  above.  Mr.  William  C.  Prime,  describing  a  visit  to 
Joppa,  says  :  "I  was  walking  along  the  sea-beach,  looking  for 
shells,  and  at  about  a  fourth  of  a  mile  from  the  city,  to  the 
southward,  I  found  two  tanneries  directly  on  the  seaside.  I  ob- 
served that  the  rocks  in  front  of  them  were  covered  with  the 
water  a  few  inches  deep,  and  that  they  soaked  their  hides  on 
these  rocks,  and  also  submitted  them  to  some  process  iu  the 
32 


498  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X 

water  which  I  did  not  stop  to  understand  "  ("  Tent-life  in  the 
Holy  Land  ")• 

Of  them  that  waited  on  him  continually  (Trpoa-Kaprepovv- 
>rci}v  avTw).     See  on  ch.  i.  14. 

8.  Declared  {e^rjy7]crd/jLevo<;).  Better,  as  Eev.,  rehearsed. 
See  on  Luke  xxiv.  35. 

9.  They  {eKeivatv).  Those  messengers,  the  servants  and  the 
soldier.  The  pronoun  has  a  more  specific  reference  than  the 
English  they. 

10.  Very  hungry  (-Trpoa-Treivo^).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

Would  have  eaten  (^^eXe  yevcraal^ai).  Kev.,  correctly,  de- 
sii'ed  to  eat.  TeviaS^ai  is  rendered  both  to  eat  and  to  taste,  more 
frequently  the  latter.  See  Matt,  xxvii.  34  ;  John  ii.  9  ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  3  ;  and  compare  Acts  xx.  11. 

He  fell  into  a  trance  {iweTrecrev  iir  amov  eKa-Tacnt;).  Lit., 
an  ecstasy  fell  upon  h.im.  The  best  texts,  however,  read  iyevero, 
came  upon  him,  or  happened  to  him.  See  on  astonishment, 
Mark  v.  42.  Luke  alone  employs  the  word  in  this  sense  of 
ecstasy  or  trance. 

11.  Saw  (.^ecopet).  Eev.,  better,  and  more  literally,  'beholdeth. 
See  on  Luke  x.  18.  The  present  tense  is  graphically  introduced 
into  the  narrative. 

Unto  him.     The  best  texts  omit. 

Sheet  {o^ovr]v).  Only  here  and  ch.  xi.  5.  Originally  .^n« 
linen ;  later,  sail-cloth  or  a  sail.  Dr.  J.  Rawson  Lumby  sug- 
gests that  the  word,  "  applied  to  loose,  bellying  sails  of  ships," 
may  indicate  that  the  form  of  vessel  which  appeared  to  Peter 
"  recalled   an  image  most  familiar  to    his  previous  life the 


Ch.  X.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  499 

wind-stretched  canvas  of  the  craft  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee" 
(«  Expositor,"  iii.,  272). 

Knit  (SeBefiivov).  If  this  is  retained,  we  must  render  hovmd, 
or  attached ;  but  the  best  texts  omit,  together  with  the  follow- 
ing and.  Render,  as  Rev.,  let  down  hyfov/r  corners.  Compare 
ch.  xi.  6. 

Corners  {ap')(al<;).  Lit.,  hegmnings  /  the  extremity  or  corner, 
marking  a  beginning  of  the  sheet.  "  We  are  to  imagine  the 
vessel,  looking  like  a  colossal  four-cornered  linen  cloth,  letting 
itself  down,  while  the  corners  attached  to  heaven  to  support  the 
whole."  The  word  is  used  in  this  sense  by  Herodotus,  describ- 
ing the  sacrifices  of  the  Scythians.  The  victim's  forefeet  are 
bound  with  a  cord,  "  and  the  person  who  is  about  to  offer, 
taking  his  station  behind  the  victim,  pulls  the  end  {u-pyjiv)  of 
the  rope,  and  thereby  throws  the  animal  down  "  (iv.,  60).  The 
suggestion  of  ropes  holding  the  corners  of  the  sheet  (Alf  ord,  and, 
cautiously,  Farrar)  is  unwarranted  by  the  usage  of  the  word.  It 
was  the  technical  expression  in  medical  language  for  the  ends  of 
iandages.  The  word  for  sheet  in  this  passage  was  also  the 
technical  terra  for  a  handage,  as  was  the  kindred  word  o^oviov, 
used  of  the  linen  iandages  in  which  the  Lord's  body  was 
swathed.  See  Luke  xxiv.  12  ;  John  xix.  40 ;  xx.  5,  6,  Y.  Mr. 
Hobart  says :  "  "We  have  thus  in  this  passage  a  technical  medi- 
cal phrase — the  ends  of  a  bandage — used  for  the  ends  of  a 
sheet,  which  hardly  any  one  except  a  medical  man  would  think 
of  employing  "  ("  Medical  Language  of  St.  Luke  "). 

12.  All  manner  of  four-footed  beasts  (Trai/TaT^Ter/jtiTroSa). 
Lit.,  all  the  four-footed  l)easts.  Without  exception,  clean  and 
unclean.     Not,  of  very  many  hinds. 

Wild  beasts.     The  best  texts  omit. 

14.  Not  so  (jj/r)8afi5)^).  Stronger:  hy  no  means.  "With 
that  simple  and  audacious  self-confidence  which  in  his  (Peter's) 
character  was  so  singularly  mingled  with  fits  of  timidity  and 


500  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

depression,  he  boldly  corrects  the  voice  which  orders  him,  and 
reminds  the  divine  Interlocutor  that  he  must,  so  to  speak,  have 
made  an  oversight "  (Farrar,  "  Life  and  Works  of  Paul  ")■  Com- 
pare Matt.  xvi.  22. 

Common  {kolvov).     Unholy. 

15.  Call  not  thou  common  (a-u  fjur)  koIvov).  The  thought 
goes  deeper  than  merely  stylmg  "  common."  Lit.,  do  not  thou 
defile.  Do  n.ot profane  it  by  regarding  and  calling  it  common. 
Eev.,  "  make  not  thou  common.''^ 

17.  Doubted  [SiTj-n-opei,).     See  on  Luke  ix.  7. 

In  himself.  On  reflection,  as  compared  with  his  ecstatic 
state. 

Had  made  inquiry  (StejOWT^o-ovre?).  "Having  inquired 
out ;  "  having  asked  their  way  through  (Sta)  streets  and  houses, 
until  they  found  the  dwelling  of  the  tanner,  who  was  an  obscure 
man,  and  not  easily  found. 

18.  Called,  A  general  summons  to  any  one  within,  in  order 
to  make  inquiries. 

19.  Thought  on  {Siev^vfiovfievov).  Was  earnestVy  (Bid)  pon- 
dering. 

22.  Was  warned  (ej^pj;^aT«r^).     See  on  Matt.  ii.  12. 

24.  Near  {dpar/Kaiov;).  The  word  originally  means  neces- 
sary /  hence  of  those  who  are  bound  by  necessary  or  natural 
ties  ;  Mood-relations.  But  as  relatives  or  kinsmen  is  expressed 
by  avyyeveli;,  this  must  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  intimate 
friends,  a  meaning  which  it  has  in  later  Greek  writers. 

25.  Worshipped  {irpoo-eicvvria-ev).  An  unfortunate  transla- 
tion, accoi'ding  to  modern  English  usage,  but  justified  by  the 


Ch.  X.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  501 

usage  of  earlier  English,  according  to  which  to  worshvp  meant 
simply  to  honor.  Worship  is  worthshvp,  or  honor  paid  to  dig- 
nity or  worth.  This  usage  survives  in  the  expressions  worshi/p- 
ful  and  your  worship.  In  the  marriage-service  of  the  English 
Church  occurs  the  phrase,  "  With  m j  body  I  thee  worshijpP 
So  Wycliffe  renders  Matt.  xix.  19,  "  Worship  thy  father  and  thy 
mother; "  and  John  xii.  26,  "  If  any  man  serve  me,  my  Father 
shall  worship  him."  Here  the  meaning  is  that  Cornelius  paid 
reverence  by  prostrating  himself  after  the  usual  oriental 
manner. 

28.  An  unlawful  thing  (aSe/atToi;).  The  word  is  peculiar  to 
Peter,  being  used  only  here  and  1  Pet.  iv.  3.  See  note  there. 
It  emphasizes  the  violation  of  established  order,  being  from  the 
same  root  as  t13^/j,i,,  to  lay  down  or  establish.  The  Jews  pro- 
fessed to  ground  this  prohibition  on  the  law  of  Moses ;  but  there 
is  no  direct  command  in  the  Mosaic  law  forbidding  Jews  to  as- 
sociate with  those  of  other  nations.  But  Peter's  statement  is 
general,  referring  to  the  general  practice  of  the  Jews  to  sepa- 
rate themselves  in  common  life  from  uncircumcised  persons. 
Juvenal  says  that  the  Jews  were  taught  by  Moses  "not  to 
show  the  way  except  to  one  who  practises  the  same  rites, 
and  to  guide  the  circumcised  alone  to  the  well  which  they 
seek  "  (Sat.,  xiv.,  104,  105).  Tacitus  also  says  of  the  Jews  that 
"  among  themselves  they  are  inflexibly  faithful,  and  ready  with 
charitable  aid,  but  hate  all  others  as  enemies.  They  keep 
separate  from  all  strangers  in  eating,  sleeping,  and  matrimonial 
connections  "  ("  Histories,"  v.,  5). 

Of  another  nation  (aWo^uXw).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment.    Used  of  the  Philistines,  1  Sam.  xiii.  3-5  (Sept.). 

Me.  Emphatic,  by  contrast  with  ye.  "Ye  know,"  etc.,  "but 
Grod  hath  showed  me." 

29.  With  what  intent  {rivi  Xoya).  More  strictly,/cir  what 
reason. 


602  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  X. 

30.  Four  days  ago  {dirb  reTdpTr)<;  '^/juipa^).  Lit.,  from  the 
fourth  day;  reckoning  backward  from  the  day  on  which  he  was 
speaking. 

I  was  fasting,  and.     The  best  texts  omit. 

At  the  ninth  hour  I  prayed  (j^v  ivvdrtiv  Trpoo-ei^j^o/tej'o?). 
JAt.,  j>rayi/ng  ckiring  the  ninth  hour.  "With  the  omission  of  / 
was  fasting,  and,  the  rendering  is  as  Kev.,  Foicr  days  ago, 
until  this  hov/r,  I  was  heejying  the  nimth  hour  ofpra/yer.* 

31.  Said  {(fyrjo-i).  Eev.,  saith.  The  historical  present,  giving 
vividness  to  the  narrative. 

33.  Weil  («a\w?).  You  have  done  a  courteous  and  handsome 
thing  in  coming.     Compare  3  John  5,  6. 

34.  I  perceive.     See  on  ch.  iv.  13. 

Respecter  of  persons  (Trpoo-wTroXjj^TrrT??).  See  on  respect 
of  persons,  Jas.  ii.  1.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

36.  The  word  (j6v  \6yov).    The  message. 

37.  That  word  {prifia).  The  contents  of  the  message:  the 
report  or  history  which  it  proclaimed. 

38.  Anointed  {expKrev).     See  on  Christ,  Matt.  i.  1. 

Went  about  {SiTjX^ev).  Lit.,  went  through  (the  country). 
Compare  ch.  viii.  4. 

And  healing.  The  and  {kuI)  has  a  particularizing  force :  do- 
ing good,  and  in  particular,  healing. 


*  It  must  be  confessed  that  this  statement,  as  thus  amended  is  obscure  and 
that  the  rendering  would  be  greatly  simplified  by  retaining  the  omitted  words, 
as  is  done  by  several  high  authorities,  as  Meyer,  Alford,  Hackett,  Gloag  De 
Wette,  though  against  strong  MS.  evidence.  They  explain  the  omissioA  in. 
these  MSS.  by  the  fact  that  no  mention  of  fasting  is  made  in  ver  3 


Ch.  X.]  THE   ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  503 

Oppressed  (/earaSwao-Teuo/Aevou?).     Only  here  and  Jas.  ii.  6, 

on  which  see  note. 

39.  They  slew.  The  best  texts  insert  koX,  also:  "whom 
also  they  slew ;  "  also  having  an  incressive  force.  They  added 
this  crowning  atrocity  to  other  persecutions. 

Tree.     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  31. 

40.  Shewed  him  openly  {eSeoKev  avrbv  e/i^avfj  yevecrl^ai). 
Lit.,  gave  Mm  to  iecome  manifest.  Compare,  for  the  construc- 
tion, ch.  ii.  27. 

41.  Chosen  before  (7rpoKeyei,poTovrjfiivoi<;).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  The  simple  verb  ^etporoi/ew,  to  anoint,  oc- 
curs Acts  xiv.  23 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  19  ;  and  originally  means  to 
stretch  out  the  hand  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  vote.  Hence 
to  elect  by  show  of  hands,  and  generally  to  ajtpoint.  Plato  uses 
the  word  of  the  election  of  leaders  of  choruses  ("  Laws,"  765). 
In  later  ecclesiastical  usage  it  signified  ordain,  as  bishops  or 
deacons. 

Who  (otTH'e?).  The  compound  pronoun  marks  them  more 
strongly  as  belonging  to  the  class  of  eye-witnesses. 

42.  Testify  (Sia/uipTvpaa-l^ai).     See  on  ch.  ii.  40. 
Remission.     See  on  Luke  iii.  3  ;  Jas.  v.  15. 

43.  His  name.  As  in  the  Lord's  prayer:  not  simply  the 
title,  but  all  that  is  embraced  and  expressed  by  the  name: 
Christ's  "  entire  perfection,  as  the  object  revealed  to  the  believer 
for  his  apprehension,  confession,  and  worship  "  (Meyer). 

44.  TheHolyGhostfell.  The  only  example  of  the  bestow- 
ment  of  the  Spirit  before  baptism. 

45.  They  of  the  circumcision.  From  this  point  Luke  dis- 
tinguishes Christians  into  two  classes — those  of  the  circumcision 


504  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XI 

and  those  of  the  uncircumcision  ;  calling  the  former  Jews,  and 
the  latter  Gentiles  or  GreeJcs. 

Were  amazed.     See  on  ch.  ii.  7. 

47.  Water  (rovScop).  Note  the  article:  the  water;  co-ordi- 
nating the  water  with  tlie  Spirit  (see  1  John  v.  8),  and  designat- 
ing water  as  the  recognized  and  customary  element  of  baptism. 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  In  Judaea  («aTaT^i''IovSatai').  More  correctly,  "  fAroMp'A- 
out  Judaea." 

2.  They  of  the  circumcision.     See  on  ch.  x.  45. 

3.  Men  uncircumcised  {avhpa'i  uKpo^vaTiav  exovras;).  An 
indignant  expression.     See  Eph.  ii.  11. 

4.  Began.  Graphically  indicating  the  solemn  purport  of  the 
speech  (compare  Luke  jcii.  1),  or  perhaps,  in  connection  with 
expounded,  his  beginning  with  the  first  circumstances  and  going 
through  the  whole  list  of  incidents. 

6.  I  considered.     See  on  Matt.  vii.  3 ;  Luke  xxii.  24,  27. 

12.  Nothing  doubting  {/j/rjSev  BiuKpivo/ievov).  The  Eev. 
renders  inaking  no  distinction,  taking  the  verb  in  its  original 
sense,  which  is  to  separate  or  distinguish.  The  rendering  seems 
rather  strained,  doubting  being  a  common  rendering  in  the  New 
Testament  and  giving  a  perfectly  good  sense  here.  See  Matt, 
xxi.  21 ;  Mark  xi.  23,  and  note  on  Jas.  i.  6.  It  was  natural  that 
Peter  should  hesitate. 

The  six  brethren.  The  men  of  Joppa  who  had  gone  with 
Peter  to  Cornelius,  and  had  accompanied  him  also  to  Jerusalem, 
either  as  witnesses  for  him  or  for  their  own  vindication,  since 
they  had  committed  the  same  offence. 


Ch.  XL]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  505 

13.  An  angel.  It  has  the  definite  article:  " the  a.ngel,'" 
mentioned  in  ch.  x. 

17.  Forasmuch  as  {el).    Better,  as  Eev.,  if. 

The  like  (tcriji').  lAt.,  equal/  making  them,  ^^"Ma^Zy  with  us, 
recipients  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

19.  They  which  were  scattered  abroad  (oiSiaa-'n-apivTe';). 
On  the  technical  expression,  the  dispersion,  see  on  1  Pet.  i.  1. 
Not  so  used  here. 

20.  The  Greeks ("E\\7;i;a?).  Some,  however,  read  'EWtj- 
via-Tci^,  the  Grecicm  Jews.  See  on  ch.  vi.  1.  The  express  ohject 
of  the  narrative  has  been  to  describe  the  admission  of  Gentiles 
into  the  church.  There  would  have  been  nothing  remarkable 
in  these  men  preaching  to  Hellenists  who  had  long  before  been 
received  into  the  church,  and  formed  a  large  part  of  the  church 
at  Jerusalem.  It  is  better  to  follow  the  rendering  of  A.  Y.  and 
Kev.,  though  the  other  reading  has  the  stronger  MS.  evidence. 
Note,  also,  the  contrast  with  the  statement  in  ver.  19,  to  the  Jews 
ordy.  There  is  no  contrast  between  Jews  and  Hellenists,  since 
Hellenists  are  included  in  the  general  term  Jews. 

23.  Purpose  (7r/3o^e(76t).  Ovigva.&\\j,  placing  in  public  ;  set- 
ting iefore.  Hence  of  the  shew-hread,  the  loaves  set  forth 
before  the  Lord  (see  on  Mark  ii.  26).  Something  set  iefore  one 
as  an  object  of  attainment :  a, purpose. 

24.  Good  {arfa^o<;).  More  than  strictly  vpright.  Compare 
Kom.  V.  7,  where  it  is  distinguished  from  hUaio'i,  just  or 
righteous.  "  His  benevolence  effectually  prevented  him  censur- 
ing anything  that  might  be  new  or  strange  in  these  preachers 
to  the  Gentiles,  and  caused  him  to  rejoice  in  their  success  " 
(Gloag). 

25.  To  seek  {dva^rjTrja-ai).  Strictly,  like  our  "  hunt  up " 
(avd). 


506  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XI. 

26.  Were  called  Christians  {xpvf^"-T((7ai,  Xpi<7Tiavov<;).  The 

former  of  these  two  words,  rendered  were  called,  meant,  origi- 
nally, to  transact  business,  to  have  dealings  with;  thence,  in  the 
course  of  business,  to  give  audience  to,  to  answer,  from  which 
comes  its  use  to  denote  the  res;ponses  of  an  oracle  ;  a  divine  ad- 
vice or  warning.  See  Acts  x.  22 ;  and  compare  Matt.  ii.  12 ; 
Heb.  xi.  7.  Later,  it  acquires  the  meaning  to  hear  a  name  ;  to 
le  called,  with  the  implication  of  a  name  used  in  the  ordinary 
transactions  and  intercourse  of  men  ;  the  name  under  which 
one  passes.*  This  process  of  transition  appears  in  the  practice 
of  naming  men  according  to  their  occupations,  as,  in  English, 
"  John  the  Smith,"  "  Philip  the  Armorer ;  "  a  practice  which  is 
the  origin  of  many  familiar  family  names,  such  as  Butler,  Car- 
penter, Smith,  Cooper.  Compare  in  New  Testament  Alexander 
the  coppersmith  (2  Tim.  iv.  14) ;  Matthew  the  publican  (Matt. 
X.  3) ;  Luke  the  physician  (Col.  iv.  14) ;  Erastus  the  chamber- 
lain (Rom.  xvi.  23);  Bahab  the  harlot  (Heb.  xi.  31).  In  the 
same  line  is  the  use  of  the  word  calling,  to  denote  one's  busi- 
ness. The  meaning  of  the  word  in  this  passage  is  illustrated 
by  Kom.  vii.  3. 

The  disciples  were  called.  They  did  not  assume  the  name 
themselves.  It  occurs  in  only  three  passages  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament :  here  ;  ch.  xxvi.  28  ;  and  1  Pet.  iv.  16  ;  and  only  in  the 
last-named  passage  is  used  by  a  Christian  of  a  Christian.  The 
name  was  evidently  not  given  by  the  Jews  of  Antioch,  to  whom 
Christ  was  the  interpretation  of  Messiah,  and  who  would  not 
have  bestowed  that  name  on  those  whom  they  despised  as 
apostates.  The  Jews  designated  the  Christians  as  Nazarenes 
(Acts  xxiv.  5),  a  term  of  contempt,  because  it  was  a  proverb 
that  nothing  good  could  come  out  of  Nazareth  (John  i.  47). 
The  name  was  probably  not  assumed  by  the  disciples  them- 
selves ;  for  they  were  in  the  habit  of  styling  each  other  be- 
lievers, disciples,  saints,  brethren,  those  of  the  way.  It,  doubt- 
less, was  bestowed  by  the  Gentiles.     Some  suppose  that  it  was 


*  The  Rev.  Samuel  Cox's  application  of  the  word  to  Christians,  as  making 
Christianity  the  daily  business  of  their  lives,  is  forced  (Biblical  Expositions, 
p.  341). 


Ch.  Xn.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  507 

applied  as  a  term  of  ridicule,  and  cite  the  wittj'  and  sarcastic 
character  of  the  people  of  Antioch,  and  their  notoriety  for  in- 
venting names  of  derision ;  but  this  is  doubtful.  The  name 
may  have  been  given  simply  as  a  distinctive  title,  naturally 
chosen  from  the  recognized  and  avowed  devotion  of  the  dis- 
ciples to  Christ  as  their  leader.  The  Antiochenes  mistook  the 
nature  of  the  name,  not  understanding  its  use  among  the  dis- 
ciples as  an  official  title — the  Anointed — but  using  it  as  Ajaer- 
sonal  name,  which  they  converted  into  a,^aHy  name. 

27.  Prophets.    See  on  Luke  vii.  26. 

28.  The  world.     See  on  Luke  ii.  1. 

29.  According  to  his  ability  (ko^co?  rfviropelro  rt?).  Lit., 
according  as  any  one  of  them  was  prospered.  The  verb  is  from 
eviropo's,  easy  to  pass  or  tramel  through;  and  the  idea  of  pros- 
perity is  therefore  conveyed  under  the  figure  of  an  easy  and 
favorable  journey.  The  same  idea  appears  in  our  farewell; 
fare  meaning  originally  to  tra/vel.  Hence,  to  bid  one  farewell 
is  to  wish  him  Si  prosperous  journey.  Compare  God-speed.  So 
the  idea  here  might  be  rendered,  as  each  one  fa/red  well. 

To  send  relief  (ew  SiuKoviav  7re/ti/rat).  Lit,  to  send  for 
ministry. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  That  time  (eKecvov  rbv  Kaipbv).  More  correctly,  that  jimci- 
ure.    See  on  ch.  i.  7.     The  date  is  a.d.  44. 

Herod  the  king.  Called  also  Agrippa,  and  commonly 
known  as  Herod  Agrippa  I.,  the  grandson  of  Herod  the  Great. 

Stretched  forth  his  hands  (eVeySaXev ra?  %6t/)a?).  JAt.,laid 
on  his  hands.  The  A.  V.  is  wrong,  and  so  is  the  Eev.  Een- 
der,  laid  hands  on  certain  of  the  church  to  afflict  them. 


508  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIl 

Vex  (KUKwaai).  Vex  is  used  in  the  older  and  stronger  sense 
of  torment  or  oppress.  See  Exod.  xxii.  21 ;  ISTum.  xxv.  17 ; 
Matt.  XV.  22.  Its  modern  usage  relates  rather  to  petty  annoy- 
ances.    Kev.,  better,  a^ 


2.  Killed— with  the  sword.  While  the  martyrdom  of 
Stephen  is  described  at  length,  that  of  James,  the  first  martyr 
among  the  apostles,  is  related  in  two  words. 

3.  He  proceeded  to  take  {'n-poa-iS-ero  a-vXKa^eiv).  'Rev., 
seise.  Lit.,  he  added  to  take.  A  Hebrew  form  of  expression. 
Compare  Luke  xix.  11,  he  added  and  spake;  Luke  xx.  12, 
again  he  sent  a  third ;  lit.,  he  added  to  send. 

4.  Quaternions.  A  quaternion  was  a  body  of  four  sol- 
diers ;  so  that  there  were  sixteen  guards,  four  for  each  of  the 
four  night-watches. 

The  passover.     The  whole  seven  days  of  the  feast. 

Bring  him  forth  (avajayeip  airbv).  J^it.,  lead  him  up ;  i.e., 
to  the  elevated  place  where  the  tribunal  stood,  to  pronounce 
sentence  of  death  before  the  people.     See  John  xix.  13. 

5.  Without  ceasing  (e/cTei/^?).  Wrong.  The  word  means 
earnest.  See  on  fervently,  1  Pet.  i.  22  ;  and  compa.re  instantly, 
Acts  xxvi.  7 ;  more  earnestly,  Luke  xxii.  44 ;  fervent,  1  Pet. 
iv.  8.  The  idea  of  continuance  is,  however,  expressed  here  by 
the  finite  verb  with  the  participle.  Very  literally,  jwayer  was 
a/rising  earnest. 

6.  Would  have  brought.  Eev.,  correctly,  was  ahout  to 
hring. 

Kept  (eTT^povv).  See  on  reserved,  1  Pet.  i.  4.  The  imper- 
fect, were  keeping. 

7.  Came  upon  (eVeo-ri?).  Better,  as  Rev.,  stood  hy.  See  on 
ch.  iv.  i. ;  and  compare  Luke  ii.  9. 


Cn.  XII.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  509 

Prison  {oiKruia'n).  Not  the  prison,  but  the  cell  where  Peter 
was  confined.     So,  rightly,  Eev. 

8.  Garment  (yiarto*/).  The  owfo?*  garment,  or  mantle.  See 
on  Matt.  V.  40. 

10.  Ward  {^vXaKr^v).  Better,  watch:  the  soldiers  on  guard. 
Explanations  of  \\\e  first  and  second  watch  differ,  some  assum- 
ing that  the  first  was  the  single  soldier  on  guard  at  the  door  of 
Peter's  cell,  and  the  second,  another  soldier  at  the  gate  leading 
into  the  street.  Others,  that  two  soldiers  were  at  each  of  these 
posts,  the  two  in  Peter's  cell  not  being  included  in  the  four 
who  made  up  the  watch. 

12.  When  he  had  considered  {a-vvt.Z(ov).  The  verb  strictly 
means  to  see  together,  or  at  the  same  time.  Hence,  to  see  in  one 
view,  to  take  in  at  a  glance.  Peter's  mental  condition  is  de- 
scribed by  two  expressions :  First,  he  came  to  himself  (ver.  12), 
or,  lit.,  when  he  had  iecome  present  in  himself/  denoting  his 
awaking  from  the  dazed  condition  produced  by  his  being  sud- 
denly roused  from  sleep  and  confronted  with  a  supernatural 
appearance  (see  ver.  9).  Secondly,  when  he  had  hecome  aware 
(a-vviBcov) ;  denoting  his  talcing  in  the  situation,  according  to  the 
popular  phrase.  I  do  not  think  that  any  of  the  commentators 
have  suflSciently  emphasized  the  force  of  avv,  together,  as  indi- 
cating his  comprehenswe perception  of  all  the  elements  of  the 
case.  They  all  refer  the  word  to  his  recognition  of  his  deliver- 
ance from  prison,  which,  however,  has  already  been  noted  in 
ver.  11.  While  it  may  include  this,  it  refers  also  to  all  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case  present  at  that  moment.  He  had  been 
freed ;  he  was  there  in  the  street  alone ;  he  must  go  somewhere ; 
there  was  the  house  of  Mary,  where  he  was  sure  to  find  friends. 
Having  taken  in  all  this,  perceived  it  all,  he  went  to  the  house 
of  Mary.* 

*  This  force  of  the  verb  is  illustrated  by  Xenophon  (Anabasis,  i.,  5,  9). 
"For  one  who  directed  his  attention  to  it  (i.e.,  the  numerous  evidences  of 
power  furnished  by  a  great  empire)  might  see  {cruviSeiy,  in  a  compreheusive 
glance)  that  the  king  was  powerful."     So  Plato  (Laws,  904),  speaking  of  God, 


510  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XH 

13.  Door  of  the  gate.  The  small  outside  door,  forining  the 
entrance  from  the  street,  and  opening  into  the  wXiav,  or  doar- 
■way,  the  passage  from  the  street  into  the  court.  Others  explain 
it  as  the  wicket,  a  small  door  in  the  larger  one,  which  is  less 
probable. 

A  damsel  {iraiSiericrj).  Or  maid.  The  word  was  used  of  a 
young  female  slave,  as  well  as  of  a  young  girl  or  maiden  gener- 
ally. The  narrative  implies  that  she  was  more  than  a  mere 
menial,  if  a  servant  at  all.  Her  prompt  recognition  of  Peter's 
voice,  and  her  joyful  haste,  as  well  as  the  record  of  her  name, 
iudicate  that  she  was  one  of  the  disciples  gathered  for  prayer. 

R  h  0  d  a.  Hose.  The  Jews  frequently  gave  their  female  chil- 
dren the  names  of  plants  and  flowers :  as  Susannah  (lily) ; 
Esther  (myrtle) ;  Tama?'  (palm-tree).  "  God,  who  leaves  in 
oblivion  names  of  mighty  conquerors,  treasures  up  that  of  a 
poor  girl,  for  his  church  in  all  ages  "  (Quesnel). 

14.  She  knew.     Or  recognized. 

15.  Constantly  affirmed  {Sua-xvpi^ero).  Better,  confidently 
affirmed  ;  constant  is  used  in  its  older  sense  of  consistent.  The 
verb  contains  two  ideas  :  strong  assertion  (to-;^;!;?),  and  holding  to 
the  assertion  through  all  contradiction  (Sta) ;  hence,  she  strongly 
and  consistently  asserted. 

Angel.  Guardian  angel,  according  to  the  popular  belief 
among  the  Jews  that  every  individual  has  his  guardian  angel, 
who  may,  on  occasion,  assume  a  visible  appearance  resembling 
that  of  the  person  whose  destiny  is  committed  to  him. 

17.  Beckoning  (/carao-et'o-a?).  Lit.,  having  shaken  downward 
with  his  hand,  in  order  to  bespeak  silence  and  attention.  It  was 
a  familiar  gesture  of  Paul.     See  ch.  xxi.  40 ;  xxvi.  1. 


says,  "  When  he  saw  that  our  actions  had  life,"  etc.,  going  on  to  enumerate 
various  details,  "He,  seeingall  thisiravTa  niyra  a-umSiii/)."    Compare,  also,  Acts 


xiv.  6. 


Ch.  XU.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  511 

19.  Examined  {avaKpLvai)'.  See  on  Luke  xxiii.  14 ;  and  com- 
pare ch.  iv.  9. 

Put  to  death  {awaxSrjvai).  Lit.,  led  away;  i.e.,  to  execution. 
A  technical  phrase  like  the  Latin  ducere.  Compare  Matt, 
xxvii.  31. 

Abode  (Bdrpi^ev).  Originally,  to  rub  away,  or  consume ; 
hence,  of  time,  to  spend. 

20.  Highly  displeased  {S-vfio/j,ax(ov).  Onginallj,  to  Jlght 
desperately :  but  as  there  is  no  record  of  any  war  of  Herod  with 
the  Tyrians  and  Sidonians,  the  word  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense 
of  the  A.  Y.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Chamberlain  (tw  eVt  TouKotTwvos).  Lit.,  the  one  over  the 
hedchanriber. 

21.  Set  (ra/cT^).  Appointed.  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Wliat  the  festival  was,  is  uncertain.  According  to  some,  it  was 
in  honor  of  the  emperor's  safe  return  from  Britain.  Others 
think  it  was  to  celebrate  the  birthday  of  Claudius  ;  others  that 
it  was  the  festival  of  the  Quinquennalia,  observed  in  honor  of 
Augustus,  and  dating  from  the  taking  of  Alexandria,  when  the 
month  SextiUs  received  the  name  of  the  Emperor — August. 

Arrayed  (ivBvadfievo'i).  More  literally,  ha/vmg  arrayed  him- 
self. 

Royal  apparel.  Josephus  says  he  was  clothed  in  a  robe  en- 
tirely made  of  silver. 

Throne.  See  on  ch.  vii.  5.  The  elevated  seat  or  throne-like 
box  in  the  theatre,  set  apart  for  the  king,  from  which  he  might 
look  at  the  games  or  address  the  assembly. 

Made  an  oration  (iBrjfj/ijyopeC).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment.    The  word  is  used  especially  of   a  popular  harangue 


512  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      ,     [Ch.  XIL 

(SJ7/io?,  the  commons).  "At  Jerusalem  Agrippa  enacted  the 
Jew,  with  solemn  gait  and  tragic  countenance,  amidst  general 
acclamation ;  but  at  Caesarea  he  allowed  the  more  genial  part 
of  a  Greek  to  be  imposed  on  him.  It  was  at  a  festival  in  this 
Hellenic  capital,  after  an  harangue  he  had  addressed  to  the 
populace,  that  they  shouted,  "  It  is  the  voice  of  a  god  and  not  of 
a  man  "  (Merivale,  "  History  of  the  Komans  under  the  Empire  "). 

22.  The  people  (S^/io?).     The  assembled  people. 

A  god.  As  most  of  the  assembly  were  heathen,  the  word 
does  not  refer  to  the  Supreme  Being,  but  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
pagan  sense — a  god. 

23.  An  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him.  An  interesting  par- 
allel is  furnished  by  the  story  of  Alp  Arslan,  a  Turkish  prince 
of  the  eleventh  century.  "  The  Turkish  prince  bequeathed  a 
dying  admonition  to  the  pride  of  kings.  '  In  my  youth,'  said 
Alp  Arslan,  '  I  was  advised  by  a  sage  to  humble  myself  before 
God ;  to  distrust  my  own  strength ;  and  never  to  despise  the 
most  contemptible  foe.  I  have  neglected  these  lessons,  and  my 
neglect  has  been  deservedly  punished.  Yesterday,  as  from  an 
eminence,  I  beheld  the  numbers,  the  discipline,  and  the  spirit 
of  my  armies ;  the  earth  seemed  to  tremble  imder  my  feet,  and 
I  said  in  my  heart,  surely  tliou  art  the  king  of  the  world,  the 
greatest  and  most  invincible  of  warriors.  These  armies  are  no 
longer  mine ;  and,  in  the  confidence  of  my  personal  strength,  I 
now  fall  by  the  hand  of  an  assassin ' "  (Gibbon,  "  Decline  and 
Fall"). 

Eaten  of  worms  (o-^mXtjko/Sjowto?).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. Of  Pheretima,  queen  of  Gyrene,  distinguished  for 
her  cruelties,  Herodotus  says:  "ISTor  did  Pheretima  herself 
end  her  days  happily.  For  on  her  return  to  Egypt  from  Libya, 
directly  after  taking  vengeance  on  the  people  of  Barca,  she  was 
overtaken  by  a  most  horrid  death.  Her  body  swarmed  with 
worms,  which  ate  her  flesh  while  she  was  still  alive  "  (iv.,  205). 
The  term,  as  applied  to  disease  in  the  human  body,  does  not 


Ch.  Xin.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  513 

occur  in  any  of  the  medical  writers  extant.  Theophrastus, 
however,  vises  it  of  a  disease  in  plants.  The  word  a-KoyXr]^  is 
nsed  by  medical  writers  of  intestinal  worms.  Compare  the  ac- 
count of  the  death  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the  great  perse- 
cutor of  the  Jews.  "  So  that  the  worms  rose  up  out  of  the 
body  of  this  wicked  man,  and  whiles  he  lived  in  sorrow  and 
pain,  his  flesh  fell  away,  and  the  filthiness  of  his  smell  was 
noisome  to  all  his  army "  (2  Mace.  ix.  9).  Sylla,  the  Roman 
dictator,  is  also  said  to  have  suffered  from  a  similar  disease. 

Gave  up  the  ghost.    See  on  ch.  v.  5. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

1.  Prophets.     See  on  Luke  vii.  26. 

Lucius  of  Cyrene.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  identify 
him  with  Luke  the  evangelist ;  but  the  name  Lxbcas  is  an  ab- 
breviation of  Lueanus,  and  not  of  Lucius.  It  is  worth  noting, 
however,  that,  according  to  Herodotus  (iii.,  131),  the  physicians 
of  Cyrene  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  second  best  in 
Greece,  those  of  Crotona  being  the  best ;  and  that  Galen  the 
physician  says  that  Lucius  was  before  him  a  distinguished  phy- 
sician in  Tarsus  of  Cilicia.  From  this  it  has  been  conjectured 
that  Luke  was  born  and  instructed  in  medicine  in  Cyrene,  and 
left  that  place  for  Tarsus,  where  he  made  Paul's  acquaintance, 
and  was,  perhaps,  converted  by  him  (Dr.  Howard  Crosby, 
"  The  New  Testament,  Old  and  New  Version  ").  But,  apart 
from  the  form  of  the  name  (see  above),  the  mention  of  the 
evangelist's  name  here  is  not  in  accord  with  his  usual  practice, 
since  he  nowhere  mentions  his  own  name,  either  in  the  Gospel 
or  in  the  Acts ;  and  if  the  present  passage  were  an  exception, 
we  should  have  expected  to  find  his  name  last  in  the  list  of  the 
worthies  of  Antioch.  Of  the  five  here  named,  four  are  known 
to  be  Jews ;  and  therefore,  probably,  Lucius  was  also  a  Jew 
from  Cyrene,  where  Jews  are  known  to  have  abounded.  Luke 
the  evangelist,  on  the  contrary,  was  a  Gentile.  Nothing  cer- 
33 


514  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XHI. 

tain  can  be  inferred  from  Rom.  xvi.  21,  where  Lucius  is  enu- 
merated by  Paul  among  his  hinsmen.  If  a-vyyevek,  kinsmen, 
means  here,  as  is  claimed  by  some,  countrymen,  it  would  prove 
Lucius  to  be  a  Jew ;  but  the  word  is  commonly  used  of  relatives 
in  the  New  Testament.  In  Rom.  ix.  3,  Paul  applies  the  term  to 
his  fellow-countrymen,  "  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according 
to  the  iiesh,  who  are  Israelites.'''' 

Which  had  been  brought  up  with  {a-vvTpocf)o<;).  Some  ven- 
der foster-hrother,  as  Rev. ;  others,  comrade.  The  word  has  both 
meanings. 

2.  Ministered  {\£iTovpyovvr(ov).  See  on  the  kindred  noun 
ministration,  Luke  i.  23.  This  noun  has  passed  through  the 
following  meanings :  1.  A  civil  service,  especially  in  the  tech- 
nical language  of  Athenian  law.  2.  A  function  or  office  of 
any  kind,  as  of  the  bodily  organs.  3.  Sacerdotal  ministration, 
both  among  the  Jews  and  the  heathen  (see  Heb.  viii.  6 ;  ix. 
21).  4.  The  eucliaristic  services.  5.  Set  forms  of  divine  wor- 
shij}  (Lightfoot,  "  On  Philippians,"  ii.,  17).  Here,  of  the  per- 
formance of  Christian  worship.  Our  word  liturgy  is  derived 
from  it. 

Separate.  The  Greek  adds  S77,  now,  which  is  not  rendered 
by  A.  V.  or  Rev.  It  gives  precision  and  emphasis  to  the  com- 
mand, implying  that  it  is  for  a  special  purpose,  and  to  be  obeyed 
at  the  time.     Compare  Luke  ii.  15  ;  Acts  xv.  36 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20. 

4.  Sailed.  On  Luke's  use  of  words  for  sailing,  see  Introduc- 
tion. 

5.  Synagogues.  The  plural  implies  that  the  Jews  were 
numerous  in  Salamis.  Augustus,  according  to  Josephus,  made 
Hei'od  the  Great  a  present  of  half  the  revenue  of  the  copper- 
mines  of  Cyprus,  so  that  numerous  Jewish  families  would  be 
settled  in  the  island.  In  the  reign  of  Trajan,  upon  the  break- 
ing out  of  a  Jewish  insurrection,  the  whole  island  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Jews,  and  became  a  rallying-poirit  for  the  revolt. 


Ch.  xni.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  515 

It  is  said  that  two  hundred  and  forty  thousand  of  the  native 
population  were  sacrificed  to  the  fury  of  the  insurgents.  "When 
the  rebellion  was  extinguished,  the  Jews  were  forbidden  thence- 
forth, on  pain  of  death,  to  set  foot  on  the  island. 

Minister  {v-n-rjpeTrjv).  Better,  as  ^ev.,  attendomt.  See  on 
Matt.  V.  25. 

6.  Sorcerer  (fidyov).  That  the  man  was  an  impostor  is  told 
us  in  the  next  word,  but  not  in  this  term.  It  is  the  word  used 
of  the  wise  men  who  came  to  the  Saviour's  cradle.  See  Matt. 
ii.  1,  Y,  16.  Elymas  was  a  magian  /  of  what  kind  is  shown  by 
false  prophet.     See  on  Matt.  ii.  1. 

Bar-Jesus.     Son  of  Jesus  or  Joshua. 

7.  The  deputy  {av^vivaTt^).  Better,  Key.,  proconsul.  See 
Introduction  to  Luke,  on  Luke's  accuracy  in  designating  public 
officers. 

Sergius  Paulus.  Di  Cesnola  relates  the  discovery  at  Soli, 
which,  next  to  Salamis,  was  the  most  important  city  in  the 
island,  of  a  slab  with  a  Greek  inscription  containing  the  name  of 
Paulus,  proconsul. 

Prudent  {a-vv6Ta>).  Better,  as  Rev.,  a  mem  of  understanding. 
See  on  Matt.  xi.  25. 

8.  Elymas.  An  Arabic  word,  meaning  the  wise,  and  equiv- 
alent to  Magus.     See  on  ver.  6. 

Withstood.  "The  position  of  soothsayer  to  a  Roman  pro- 
consul, even  though  it  could  only  last  a  year,  was  too  distin- 
guished and  too  lucrative  to  abandon  without  a  struggle  "  (Far- 
rar,  "  Life  and  Work  of  Paul "). 

9.  Saul — Paul.  The  first  occurrence  of  the  name  of  Paul  in 
the  Acts.     Hereafter  he  is  constantly  so  called,  except  when 


516  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XnX 

there  is  a  reference  to  the  earlier  period  of  his  life.  Various 
explanations  are  given  of  the  change  of  name.  The  most  sat- 
isfactory seems  to  be  that  it  was  customary  for  Hellenistic  Jews 
to  have  two  names,  the  one  Hebrew  and  the  other  Greek  or 
Latin.  Thus  John  was  also  called  Marcus ;  Symeon,  Niger ; 
Barsabas,  Jvstus.  As  Paul  now  comes  prominently  forward  as 
the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  Luke  now  retains  his  Gentile  name, 
as  he  did  his  Jewish  name  during  his  ministry  among  the  Jews. 
The  connection  of  the  name  Paul  with  that  of  the  deputy 
seems  to  me  purely  accidental.  It  was  most  unlike  Paul  to 
assume  the  name  of  another  man,  converted  by  his  instrumen- 
tality, out  of  respect  to  him  or  as  a  memorial  of  his  conversion. 
Farrar  justly  observes  that  there  would  have  been  in  this  "  an 
element  of  vulgarity  impossible  to  St.  Paul." 

Set  his  eyes  on  him.     See  on  Luke  iv.  20. 

10.  Mischief  (paStoii/!)7/as).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Originally,  ease  ovfadlity  in,  doing  ;  hence  readiness  in  turning 
the  hand  to  anything,  bad  or  good ;  and  so  recklessness,  unscru- 
pulousness,  wickedness.  A  kindred  word  (pa8i,ovpyr)fj,a,  lewdness, 
Rev.,  villany)  occurs  at  ch.  xviii.  14. 

Right  ways.  Or  st/raight,  possibly  with  an  allusion  to  Ely- 
mas'  crooked  ways. 

11.  Mist  (a^Xii?).  Only  here  in  ISTew  Testament.  The  word 
is  used  by  medical  writers  as  a  name  for  a  disease  of  the  eyes. 
The  mention  of  the  successive  stages,  first  dimness,  then  total 
darkness,  are  characteristic  of  the  physician.  "  The  first  mira- 
cle which  Paul  performed  was  the  infliction  of  a  judgment ; 
and  that  judgment  the  same  which  befell  himself  when  arrested 
on  his  way  to  Damascus  "  (Gloag). 

12.  Astonished  (eWXiyo-o-o/ievo?).     See  on  Matt.  vii.  28. 

13.  Loosed  (dvax^evTesi).     See  on  Luke  viii.  22. 


Ch.  XIII.]  THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  617 

Paul  and  his  company  {ol  irepl  rov  IlavXov).  Lit.,  those 
around  Pcml.  In  later  writers,  used  to  denote  the  principal 
person  alone,  as  John  xi.  19,  came  to  Mary  and  Martha; 
where  the  Greek  literally  reads,  cams  tp  the  women  aroimd 
Mary  and  Martha.  Paul,  and  not  Barnabas,  now  appears  as 
the  principal  person. 

15.  Exhortation.     See  on  ch.  ix.  31. 

16.  Beckoning,     See  on  ch.  xii.  IT. 
Men  of  Israel.     See  on  ch.  iii.  12. 

17.  People  (XaoO).  Eestricted  in  the  Acts  to  the  people  of 
Israel. 

18.  Suffered  he  their  manners  {erpoiro^opTia-ev).  From 
rpoTToii,  fashion  or  manner,  and  (popem,  to  bear  or  suffer.  The 
preferable  reading,  however,  is  €T/3o</)o^opi;o-ei' ;  from  rpo^o?,  a 
nurse;  and  the  figure  is  explained  by,  and  probably  was  drawn 
from,  Deut.  i.  31.  The  American  revisers  properly  insist  on 
the  rendering,  as  a  nursing-father  ha/re  he  them. 

19.  Divided  by  lot  {KareKKi]pov6iJL7]a-ev).  The  A.  V.  gives 
the  literal  rendering.  The  Eev.,  gave  them  their  land  for  am, 
inheritance,  is  correct,  so  far  as  the  meaning  inheritance  is 
concerned  (see  on  1  Pet.  i.  4),  but  does  not  give  the  sense  of 
distribution  which  is  contained  in  the  word. 

24.  Before  his  coming  {irpb  irpoa-mTrov  Trj<;  euroBov  airov). 
Lit. ,  before  the  face  of  his  entrance.  A  Hebrew  form  of  expres- 
sion. 

25.  Think  ye  {vTrovoelre).  Originally,  to  think  secretly: 
hence  to  suspect,  conjecture. 

26.  To  you.     The  best  texts  read  to  us. 

33.  H  ath  f  u  If  i  1 1  ed  {eKire'TrKripwKe).  Comjpletely  fulfilled ;  force 
of  e«,  out  and  out. 


518  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XIII. 

34.  The  sure  mercies  (ra  oa-ta  ra  Tnard).  Lit.,  the  hohf 
things,  the  sure.     Rev.,  the  holy  and  sure  hlessvngs. 

35.  Suffer  (Stoo-ets).     'L\i.,gvoe. 

36.  Was  laid  unto  {irpoa-eTeS^).  Lit.,  wa,a  added  unto.  Com- 
pare ch.  ii.  47  ;  v.  14. 

41.  Perish  (acpavicrSrjTe).     Lit.,  vanish. 

Declare  {eKhirffrjTaC}.  Only  here  and  ch.  xv.  3.  See  on 
shew,  Luke  viii.  39.  The  word  is  a  very  strong  expression  for 
the  fullest  and  clearest  declaration :  declare  throughout. 

42.  Next  {fiera^ii).  The  word  commonly  means  interme- 
diate, and  hence  is  explained  by  some  as  referring  to  the  in- 
termediate week.  But  the  meaning  is  iixed  by  ver.  44;  and 
though  the  word  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testament  else- 
where in  the  sense  of  next,  it  has  that  meaning  sometimes  in 
later  Greek. 

43.  Religious  {cre^o/xevcov).  Lit.,  worshipping.  Compare 
ver.  50  and  ch.  xvi.  14. 

Proselytes  {Trpoa-rfKvrmv).  Originally,  one  who  arrives  at  a 
place ;  a  stranger  /  thence  of  one  who  comes  over  to  another 
faith. 

45.  Envy  {^■^\ov).     'Rev.,  jealousy.     See  on  Jas.  iii.  14. 

46.  Put  {a-TTcoSeicrl^e).  Not  strong  enough.  Better,  as  Rev., 
thrust,  denoting  violent  rejection. 

Lo  {ISoii).     Marking  a  crisis. 

50.  Honorable  {evaxviJ'Ova<;).  See  on  Mark  xv.  43.  "Women 
of  rank,  or,  as  Rev.,  of  honorable  estate. 


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  519 

Coasts  {opieov).  Not  a  good  rendering,  because  it  implies 
merely  a  sea-coast,  whereas  the  word  is  a  general  one  for 
boundaries. 

51.  Shook  off.     See  on  Matt.  x.  14. 

Dust.     See  on  Luke  x.  11. 


CHAPTER  XIY. 
3.  Long  {iKavbv).     See  on  Luke  vii.  6. 
Abode.     See  on  ch.  xii.  19. 
In  the  Lord.    Lit.,  upon  (eirl)  the  Lord:  in  reliance  onhiva. 

5.  Assault  (opfiT)).  Too  strong,  as  is  also  the  Rev.,  onse^. 
In  case  an  actual  assault  had  been  made,  it  would  have  been 
absurd  for  Luke  to  tell  us  that  "  they  were  ware  of  it."  It  is 
ratlier  the  purpose  and  intention  of  assault  beginning  to  as- 
sume the  character  of  a  movement.     See  on  Jas.  iii.  4. 

To  stone.  Paul  says  he  was  stoned  once  (2  Oor.  xi.  25). 
This  took  place  at  Lystra  (see  ver.  19). 

6.  Were  ware  (o-wiSoi'Te?).  Kev.,  hecame  awa/re.  See  on 
considered,  ch.  xii.  12. 

7.  They  preached  the  gospel  {ria-av  evayyeXi^ofievoi).  The 
finite  verb  with  the  participle,  denoting  continuance.  They 
prolonged  their  preaching  for  some  time. 

8.  Impotent  (dBvvaros;).  The  almost  universal  meaning  of 
the  word  in  the  New  Testament  is  impossible  (see  Matt.  xix.  26 ; 
Heb.  vi.  4,  etc.).  The  sense  of  weak  or  impotent  occurs  only 
here  and  Horn.  xv.  1. 

9.  Heard  {rjKove).  The  force  of  the  imperfect  should  be 
given  here.     He  was  hearing  while  Paul  preached. 


520  WOKD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XIT. 

10.  Upright  (o/a^o?).  Only  here  and  Heb.  xii.  13.  Compare 
made  straight,  Luke  xiii.  13,  and  see  note  there. 

Leaped  {r]\aro).  Better,  as  Eev.,  leaped  up.  Note  the  ao- 
rist  tense,  indicating  a  single  act,  while  the  imperfect,  walked, 
denotes  continuous  action. 

11.  In  the  speech  of  Lycaonia.  The  apostles  had  been 
conversing  with  them  in  Greek.  The  fact  that  the  people  now 
spoke  in  their  native  tongue  explains  why  Paul  and  Barnabas 
did  not  interfere  until  they  saw  the  preparations  for  sacrifice. 
They  did  not  understand  what  was  being  said  by  the  people 
about  their  divine  character.  It  was  natural  that  the  surprise 
of  the  Lystrans  should  express  itself  in  their  own  language 
rather  than  in  a  foreign  tongue. 


In  the  likeness  of  men  (o/iotw^evre?  dv^pioTroi';).  Lit, 
having  become  like  to  men.  A  remnant  of  the  earlier  pagan 
belief  that  the  gods  visited  the  earth  in  human  form.  Homer, 
for  example,  is  full  of  such  incidents.  Thus,  when  Ulysses 
lands  upon  his  native  shore,  Pallas  meets  hirrf 

"  in  the  shape 
Of  a  young  shepherd  delicately  formed, 
As  are  the  sons  of  kings.     A  mantle  lay 
Upon  her  shoulder  in  rich  folds  ;  her  feet 
Shone  in  their  sandals  ;  in  her  hands  she  bore 
A  javelin." 

!/,  xiii,,  331-225. 


Again,  one  rebukes  a  suitor  for  maltreating  Ulysses : 

' '  Madman  !  what  if  he 
Came  down  from  heaven  and  were  a  god !     The  gods 
Put  on  the  form  of  strangers  from  afar, 
And  walk  our  towns  in  many  different  shapes, 
To  mark  the  good  and  evil  deeds  of  men. " 

Odyssey,  xvii. ,  485  sq. 

12.  Barnabas  Jupiter,  and  Paul  Mercury.     The  Greek 

names  of  these  deities  were  Zeus  and  Hermes.     As  the  herald 
of  the  gods.  Mercury  is  the  god  of  skill  in  the  use  of  speech  and 


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  521 

of  eloquence  in  general,  for  the  heralds  are  the  public  speakers 
in  the  assemblies  and  on  other  occasions.  Hence  he  is  sent 
on  messages  where  persuasion  or  argument  are  required,  as  to 
Calypso  to  secure  the  release  of  Ulysses  from  Ogygia  ("  Odys- 
sey," i.,  84) ;  and  to  Priam  to  warn  him  of  danger  and  to  escort 
him  to  the  Grecian  fleet  ("  Iliad,"  xxiv.,  390).  Horace  ad- 
dresses him  as  the  "  eloquent "  grandson  of  Atlas,  who  artfully 
formed  by  oratory  the  savage  manners  of  a  primitive  race 
("  Odes,"  i.,  10).  Hence  the  tongues  of  sacrificial  animals  were 
offered  to  him.  As  the  god  of  ready  and  artful  speech,  his 
office  naturally  extended  to  business  negotiations.  He  was  the 
god  of  prudence  and  skill  in  all  the  relations  of  social  inter- 
course, and  the  patron  of  business  and  gain.  A  merchant-guild 
at  Rome  was  established  under  his  protection.  And  as,  from 
its  nature,  commerce  is  prone  to  degenerate  into  fraud,  so  he 
appears  as  the  god  of  thievery,  exhibiting  cunning,  fraud,  and 
perjury.*  "  He  represents,  so  to  speak,  the  utilitarian  side  of 
the  human  mind.  ...  In  the  limitation  of  his  faculties  and 
powers,  in  the  low  standard  of  his  moral  habits,  in  the  abundant 
activity  of  his  appetites,  in  his  indifference,  his  ease,  his  good- 
nature, in  the  full-blown  exhibition  of  what  Christian  theology 
would  call  conformity  to  the  world,  he  is,  as  strictly  as  the  nat- 
ure of  the  case  admits,  a  product  of  the  invention  of  man.  He 
is  the  god  of  intercourse  on  earth  "  (Gladstone,  "  Homer  and 
the  Homeric  Age  "). 

The  chief  speaker  (6  '^yovfievof  rov  Xoyov).  Lit.,  the  lead- 
er in  discourse.  Barnabas  was  called  Jupiter,  possibly  because 
his  personal  appearance  was  more  imposing  than  Paul's  (see  2 
Cor.  X.  1,  10),  and  also  because  Jupiter  and  Mercury  were  com- 
monly represented  as  companions  in  their  visits  to  earth.f 

13.  Of  Jupiter  {rov  Aixi<:).    Properly,  ^Ae  Jupiter,  the  tute- 


*  See  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Hermes,  and  Horace,  Odes,  B.  i.,  Odex. ; 
Iliad,  v.,  390;  xxiv.,  24. 

t  As,  for  instance,  in  the  beautiful  story  of  Baucis  and  Philemon,  as  related 
by  Orid  (Metamorphoses,  viii.,  636-724). 


522  WOKD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XIV. 

laiy  deity  of  Lystra.     It  is  unnecessary  to  supply  temjpk,  as  Eev. 
The  god  himself  was  regarded  as  present  in  his  temple. 

The  gates  (TruXoJi'as).  What  gates  are  intended  is  uncer- 
tain. Some  say,  the  city  gates  ;  others,  the  temple  gates  ;  and 
others,  the  doors  of  the  house  in  which  Paul  and  Earnabas  were 
residing.     See  on  ch.  xii.  13. 

14.  Ran  in  (elaeirrihta-av).  A  feeble  translation,  even  if  this 
reading  is  retained.  The  verb  means  to  leap  or  sprwig.  The 
best  texts  read  i^eir'^STja-av,  spi'ang  forth,  probably  from  the 
gate  of  their  house,  or  from  the  city  gate,  if  the  sacrifice  was 
prepared  in  front  of  it. 

Crying  out  {Kpa^ovrei).  Inarticulate  shouts  to  attract  atten- 
tion. 

15.  Of  like  passions  (d/iotoTraSet?).  Only  here  and  Jas.  v. 
17,  on  which  see  note.     Better,  of  like  nature. 

Turn  {iinaTpe^eiv).  Compare  1  Thess.  i.  9,  where  the  same 
verb  is  used. 

16.  Times  (yereats).     M.ore  correctly,  generations,  as  ^ev. 

17.  Rains.  Jupiter  was  lord  of  the  air.  He  dispensed  the 
thunder  and  lightning,  the  rain  and  the  hail,  the  rivers  and  tem- 
pests. "  All  signs  and  portents  whatever,  that  appear  in  the  air, 
belong  primarily  to  him,  as  does  the  genial  sign  of  the  rain- 
bow" (Gladstone,  "  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age").  The 
mention  of  rain  is  appropriate,  as  there  was  a  scarcity  of  water 
in  Lycaonia. 

Food.  Mercury,  as  the  god  of  merchandise,  was  also  the  dis- 
penser of  food. 

"  No  one  can  read  the  speech  without  once  more  perceiving 
its  subtle  and  inimitable  coincidence  with  his  (Paul's)  thoughts 


Ch.  XIV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  523 

and  expressions.  The  rhythmic  conclusion  is  not  unaccordant 
with  the  style  of  his  most  elevated  moods ;  and  besides  the  ap- 
propriate appeal  to  God's  natural  gifts  in  a  town  not  in  itself 
unhappily  situated,  but  surrounded  by  a  waterless  and  treeless 
plain,  we  may  naturally  suppose  that  the  '  filling  our  hearts 
with  food  and  gladness '  was  suggested  by  the  garlands  and  fes- 
tive pomp  which  accompanied  the  bulls  on  which  the  people 
would  afterward  have  made  their  common  banquet "  (Far- 
rar, "  Life  and  Work  of  Paul ").  For  the  coincidences  between 
this  discourse  and  other  utterances  of  Paul,  compare  ver.  15, 
and  1  Thess.  i.  9  ;  ver.  16,  and  Eom.  iii.  25  ;  Acts  xvii.  30 ; 
ver.  17,  and  Pom.  i.  19,  20. 

19.  Stoned.     See  on  ver.  5. 

20.  To  Derbe.     A  journey  of  only  a  few  hours. 

21.  Taught  (jioSTjTeva-avTe^).  More  correctly,  made  disciples 
of,  as  Pev.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  52. 

Many.     See  on  Luke  vii.  6. 

22.  Confirming.     See  on  stablisA,!  Pet.  v.  10. 

23.  Ordained  {')(eiporovr)(7avre<i).  Only  here  and  2  Cor.  viii. 
19.  Rev.,  more  correctly,  appointed.  The  meaning  ordain  is 
later.     See  on  ch.  x.  41. 

Elders  {irpea^vTipovi).  For  the  general  superintendence  of 
the  church.  The  word  is  synonymous  with  iirla-KOTroi,,  over- 
seer's or  bishops  (see  on  visitation,  1  Pet.  ii.  12).  Those  who 
are  called  elders,  in  speaking  of  Jewish  communities,  are  called 
bishops,  in  speaking  of  Gentile  communities.  Hence  the  latter 
term  prevails  in  Paul's  epistles. 

Commended  (irapeSevTo).  See  on  set  before,  Luke  ix.  16; 
and  commit,  1  Pet.  iv.  19. 


524  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XV. 

27.  With  them  (/ter'  avrmv).    In  connection  with   them; 
assisting  them. 

And  how  («ot  oti).    Better,  that.    The  and  has  an  incres- 
sive  and  particularizing  force :  "  and  in  j>a/rticula/r,  above  all." 


CHAPTER  XT. 

1.  Taught.  Rather  the  imperfect,  were  teaching.  They 
had  not  merely  broached  the  error,  but  were  inculcating  it. 

Manner  (e^ei).     Better,  custom,  as  Kev. 

2.  Question  (^i7Tj;yttaTo?).  Found  only  in  the  Acts,  and  al- 
ways of  a  question  in  dispute. 

3.  Being  brought  on  their  way  (irpo'n-efjLcpSivTe's).  Lit., 
homing  been  sent  forth;  imder  escort  as  a  mark  of  honor. 

Declaring.  See  on  ch.  xiii.  41.  In  the  various  towns  along 
their  route. 

4.  Were  received  (a.TreSe'x^^aav).  The  word  implies  a  cor- 
dial welcome,  which  they  were  not  altogether  sure  of  receiving. 

5.  Arose.     In  the  assembly. 
Sect.     See  On  heresies,  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

7.  The  word  of  the  gospel  (rbv  \6yov  tov  evayyeKiov). 
This  phrase  occurs  nowhere  else;  and  evayyiXiov,  gospel,  is 
found  only  once  more  in  Acts  (ch.  xx.  24). 

8.  Which  knoweth  the  heart  (KapSioyvaxTriji;).  Only  here 
and  ch.  i.  24. 

10.  Were  able  {Icrxvcranev).     See  on  Luke  xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  3. 


Ch.  XV.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  525 

12.  Hearkened.  The  imperfect  {ijKovov)  denotes  attention 
to  a  continued  narrative. 

Declaring  (6^ij70i//iei'a)i').  better,  a,s  Hev.,  rehearsing.  See 
on  Luke  xxiv.  35. 

What  miracles,  etc.     Lit.,  how  many  (oa-a). 

13.  James.     See  Introduction  to  Catholic  Epistles. 

18.  Known  unto  God,  etc.  The  best  texts  join  these  words 
with  the  preceding  verse,  from  which  they  omit  all ;  rendering, 
The  Lord,  who  maheth  these  things  Tcnownfrom  the  hegvnning 
of  the  world. 

19.  Trouble  {•irapevoj(Xelv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
See  on  vexed,  Luke  vi.  18. 

20.  Write  {iiria-reTXai).  Originally,  to  send  to,  as  a  message ; 
hence,  by  letter.  The  kindred  noun  iTria-ToXij,  whence  our 
epistle,  means,  originally,  anything  sent  hy  a  messenger.  Letter 
is  a  secondary  meaning. 

Pollutions  (aXia-yTjfjidTmv).  A  word  not  found  in  classical 
Greek,  and  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  The  kindred  verb 
aXiayelv,  to  pollute,  occurs  in  the  Septuagint,  Dan.  i.  8  ;"  Mai. 
i.  7,  and  both  times  in  the  sense  of  defiling  by  food.  Here  the 
word  is  defined  by  things  sacrificed  to  idols  (ver.  29) ;  the  flesh 
of  idol  sacrifices,  of  which  whatever  was  not  eaten  by  the  wor- 
shippers at  the  feasts  in  the  temples,  or  given  to  the  priests, 
was  sold  in  the  markets  and  eaten  at  home.  See  1  Cor.  x.  25- 
28 ;  and  Exod.  xxxiv.  15. 

Fornication.  In  its  literal  sense.  "  The  association  of /b?-- 
nication  with  three  things  in  themselves  indiiferent  is  to  be 
explained  from  the  then  moral  corruption  of  heathenism,  by 
which  fornication,  regarded  from  of  old  with  indulgence,  and 
even  with  favor,  nay,  practised  without  shame  even  by  philoso- 


536  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cs.  XV. 

phers,  and  surrounded  bj  poets  with  all  the  tinsel  of  lascivious- 
ness,  had  become  in  public  opinion  a  thing  really  indifferent ' 
(Meyer).  See  DoUinger,  "The  Gentile  and  the  Jew,"  ii., 
237  sq. 

Strangled.  The  flesh  of  animals  killed  in  snares,  and  whose 
blood  was  not  poured  forth,  was  forbidden  to  the  Israelites. 

23.  Greeting  {xalpeiv).  The  usual  Greek  form  of  saluta- 
tion. It  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  salutation  of  a  Isew  Testa- 
ment epistle  save  in  the  Epistle  of  James  (i.  1).  See  note  there. 
It  appears  in  the  letter  of  Claudius  Lysias  (ch.  xxiii.  26). 

24.  Subverting  {avaatcevd^ovTe'i).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament, and  not  found  either  in  the  Septuagint  oi'  in  the 
Apocrypha.  Originally,  it  means  to  pack  wp  haggage,  and  so 
to  carry  away  /  hence,  to  dismantle  or  disfurnish.  So  Thu- 
cydides  (iv.,  116)  relates  that  Brasidas  captured  Lecythus,  and 
then  pulled  it  down  and  dismantled  it  {avaa-Kevda-a<;).  From 
this  comes  the  more  general  meaning  to  lay  waste,  or  ?'avage. 
The  idea  here  is  that  of  turning  the  minds  of  the  Gentile  con- 
verts iTpside  down ;  throwing  them  into  confusion  like  a  dis- 
mantled house. 

We  gave  no  commandment  {ov  BteaTeiXd/^eSa).  The  word 
originally  means  to  put  asunder  •  hence,  to  distinguish,  and  so 
of  a  commandment  or  injunction,  to  distinguish  and  emphasise 
it.  Therefore  implying  eapress  order's,  and  so  always  in  the 
New  Testament,  where  it  is  almost  uniformly  rendered  charge. 
The  idea  here  is,  then,  "  we  gave  no  express  injunction  on  the 
points  which  these  Judaizers  have  raised." 

25.  Barnabas  and  Paul.  Here,  as  in  ver.  12,  Barnabas  is 
named  first,  contrary  to  the  practice  of  Luke  since  Acts  xiii.  9. 
Barnabas  was  the  elder  and  better  known,  and  in  the  church  at 
Jerusalem  his  name  would  naturally  precede  Paul's.  The  use 
of  the  Greek  salutation,  and  this  order  of  the  names,  are  two 
undesigned  coincidences  going  to  attest  the  genuineness  of  this 


Ch.  XV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  527 

first  document  preserved  to  us  from  the  Acts  of  the  primitive 
church. 

29.  Blood.  Because  in  the  blood  was  the  animal's  life,  and 
it  was  the  blood  that  was  consecrated  to  make  atonement.  See 
Gen.  ix.  6  ;  Lev.  xvii.  10-14  ;  Deut.  xii.  23,  24.  The  Gentiles 
had  no  scruples  about  eating  blood ;  on  the  contrary,  it  was  a 
special  delicacy.     Thus  Homer : 

"  At  ihe  fire 
Already  lie  the  paunches  of  two  goats, 
Preparing  for  our  evening  meal,  and  both 
Are  filled  with  fat  and  blood.     Whoever  shows 
Himself  the  better  man  in  this  afEray, 
And  conquers,  he  shall  take  the  one  of  these 
He  chooses." 

y,  xviii.,  44  sq. 


The  heathen  were  accustomed  to  drink  blood  mingled  with  wine 
at  their  sacrifices. 

Farewell  (eppmcrl^e).  Lit.,  ie  strong,  like  the  Latin  valete. 
Compare  the  close  of  Claudius  Lysias'  letter  to  Festus  (ch.  xxiii. 
30). 

31.  Consolation.     See  on  Acts  ix.  31. 

32.  Many  words.  Or,  lit.,  much  discourse;  adding  the 
spoken  to  the  written  consolation. 

Exhorted.  Or  comforted.  See  on  ver.  31.  The  latter 
agrees  better  with  consolation  there. 

Confirmed.     See  on  ch.  xiv.  22. 

36.  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  {iiriffrpi'^avTe^  Br)  eTrurKeifra)- 
fieSa).  Lit.,  Saving  returned,  let  us  now  visit.  The  A.  Y. 
omits  now.     See  on  ch.  xiii.  2. 

In  every  city  {Kara  iraaav  voXtv).  Kara,  has  the  force  of 
city  by  city. 


528  WOKD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVI 

38.  H'lm  {tovtov).  Lit,  that  one.  It  marks  him  very  strongly, 
and  is  an  emphatic  position  at  the  end  of  the  sentence. 

Departed  {anrocTravra).  Eev.,  withdrew.  It  furnishes  the 
derivation  of  our  word  apostatise. 

39.  The  contention  was  so  sharp  {e<^eveTo  irapo^va-fio':) . 
More  correctly,  there  arose  a  sharj)  contention.  Only  here  and 
Heb.  X.  24.  Our  w  or  A.  paroxysm  is  a  transcription  of  irapo^va- 
fib'i.     An  angry  dispute  is  indicated. 

Barnabas.     The  last  mention  of  him  in  the  Acts. 

40.  Recommended.  Which  was  not  the  case  with  Barna- 
bas, leading  to  the  inference  that  the  church  at  Antioch  took 
Paul's  side  in  the  dispute. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

3.  To  go  forth  {i^eX^elv).  The  word  is  used  of  going  forth 
as  a  missionary  in  Luke  ix.  6  ;  3  John  7. 

6.  Were  established  {ea-repeovvTo).  Rather,  were  strength- 
ened. Another  word  is  used  for  estailished.  See  ch.  xiv.  22 ; 
XV.  32,  41 ;  xviii.  23.  There  is  a  difference,  moreover,  between 
being  strengthened  and  established.     See  1  Pet.  v.  10. 

6.   Asia.     See  on  ch.  ii.  9. 

8.  Passing  by  Mysia.  Not  amoidmig,  since  they  could  not 
reach  Troas  without  traversing  it ;  but  omitting  it  as  a  preach- 
ing-place. 

Came  down.     From  the  highlands  to  the  coast.' 

10.  We  sought.  Note  the  introduction,  for  the  first  time 
here,  of  the  first  person,  intimating  the  presence  of  the  author 
with  Paul. 


Ch.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE   A.POSTLES.  529 

Assuredly  gathering  {crvn/3t,^d^ovTe'i).  See  onproving,  ch. 
ix.  22. 

11.  Came  with  a  straight  course  (ev^vSpofi^aa/Mev).  Lit., 
we  ran  a  straight  course.  A  nautical  term  for  sailing  hefore  the 
wind. 

12.  Chief  {-TrpeoTT]).  Some  explain,  the  Jlrst  city  to  which 
they  came  in  Macedonia. 

A  colony  {koXcovCo).  Roman  towns  were  of  two  classes: 
Tnunicipia,  or  free  towns,  and  colonies.  The  distinction,  how- 
ever, was  not  sharply  maintained,  so  that,  in  some  cases,  we  find 
the  same  town  bearing  both  names.  The  two  names  involved 
no  difference  of  right  or  of  privilege.  The  historical  difference 
between  a  colony  and  a  free  town  is,  that  the  fi'ee  towns  were 
taken  into  the  state  from  without,  while  the  colonies  were  off- 
shoots from  within.  "  The  municipal  cities  insensibly  equalled 
the  rank  and  splendor  of  the  colonies  ;  and  in  the  reign  of  Ha- 
drian it  was  disputed  which  was  the  preferable  condition,  of 
those  societies  which  had  issued  from,  or  those  which  had  been 
received  into,  the  bosom  of  Home "  (Gibbon,  "  Decline  and 
Fall "). 

The  colony  was  used  for  three  different  purposes  in  the  course 
of  Roman  history  :  as  a  fortified  outpost  in  a  conquered  country  ; 
as  a  means  of  providing  for  the  poor  of  Rome ;  and  as  a  settle- 
ment for  veterans  who  had  served  their  time.  It  is  with  the 
third  class,  established  by  Augustus,  that  we  have  to  do  here. 
The  Romans  divided  mankind  into  citiseiis  and  strangers.  An 
inhabitant  of  Italy  was  a  citizen ;  an  inhabitant  of  any  other 
part  of  the  empire  was  z,  j)eregrinv,s,  or  stranger.  The  colonial 
policy  abolished  this  distinction  so  far  as  privileges  were  con- 
cerned. The  idea  of  a  colony  was,  that  it  was  another  Rome 
transferred  to  the  soil  of  another  country.  In  his  establishment 
of  colonies,  Augustus,  in  some  instances,  expelled  the  existing 
inhabitants  and  founded  entirely  new  towns  with  his  colonists  ; 
in  others,  he  merely  added  his  settlers  to  the  existing  population 
of  the  town  then  receiving  the  rank  and  title  of  a  colony.  In 
34 


530  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVL 

some  instances  a  place  received  these  without  receiving  any  new 
citizens  at  all.  Both  classes  of  citizens  were  in  possession  of  the 
same  privileges,  the  principal  of  which  were,  exemption  from 
scourging,  freedom  from  arrest,  except  in  extreme  cases,  and, 
in  all  cases,  the  right  of  appeal  from  the  magistrate  to  the  em- 
peror. The  names  of  the  colonists  were  still  enrolled  in  one  of 
the  Eoman  tribes.  The  traveller  heard  the  Latin  language  and 
was  amenable  to  the  Roman  law.  The  coinage  of  the  city  had 
Latin  inscriptions.  The  affairs  of  the  colony  were  regulated 
by  their  own  magistrates,  named  Duumviri,  who  took  pride 
in  calling  themselves  by  the  Eoman  title  of  jpraetors  (see  on 
ver.  20). 

13.  Out  of  the  city  (e'|^w  t^9  TroXetBs).  The  best  texts  read 
ttuXt;?,  the  gate. 

River.     Probably  the  Gcungas  or  Oangites. 

Where  prayer  was  wont  to  be  made  {ov  ivofii^ero  Trpo- 

a-evxv  elvai).  The  best  texts  read  ivo/ii^ofj-ev  Trpoa-evxrjv,  where 
we  suj)posed  there  was  a  place  of  prayer.  The  number  of  Jews 
in  Philippi  was  small,  since  it  was  a  military  and  not  a  mercan- 
tile city ;  consequently  there  was  no  synagogue,  but  only  a 
proseucha,  or  jyraying-place,  a  slight  structure,  and  often  open 
to  the  sky.  It  was  outside  the  gate,  for  the  sake  of  retirement, 
and  near  a  stream,  because  of  the  ablutions  connected  with  the 
worship. 

14.  Lydia.  An  adjective:  the  Lydian ;  but  as  Lydia  was  a 
common  name  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  it  does  not  fol- 
low that  she  was  named  from  her  native  country. 

A  seller  of  purple.     On  purple,  see  note  on  Luke  xvi.  19. 

Thyatira.  The  district  of  Lydia,  and  the  city  of  Thyatira 
in  particular,  were  famous  for  purple  dyes.     So  Homer : 


Ch.  XVI.]        THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  631 

"  As  when  some  Carian  or  Maeonian  *  dame 
Tinges  with  purple  the  white  ivory, 
To  form  a  trapping  for  the  cheeks  of  steeds." 

Iliad,  iv.,  141. 

An  inscription  found  in  the  ruins  of  Thyatira  relates  to  the 
guild  of  dyers. 

H  eard  i^KOvev).     Imperfect,  was  hearing  while  we  preached. 

15.  Constrained  {"Trape/Stda-aro).  Only  here  and  Luke  xxiv. 
29,  on  which  see  note.  The  constraint  was  from  ardent  grati- 
tude. 

16.  Damsel.     See  on  ch.  xii.  13. 

Spirit  of  divination  {irvevfia  Uvd-eova).  Lit.,  a  spirit,  a 
Python.  Python,  in  the  Greek  mythology,  was  the  serpent 
which  guarded  Delphi.  According  to  the  legend,  as  related  in 
the  Homeric  hymn,  Apollo  descended  from  Olympus  in  order 
to  select  a  site  for  his  shrine  and  oracle.  Having  fixed  upon 
a  spot  on  the  southern  side  of  Mount  Parnassus,  he  found  it 
guarded  by  a  vast  and  terrific  serpent,  which  he  slew  with  an 
arrow,  and  suifered  its  body  to  rot  {-n-vl^eiv)  in  the  sun.  Hence 
the  name  of  the  serpent  Python  (rotting) ;  Pyiho,  the  name  of 
the  place,  and  the  epithet  Pythian,  applied  to  Apollo.  The 
name  Python  was  subsequently  used  to  denote  a  prophetic  de- 
mon, and  was  also  used  of  soothsayers  who  practised  ventrilo- 
quism, or  speaking  from  the  belly.  The  word  iiyyaa-TpifivS^oi;, 
ventriloquist,  occurs  in  the  Septuagint,  and  is  rendered  having 
a  familiar  spirit  (see  Levit.  xix.  31 ;  xx.  6,  27 ;  1  Sam.  xxviii. 
7,  8).  The  heathen  inhabitants  of  Philippi  regarded  the 
woman  as  inspired  by  Apollo ;  and  Luke,  in  recording  this  case, 
which  came  under  his  own  observation,  uses  the  term  which 
would  naturally  suggest  itself  to  a  Greek  physician,  a  Python- 
spirit,  presenting  phenomena  identical  with  the  convulsive 
movements  and  wild  cries  of  the  Pythian  priestess  at  Delphi. 

•  Caria,  the  province  adjoining  Lydia  on  the  south ;  Maeonia,  the  ancient 
name  of  Lydia. 


532  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVL 

Soothsaying  {navTevofiivr}).  Akin  to  fiaivo/jLui,  to  ra/ve,  in 
allusion  to  the  temporary  madness  which  possessed  the  priestess 
or  sibyl  while  under  the  influence  of  the  god.  Compare  Yir- 
gil's  description  of  the  Cumaean  Sibyl : 

"  And  as  the  word  she  spake 
Within  the  door,  all  suddenly  her  visage  and  her  hue 
Were  changed,  and  all  her  sleeked  hair  and  gasping  breath  she  drew, 
And  with  the  rage  her  wild  heart  swelled,  and  greater  was  she  grown, 
Nor  mortal-voiced  ;  for  breath  of  god  upon  her  heart  was  blown 
As  he  drew  nigher. " 

Aeneid,  vi. ,  45  sq. 

18.  Grieved  {SiaTrovrji^eh).  Not  strong  enough.  Rather, 
woj'n  out.  Both  grieved  at  the  sad  condition  of  the  woman, 
and  thoroughly  annoyed  and  indignant  at  the  continued  demon- 
strations of  the  evil  spirit  which  possessed  her.  Compare  ch. 
iv.  2. 

19.  Was  gone  {e^rjXSev).     Went  out  with  the  evil  spirit. 

20.  Magistrates  (a-T/3aT777ot?).  Their  usual  name  was  ^^-m-mtw- 
vwi,  answering  to  the  consuls  of  Rome ;  but  they  took  pride 
in  calling  themselves  crTpaTrjjoi,  or  praetors,  as  being  a  more 
honorable  title.  This  is  the  only  place  in  the  Acts  where  Luke 
applies  the  term  to  the  rulers  of  a  city.  See  Introduction  to 
Luke. 

Jews.  Who  at  this  time  were  in  special  disgrace,  having 
been  lately  banished  from  Rome  by  Claudius  (see  Acts  xviii.  2). 
The  Philippians  do  not  appear  to  have  recognized  the  distinc- 
tion between  Christians  and  Jews. 

21.  Being  Romans.  The  Romans  granted  absolute  tolera- 
tion to  conquered  nations  to  follow  their  own  religious  customs, 
and  took  the  gods  of  these  countries  under  their  protection. 
Otho,  Domitian,  Commodus,  and  Caracalla  were  zealous  parti- 
sans of  the  worship  of  Isis ;  Serapis  and  Cybele  were  patronized 
at  Rome ;  and  in  the  reign  of  Nero  the  religious  dilettanti  at 
Rome  affected  Judaism,  and  professed  to  honor  the  name  of 
Moses  and  the  sacred  books.     Poppaea,  Nero's  consort,   was 


Ch.  XVI.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  533 

their  patroness,  and  Seneca  said,  "  the  Jewish  faith  is  now  re- 
ceived on  every  hand.  The  conquered  have  given  laws  to  the 
conquerors."  On  the  other  hand,  there  were  laws  which  for- 
bade the  introduction  of  strange  deities  among  the  Romans 
themselves.  In  186  e.g.,  when  stringent  measures  were  taken 
by  the  government  for  the  repression  of  Bacchanalian  orgies  in 
Home,  one  of  the  consuls,  addressing  an  assembly  of  the  people, 
said :  "  How  often  in  the  ages  of  our  fathei'S  was  it  given  in 
charge  to  the  magistrates  to  prohibit  the  performance  of  any 
foreign  religious  rites ;  to  banish  strolling  sacrificers  and  sooth- 
sayers from  the  fornm,  the  circus,  and  the  city  ;  to  search  for 
and  burn  books  of  divination ;  and  to  abolish  every  mode  of  sac- 
rificing that  was  not  conformable  to  the  Koman  practice  "  (Livy, 
xxxix.,  16).  It  was  contrary  to  strict  Roman  law  for  the  Jews 
to  propagate  their  opinions  among  the  Romans,  though  they 
might  make  proselytes  of  other  nations. 

22.  Rent  off  their  clothes  {■n-epipprj^avTe';).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  By  the  usual  formula  of  command  to  the  lie- 
tors  :  Go,  Uctors  y  strip  off  their  garments  ;  let  them  he  scourged  ! 

To  beat  (^pa^Si^eiv).  From  pd^So'i,  a  rod.  Rev.  properly 
adds,  with  rods. 

23.  Prison.     See  on  ch.  v.  21. 

24.  The  inner  prison.  Some  have  supposed  this  to  be  the 
lower  prison,  being  misled  by  the  remains  of  the  Mamertine 
prison  at  Rome,  on  the  declivity  of  the  Capitoline,  and  near  the 
Arch  of  Septimius  Severus.  This  consists  of  two  chambers,  one 
above  the  other,  excavated  in  the  solid  rock.  In  the  centre  of 
the  vault  of  the  lower  chamber  is  a  circular  opening,  through 
which  it  is  supposed  that  prisoners  were  let  down  into  the  dun- 
geon. Modern  excavations,  however,  have  shown  that  these 
two  chambers  were  connected  with  a  series  of  large  chambers, 
now  separated  by  an  alley  from  the  prison  of  St.  Peter.  The 
opening  into  the  passage  leading  to  these  was  discovered  in  the 
lower  dungeon.     Under  this  passage  ran  a  drain,  which  formed 


534  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cn.  XVI 

a  branch  of  the  Cloaca  Maxima,  or  main  sewer.  Six  of  these 
chambers  have  been  brought  to  light,  evidently  apartments  of  a 
large  prison  in  the  time  of  the  Eoman  kings.  Mr.  John  Henry- 
Parker,  from  whose  elaborate  work  on  the  primitive  fortifica- 
tions of  Rome  these  details  are  drawn,  believes  that  the  prison 
of  St.  Peter  now  shown  to  tourists  firmed  the  vestibule  and 
guard-room  of  the  great  prison.  It  was  customary  to  have 
a  vestibule,  or  house  for  the  warder,  at  a  short  distance  from 
the  main  prison.  Thus  he  distinguishes  the  inner  prison  from 
this  vestibule.  With  this  agrees  the  description  in  the  He  v. 
John  Henry  Newman's  "  Callista  : "  "  The  state  prison  was 
arranged  on  pretty  much  one  and  the  same  plan  through  the 
Poman  empire,  nay,  we  may  say  throughout  the  ancient  world. 
It  was  commonly  attached  to  the  government  buildings,  and 
consisted  of  two  parts.  The  first  was  the  vestibule,  or  outward 
prison,  approached  from  the  praetorium,  and  surrounded  by  cells 
opening  into  it.  The  prisoners  who  were  confined  in  these 
cells  had  the  benefit  of  the  air  and  light  which  the  hall  ad- 
mitted. From  the  vestibule  there  was  a  passage  into  the  inte- 
rior prison,  called  Rolyur  or  Lignum,  from  the  beams  of  wood 
which  were  the  instruments  of  confinement,  or  from  the  char- 
acter of  its  floor.  It  had  no  window  or  outlet  except  this  door, 
which,  when  closed,  absolutely  shut  out  light  and  air.  This 
apartment  was  the  place  into  which  Paul  and  Silas  were  cast  at 
Philippi.  The  utter  darkness,  the  heat,  and  the  stench  of  this 
miserable  place,  in  which  the  inmates  were  confined  day  and 
night,  is  often  dwelt  upon  by  the  martyrs  and  their  biogra- 
phers." 

Stocks  {^vhjov).  Lit.,  ihetimher.  An  instrument  of  torture 
having  five  holes,  four  for  the  wrists  and  ankles  and  one  for  the 
neck.  The  same  word  is  used  for  the  cross,  ch.  v.  30  ;  x.  39  ; 
Gal.  iii.  13  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24. 

25.  Prayed  and  sang  praises  {irpoa-evxofievoiv/Mvovv).  Lit., 
praying,  they  sang  hymns.  The  praying  and  the  praise  are  not 
described  as  distinct  acts.  Their  singing  of  hymns  was  their 
prayer,  probably  Psalms. 


Ch.  xvi]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  535 

27.  Would  have  killed  (e/aeX\e J)  ai/at/seti/).  Ee v.,  more  cor- 
rectly, was  about  to  kill.  Knowing  that  he  naust  suffer  death 
for  the  escape  of  his  prisoners. 

29.  A  light  (0wT«).  Eev.,  more  correctly,  lights.  Several 
lamps,  in  order  to  search  everywhere. 

Sprang  in.     See  on  ran  in,  ch.  xiv.  14. 

33.  He  took  {trapaXa^ibv).  Strictly,  "took  them  along  with 
{■rrapd)  him  :  "  to  some  other  part  of  the  prison. 

Washed  their  stripes  {e\ovaev  utto  ravirXtjy&v).  Properly, 
"  washed  them  Jrom  (airo)  their  stripes."  The  verb  \ovei,v  ex- 
presses the  bathing  of  the  entire  body  (Heb.  x.  23  ;  Acts  ix.  37 ; 
2  Pet.  ii.  22)  ;  while  viirrew  commonly  means  tlie  washing  of 
&;part  of  the  body  (Matt.  vi.  17 ;  Mark  vii.  3  ;  Jolm  xiii.  6).  The 
jailer  bathed  them ;  cleansing  them  from  the  blood  with  which 
they  were  besprinkled  from  the  stripes. 

34.  Brought  {avcvycuydav).  Lit.,  "brought  up  (am)."  His 
house  would  seem  to  have  been  above  the  court  of  the  prison 
where  they  were.     See  on  tooTc,  ver.  33. 

Believing  {ireinaTevicm).  More  correctly,  homing  beli&ved; 
assigning  the  reason  for  his  joy  :  "  in  that  he  had  believed." 

35.  Serjeants  (pa^Bovxov^).  Lit.,  those  who  hold  the  rod. 
The  Koman  lictors.  They  were  the  attendants  of  the  chief 
Roman  magistrates. 

' '  Ho,  trumpets,  sound  a  war-note  ! 
Ho,  lictors,  clear  the  way  ! 
The  knights  will  ride,  in  all  their  pride, 
Along  the  streets  to-day." 

MACAUiiAY,  Lays  of  Ancient  Borne. 

They  preceded  the  magistrates  one  by  one  in  a  line.     They  had 
to  inflict  punishment  on  the  condemned,  especially  on  Eoman 


536  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVII, 

citizens.  They  also  commanded  the  people  to  pay  proper  re- 
spect to  a  passing  magistrate,  by  uncovering,  dismounting  from 
horseback,  and  standing  out  of  the  way.  The  badge  of  their 
office  was  the  fasces,  an  axe  bound  up  in  a  bundle  of  rods  ;  but 
in  the  colonies  they  carried  staves. 

Those  men.     Contemptuous. 

37.  They  have  beaten  us  publicly,  uncondemned,  men 
that  are  Romans.  Hackett  remarks  that  "  almost  every  word 
in  this  reply  contains  a  distinct  allegation.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  find  or  frame  a  sentence  superior  to  it  in  point  of  energetic 
brevity."  Cicero  in  his  oration  against  Yerres  relates  that  there 
was  a  Roman  citizen  scourged  at  Messina ;  and  that  in  the  midst 
of  the  noise  of  the  rods,  nothing  was  heard  from  him  but  the 
words,  "I  am  a  Roman  citizen."  He  says:  "It  is  a  dreadful 
deed  to  hi7id  a  Roman  citizen  ;  it  is  a  crime  to  scourge  him  ;  it 
is  almost  j)arricide  to  put  hi7n  to  death.'''' 

40.  They  went  out.  Note  that  Luke  here  resumes  the  third 
person,  implying  that  he  did  not  accompany  them. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

3.  Opening  and  alleging.  The  latter  word  is  rather ^to- 
pouTiding,  or  setting  forth  {■rrapanS^efievo';).  See  ou  set  b^ore, 
Luke  is.  16 ;  and  com^nit,  1  Pet.  iv.  19.  Bengel  remarks,  "  Two 
steps,  as  if  one,  having  broken  the  rind,  were  to  disclose  and  ex- 
hibit the  kernel." 

4.  Consorted  with  {TrpoaeKKripdoSTja-av).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.     More  strictly,  "  were  added  or  allotted  to." 

Chief  women.  The  position  of  women  in  Macedonia  seems 
to  have  been  exceptional.  Popular  prejudice,  and  the  verdict 
of  Grecian  wisdom  in  its  best  age,  asserted  her  natural  inferior- 
ity.    The  Athenian  law  provided  that  everything  which  a  man 


Ch.  XVII.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  537 

might  do  by  the  counsel  or  request  of  a  woman  should  be  null 
in  law.  She  was  little  better  than  a  slave.  To  educate  her  was 
to  advertise  her  as  a  harlot.  Her  companions  were  principally 
children  and  slaves.  In  Macedonia,  however,  monuments  were 
erected  to  women  by  public  bodies  ;  and  records  of  male  proper 
names  are  found,  in  Macedonian  inscriptions,  formed  on  the 
mother's  name  instead  of  on  the  fatlier's.  Macedonian  women 
were  permitted  to  hold  property,  and  were  treated  as  mistresses 
of  the  house.  These  facts  are  borne  out  by  the  account  of 
Paul's  labors  in  Macedonia.  In  Thessalonica,  Beroea,  and  Phi- 
lippi  we  note  additions  of  women  of  rank  to  the  church ;  and 
their  prominence  in  church  affairs  is  indicated  by  Paul's  spe- 
cial appeal  to  two  ladies  in  the  church  at  Philippi  to  reconcile 
their  differences,  which  had  caused  disturbance  in  the  church, 
and  by  his  commending  themi  to  his  colleagues  as  women  who 
had  labored  with  him  in  the  Lord  (Philip,  iv.  2,  3). 

6.  Of  the  baser  sort  {ajopaimv).  From  dyopd,  the  market- 
place ;  hence  loungers  in  the  market-place ;  the  rabhle.  Cicero 
calls  them  subrostrani,  those  who  hung  round  the  rostra,  or 
platform  for  speakers  in  the  forum  ;  and  Plautus,  subbasiUcani, 
the  loungers  round  the  court-house  or  exchange.  The  word 
occurs  only  here  and  ch.  xix.  38,  on  which  see  note. 

Gathered  a  company  {o'xXoTToirjcravTe'i).  Kev.,  better,  a 
crowd.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

6.  Rulers  of  the  city  (7ro\{Tapx«?)-  Another  illustration  of 
Luke's  accuracy.  Note  that  the  magistrates  are  called  by  a 
different  name  from  those  at  Philippi.  Thessalonica  was  not  a 
colony,  but  2ifree  city  (see  on  colony,  ch.  xvi.  12),  and  was  gov- 
erned by  its  own  rulers,  whose  titles  accordingly  did  not  follow 
those  of  Roman  magistrates.  The  word  occurs  only  here  and 
ver.  8,  and  has  been  found  in  an  inscription  on  an  arch  at  Thes- 
salo'nica,  where  the  names  of  the  eeven  politarchs  are  men- 
tioned. The  arch  is  thought  by  antiquarians  to  have  been 
standing  in  Paul's  time. 


538  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVIL 

7.  Contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Caesar.  The  charge  at 
Philippi  was  that  of  introducing  new  customs ;  but  as  Thessa- 
lonica  was  not  a  colony,  that  charge  conld  have  no  force  there. 
The  accusation  substituted  is  that  of  treason  against  the  em- 
peror ;  that  of  which  Jesus  was  accused  before  Pilate.  "  The 
law  of  treason,  by  which  the  ancient  legislators  of  the  republic 
had  sought  to  protect  popular  liberty  from  the  encroachments 
of  tyranny,  .  .  .  was  gradually  concentrated  upon  the  em- 
peror alone,  the  sole  impersonation  of  the  sovereign  people. 
The  definition  of  the  crime  itself  was  loose  and  elastic,  such  as 
equally  became  the  jealousy  of  a  licentious  republic  or  of  a 
despotic  usurper"  (Merivale,  "History  of  the  Komans  under 
the  Empire  "). 

9.  Security  {to  ikuvov).  See  on  Luke  vii.  6.  £ail,  either 
personal  or  by  a  deposit  of  money.  A  law  term.  They  en- 
gaged that  the  public  peace  should  not  be  violated,  and  that 
the  authors  of  the  disturbance  should  leave  the  city. 

11.  Searched.     Or  examined.     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  14. 

12.  Honorable  women.     See  on  ver.  4,  and  Mark  xv.  43. 

15. , They  that  conducted  {Ka^uTT&vre<i).  Lit.,  'brought  to 
the  spot.  Note  the  different  word  employed,  ch.  xv.  3  (see  note 
there). 

16.  Was  stirred  {m-apw^vveTo).  Better,  as  Rev.,  was  ^ro- 
vohed.  See  on  the  kindred  word  contention  {irapo^v&no's),  ch. 
XV.  39. 

Saw  {^eojpovvTt).     Better,  heheld.     See  on  Luke  x.  18. 

Wholly  given  to  idolatry  {KarelSmXov).  Incorrect.  The 
word,  which  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  no- 
where in  classical  Greek,  mea.nB  full  of  idols.  It  applies  to  the 
city,  not  to  the  inhabitants.     "  We  learn  from  Pliny  that  at 


Ch.  XVn.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  539 

the  time  of  Nero,  Athens  contained  over  three  thousand  public 
statues,  besides  a  countless  number  of  lesser  images  within  the 
walls  of  private  houses.  Of  this  number  the  great  majority 
were  statues  of  gods,  demi-gods,  or  heroes.  In  one  street  there 
stood  before  every  house  a  square  pillar  carrying  upon  it  a  bust 
of  the  god  Hermes.  Another  street,  named  the  Street  of  the 
Tripods,  was  lined  with  tripods,  dedicated  by  winners  in  the 
Greek  national  games,  and  carrying  each  one  an  inscription  to 
a  deity.  Every  gateway  and  porch  carried  its  protecting  god. 
Every  street,  every  square,  nay,  every  purlieu,  had  its  sanctu- 
aries, and  a  Roman  poet  bitterly  remarked  that  it  was  easier  in 
Athens  to  find  gods  than  men"  (G.  S.  Davies,  "  St.  Paul  in 
Greece  "). 

18.  Epicureans.  Disciples  of  Epicurus,  and  atheists.  They 
acknowledged  God  in  words,  but  denied  his  providence  and 
superintendence  over  the  world.  According  to  them,  the  soul 
was  material  and  annihilated  at  death.  Pleasure  was  their 
chief  good;  and  whatever  higher  sense  their  founder  might 
have  attached  to  this  doctrine,  his  followers,  in  the  apostle's 
day,  were  given  to  gross  sensualism. 

Stoics.  Pantheists.  God  was  the  soul  of  the  world,  or 
the  world  was  God.  Everything  was  governed  by  fate,  to 
which  God  himself  was  subject.  They  denied  the  universal 
and  perpetual  immortality  of  the  soul ;  some  supposing  that  it 
was  swallowed  up  in  deity ;  others,  that  it  survived  only  till 
the  final  conflagration ;  others,  that  immortality  was  restricted 
to  the  wise  and  good.  Yirtue  was  its  own  reward,  and  vice  its 
own  punishment.  Pleasure  was  no  good,  and  pain  no  evil. 
The  name  Stoic  was  derived  from  stoa,  a  porch.  Zeno,  the 
founder  of  the  Stoic  sect,  held  his  school  in  the  Stoa  Poecile, 
Gv  jpavnted  portico,  so  called  because  adorned  with  pictures  by 
the  best  masters. 

Babbler  {crirepiio'Kcyyoi).  Lit.,  seed-picher :  a  bird  which 
picks  up  seeds  in  the  streets  and  markets ;  hence  one  who  picks 


f)40  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XVIL 

up  and  retails  scraps  of  news.     Trench  ("  Authorized  Yersion 
of  the  New  Testament ")  cites  a  parallel  from  Shakespeare  : 

"  This  fellow  picks  up  wit  as  pigeons  peas, 
And  utters  it  again  when  Jove  doth  please. 
He  is  wit's  pedler,  and  retails  his  wares 
At  wakes,  and  wassails,  meetings,  markets,  fairs." 

Love's  Labor's  Lost,  v. ,  3. 

Setter-forth  {KUTayyeXev';).  See  on  declare,  ver.  23.  Com- 
pare 1  Pet.  iv.  4,  12. 

Strange.     Foreign. 

19.  Areopagus.  The  Hill  of  Mars :  the  seat  of  the  ancient 
and  venerable  Athenian  court  which  decided  the  most  solemn 
questions  connected  with  religion.  Socrates  was  arraigned  and 
condemned  hei'e  on  the  charge  of  innovating  on  the  state  relig- 
ion. It  received  its  name  from  the  legend  of  the  trial  of  Mars  for 
the  murder  of  the  son  of  Neptune.  The  judges  sat  in  the  open 
air  upon  seats  hewn  out  in  the  rock,  on  a  platform  ascended  by 
a  flight  of  stone  steps  immediately  from  the  market-place.  A 
temple  of  Mars  was  on  the  brow  of  the  edifice,  and  the  sanctu- 
ary of  the  Furies  was  in  a  broken  cleft  of  the  rock  immediately 
below  the  judges'  seats.  The  Acropolis  rose  above  it,  with  the 
Parthenon  and  the  colossal  statue  of  Athene.  "  It  was  a  scene 
with  which  the  dread  recollections  of  centuries  were  associated. 
Those  who  withdrew  to  the  Areopagus  from  the  Agora,  came, 
as  it  were,  into  the  presence  of  a  higher  power.  No  place  in 
Athens  was  so  suitable  for  a  discourse  upon  the  mysteries  of 
religion"  (Conybeare  and  Howson).* 

20.  Strange  {^evi^ovra).  A  participle :  surprising.  Com- 
pare 1  Pet.  iv.  4,  12. 

21.  All  the  Athenians.  No  article.  Lit.,  "Athenians,  all 
of  them."     The  Athenian  people  collectively. 

*  For  fuller  descriptions,  see  Lewin,  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul;  Davies, 
St.  Paul  in  Greece  ;  Smith,  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geography, 
Art.,  AtJiens. 


Ch.  XVII.]  THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  541 

Strangers  which  were  there  (ot  eTriSTj/iowre?  ^evoi).  Eev., 
more  correctly,  the  strangers  sojourning  there.  See  on  1  Pet. 
i.  1. 

Spent  thei  r  time  (evKaipow).  The  word  means  to  have  good 
opportunity;  to  have  leisure :  also,  to  devote  one^s  leisure  to  some- 
thing ;  to  spend  the  time.    Compare  Mark  vi.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  12. 

Something  new  {tl  KaivoTepov).  Lit.,  newer:  newer  than 
that  which  was  then  passing  current  as  new.  The  comparative 
was  regularly  used  by  the  Greeks  in  the  question  what  news  ? 
They  contrasted  what  was  new  with  what  had  been  new  up  to 
the  time  of  asking.  The  idiom  vividly  characterizes  the  state 
of  the  Athenian  mind.  Bengel  aptly  says,  "  New  things  at  once 
became  of  no  account ;  newer  things  were  being  sought  for." 
Their  own  orators  and  poets  lashed  them  for  this  peculiarity. 
Aristophanes  styles  Athens  the  city  of  the  gajpers  ("  Knights," 
1262).  Demades  said  that  the  crest  of  Athens  ought  to  be  a 
great  tongue.  Demosthenes  asks  them,  "  Is  it  all  your  care  to  go 
about  up  and  down  the  market,  asking  each  other, '  Is  there  any 
news  ? ' "  In  the  speech  of  Cleon  to  the  Athenians,  given  by 
Thucydides  (iii.,  38),  he  says :  "  ISTo  men  are  better  dupes, 
sooner  deceived  by  novel  notions,  or  slower  to  follow  approved 
advice.  You  despise  what  is  familiar,  while  you  are  worship- 
pers of  every  new  extravagance.  You  are  always  hankering 
after  an  ideal  state,  but  you  do  not  give  your  minds  even  to 
what  is  straight  before  you.  In  a  word,  you  are  at  the  mercy 
of  your  own  ears." 

22.  I  perceive  (^ewpw).  I  regard  you,  in  my  careful  obser- 
vation of  you.     See  on  Luke  x.  18. 

Too  superstitious  (Seia-iSaifioveaTepov}).  This  rendering 
and  that  of  the  Eev.,  somewhat  superstitious,  are  both  unfortu- 
nate. The  word  is  compounded  of  SelSw,  to  fear,  and  haifitov,  a 
deity.  It  signifies  either  a  religious  or  a,  superstitious  sentiment, 
according  to  the  context.  Paul  would  have  been  unlikely  to 
begin  his  address  with  a  charge  which  would  have  awakened 


542  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XVIL 

the  anger  of  his  audience.  What  he  means  to  say  is,  You  are 
more  dvoinity -fearing  than  the  rest  of  tlie  Greelcs.  This  pro- 
pensity to  reverence  tlie  higher  powers  is  a  good  thing  in  itself, 
only,  as  he  shovvs  them,  it  is  misdirected,  not  rightly  conscious 
of  its  object  and  aim.  Paul  proposes  to  guide  the  sentiment 
rightly  by  revealing  him  whom  they  ignorantly  worship.  The 
American  revisers  insist  on  very  religious.  The  kindred  word 
SeicrtSai/jLovia  occurs  ch.  xxv.  19,  and  in  the  sense  of  religion, 
though  rendered  in  A.  V.  superstition.  Festns  would  not  call 
the  Jewish  religion  a  superstition  before  Agrippa,  ^vho  was  him- 
self a  Jew.  There  is  the  testimony  of  the  Ephesian  town-clerk, 
that  Paul,  during  his'  three  years'  residence  at  Ephesus,  did  not 
rudely  and  coarsely  attack  the  worship  of  the  Ephesian  Diana. 
"  Nor  yet  blasphemers  of  your  goddess  "  (Acts  xix.  37). 

23.  As  I  passed  by  {hepxofievo^).  More  strictly,  "passing 
through  {Sid)  "  yonr  city,  or  your  streets. 

Beheld  (dvaSemp&v).  Only  here  and  Heb.  xiii.  7.  Eev., 
much  better,  observed.  The  compound  verb  denotes  a  very  at- 
tentive consideration  (dvd,  up  and  down,  throughout). 

Devotions  {a-e^da-fiaTo).  Wrong.  It  means  the  objects  of 
their  worship — temples,  altars,  statues,  etc. 

An  altar  {^afibv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament,  and  the 
only  case  in  which  a  heathen  altar  is  alluded  to.  In  all  other 
cases  ^vaiaarripiov  is  used,  signifying  an  altar  of  the  true  God. 
The  Septuagint  translators  commonly  observe  this  distinction, 
being,  in  this  respect,  more  particular  than  the  Hebrew  script- 
ures themselves,  which  sometimes  interchange  the  word  for  the 
heathen  altar  and  that  for  God's  altar.  See,  especially,  Josh, 
xxii.,  where  the  altar  reared  by  the  Transjordanic  tribes  is 
called  ^afi6<;,  as  being  no  true  altar  of  God  (vv.  10,  11,  16,  19, 
23,  26,  34) ;  and  the  legitimate  altar,  Sva-iacTTijpiov  (vv.  19, 
28,  29). 

To  the  unknown  God  {dr/vmcrT^  ©em).  The  article  is  want- 
ing.   Render,  as  Rev.,  to  an  unknown  God.    The  origin  of  these 


Ch.  XVn.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  543 

altars,  of  which  there  were  several  in  Athens,  is  a  matter  of 
conjecture.  Hackett's  remarks  on  this  point  are  sensible,  and 
are  borne  out  by  the  following  words :  "  whom  therefore,"  etc. 
"  The  most  rational  explanation  is  unquestionably  that  of  those 
who  suppose  these  altars  to  have  had  their  origin  in  the  feel- 
ing of  uncertainty,  inherent,  after  all,  in  the  minds  of  the  hea- 
then, whether  their  acknowledgment  of  the  superior  powers  was 
sufficiently  full  and  comprehensive ;  in  their  distinct  conscious- 
ness of  the  limitation  and  imperfection  of  their  religious  views, 
and  their  consequent  desire  to  avoid  the  anger  of  any  still  un- 
acknowledged god  who  might  be  unknown  to  them.  That  no 
deity  might  punish  them  for  neglecting  his  worship,  or  remain 
uninvoked  in  asking  for  blessings,  they  not  only  erected  altars 
to  all  the  gods  named  or  known  among  them,  but,  distrustful 
still  lest  they  might  not  comprehend  fully  the  extent  of  their 
subjection  and  dependence,  they  erected  them  also  to  any  other 
god  or  power  that  might  exist,  although  as  yet  unrevealed  to 
them.  .  .  .  Under  these  circumstances  an  allusion  to  one  of 
these  altars  by  the  apostle  would  be  equivalent  to  his  saying  to 
the  Athenians  thus  :  '  You  are  correct  in  acknowledging  a  divine 
existence  beyond  any  which  the  ordinary  rites  of  your  worship 
recognize  ;  there  is  such  an  existence.  You  are  correct  in  con- 
fessing that  this  Being  is  unknown  to  you ;  you  have  no  just 
conceptions  of  his  nature  and  perfections.' " 

Ignorantly  (a7i'oowT6s).  father,  unconsoioush/ :  not  know- 
ing. There  is  a  kind  of  play  on  the  words  unknown,  knowing 
not.     IgnorantVy  conveys  more  rebuke  than  Paul  intended. 

Declare  I  {KaTaryyiXKa)).  Compare  KarayyeXeii';,  setter-forih, 
in  ver.  18.  Here,  again,  there  is  a  play  upon  the  words.  Paul 
takes  up  their  noun,  setter-forth,  and  gives  it  back  to  them  as  a 
verb.  "  You  say  I  am  a  setter-forth  of  strange  gods :  I  now  set 
forth  unto  you  (Rev.)  the  true  God." 

24.  God.     With  the  article :  "^AeGod." 

The  world  {rhv  Koa-fiov).  Originally,  order,  and  hence  the 
order  of  the  world  ;  the  ordered  universe.   So  in  classical  Greek. 


544  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVU 

In  the  Septuagint,  never  the  world,  but  the  ordered  total  of  the 
heamenly  hodies ;  tlie  host  of  heaven  (Deut.  iv.  19  ;  xvii.  3  ;  Isa. 
xxiv.  21 ;  xl.  26).  Compare,  also,  Prov.  xvii.  6,  and  see  note 
on  Jas.  iii.  6.  In  the  apocryphal  books,  of  the  universe,  and 
mainly  in  the  relation  between  God  and  it  arising  out  of  the 
creation.  Thus,  the  king  of  the  world  (2  Mace.  vii.  9) ;  the 
creator  or  founder  of  the  world  (2  Mace.  vii.  23) ;  the  great 
potentate  of  the  world  (2  Mace.  xii.  15).  In  the  K^ew  Testa- 
ment :  1.  In  the  classical  and  physical  sense,  the  universe  {John 
xvii.  5 ;  xxi.  25  ;  Rom.  i.  20 ;  Eph.  i.  4,  etc.).  2.  As  the  order 
of  things  of  which  man  is  the  centre  (Matt.  xiii.  38  ;  Mark  xvi. 
15  ;  Luke  ix.  25  ;  John  xvi.  21 ;  Eph.  ii.  12  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  7).  3. 
Humanity  as  it  manifests  itself  in  and  through  this  order 
(Matt,  xviii.  7;  2  Pet.  ii.  5;  iii.  6;  Eom.  iii.  19).  Then,  as 
sin  has  entered  and  disturbed  the  order  of  things,  and  made  a 
breach  between  the  heavenly  and  the  earthlj'  order,  which  are 
one  in  the  divine  ideal — 4.  The  order  of  things  which  is  alien- 
ated from  Ood,  as  manifested  in  and  itj  the  human  race:  hu- 
manity as  alienated  from  God,  and  acting  in  opposition  to  him 
(John  i.  10 ;  xii.  31  ;  xv.  18,  19  ;  1  Cor.  i.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  15, 
etc.).  The  word  is  used  here  in  the  classical  sense  of  the 
visible  creation,  which  would  appeal  to  the  Athenians.  Stanley, 
speaking  of  the  name  by  which  the  Deity  is  known  in  the  patri- 
archal age,  the  plural  JElohim,  notes  tliat  Abraham,  in  per- 
ceiving that  all  the  Elohim  worshipped  by  the  numerous  clans 
of  his  race  meant  07ie  God,  anticipated  the  declaration  of  Paul 
in  this  passage  ("  Jewish  Church,"  i.,  25).  Paul's  statement 
strikes  at  the  belief  of  the  Epicureans,  that  the  world  was 
made  by  "  a  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms,"  and  of  the  Stoics, 
who  denied  the  creation  of  the  world  by  God,  holding  either 
that  God  animated  the  world,  or  that  the  world  itself  was 
God. 

Made  with  hands  {'xeipotroirjTOK).  Probably  pointing  to 
the  magnificent  temples  above  and  around  him.  Paul's  epistles 
abound  in  architectural  metaphors.  He  here  employs  the  very 
words  of  Stephen,  in  his  address  to  the  Sanhedrim,  which  he 
very  probably  heard.     See  ch.  vii.  48. 


Ch.  XVn.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  545 

25.  Is  worshipped  {SepaireveTai).  Incorrect.  Eender,  as 
Eev.,  served.  Lake  often  uses  the  word  in  the  sense  of  to  heal 
or  cure  ;  but  this  is  its  primary  sense.  See  on  Luke  v.  15.  It 
refers  to  the  clothing  of  the  images  of  the  gods  in  splendid 
garments,  and  bringing  them  costly  gifts  and  offerings  of  food 
and  drink. 

As  though  he  needed  (irpoa-Seofji.evo^).  Properly,  "needed 
anything  in  addition  (irpo^)  to  what  he  already  has." 

26.  Before  appointed  {TrpoTeTay/Mevov;).  The  Eev.,  prop- 
erly, omits  iefore,  following  the  reading  of  the  best  texts,  irpotr- 
reTor/fjievovt;,  assigned. 

Bounds  (opo^ecrta?).  Only  here  in  ISTew  Testament.  The 
word,  in  the  singular,  means  the  fixing  of  boundaries,  and  so  is 
transferred  to  the  fixed  boundaries  themselves. 

27.  Might  feel  after.  See  on  Aa?i(^Ze,  Luke  xxiv.  39.  Com- 
pare Tennyson : 

"  I  stretch,  lame  hands  of  faith,  and  grope 
And  gather  dust  and  chaff,  and  call 
To  what  I  feel  is  Lord  of  all." 

In  Memoriam,  Iv. 

28.  We  are  also  his  offspring.  A  line  from  Aratus,  a  poet 
of  Paul's  own  province  of  Cilicia.  The  same  sentiment,  in  al- 
most the  same  words,  occurs  in  the  fine  hymn  of  Cleanthes  to 
Jove.     Hence  the  words,  "  Some  of  your  own  poets." 

29.  The  Godhead  {ro  Seiov).     Lit.,  that  which  is  divine. 

Like  to  gold,  etc.  These  words  must  have  impressed  his 
hearers  profoundly,  as  they  looked  at  the  multitude  of  statues 
of  divinities  which  surrounded  them. 

G raven  {'xapd'^fiaTo).    Not  a  participle,  as  A.  V.,  but  a  noun, 
in  apposition  with  gold,  silver,  and  stone :  "  a  gravmg  or  carved- 
worTc  of  art,"  etc. 
35 


646  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XVIL 

30.  Winked  at  {v-n-epiBcav).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Originally,  to  overlook  ;  to  suffer  to  jpass  unnoticed.  So  Kev., 
overlooked. 

32.  Resurrection.  This  word  was  the  signal  for  a  derisive 
outburst  from  the  crowd. 

Moclced  {e-xKeva^ov).  From  xKevrj,  a  jest.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament,  though  a  compound,  Bia^xkevd^oj,  mock,  occurs, 
according  to  the  best  texts,  at  ch.  ii.  13.  The  force  of  the  im- 
perfect, hegan  to  mock,  should  be  given  here  in  the  translation, 
as  marking  the  outbreak  of  derision. 

In  this  remarkable  speech  of  Paul  are  to  be  noted :  his  pru- 
dence and  tact  in  not  needlessly  offending  his  hearers ;  his 
courtesy  and  spirit  of  conciliation  in  recognizing  their  piety  to- 
ward their  gods ;  his  wisdom  and  readiness  in  the  use  of  the 
inscription  "to  the  unknown  God,"  and  in  citing  their  own 
poets;  his  meeting  the  radical  errors  of  every  class  of  his  hearers, 
while  seeming  to  dwell  only  on  points  of  agreement ;  his  lofty 
views  of  the  nature  of  God  and  the  great  principle  of  the  unity 
of  the  human  race ;  his  boldness  in  proclaiming  Jesus  and  the 
resurrection  among  those  to  whom  these  truths  were  foolish- 
ness ;  the  wonderful  terseness  and  condensation  of  the  whole, 
and  the  rapid  but  powerful  and  assured  movement  of  the 
thought. 

34.  Clave.     See  on  Luke  x.  11 ;  xv.  15  ;  Acts  v.  13. 

The  Areopagite.  One  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of  Are- 
opagus. Of  this  court  Curtius  remarks  :  "  Here,  instead  of  a 
single  judge,  a  college  of  twelve  men  of  proved  integrity  con- 
ducted the  trial.  If  the  accused  had  an  equal  number  of  votes 
for  and  against  him,  he  was  acquitted.  The  Court  on  the  hill 
of  Ares  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  institutions  of  Athens,  and 
none  achieved  for  the  city  an  earlier  or  more  widely  spread 
recognition.  The  Areopagitic  penal  code  was  adopted  as  a 
norm  by  all  subsequent  legislators "  ("  History  of  Greece," 
i.,  307). 


ch.  xvxu.]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  647 


CHAPTER  XYIII. 

1.  Found.  "  A  Jewish  guild  always  keeps  together,  whether 
in  street  or  synagogue.  In  Alexandria  the  different  trades  sat 
in  the  synagogue  arranged  into  guilds ;  and  St.  Paul  could  have 
no  difficulty  in  meeting,  in  the  hazaar  of  his  trade,  with  the 
like-minded  Aquila  and  Priseilla  "  (Edersheim,  "  Jewish  Social 
Life"). 

2.  Lately  (Trpoo-^aToj?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
though  the  kindred  adjective,  rendered  new,  is  found  in  Heb. 
X.  20.  It  is  derived  from  i^kva,  to  slay,  and  the  adjective 
means,  originally,  toe^j/  slain;  thenae,  fresh,  new,  recent.  It  is 
quite  common  in  medical  writings  in  this  sense. 

3.  Of  the  same  craft  (ofiore^^vov).  It  was  a  Rabbinical 
principle  that  whoever  does  not  teach  his  son  a  trade  is  as  if 
he  brought  him  up  to  be  a  i-obber.  All  the  Rabbinical  authori- 
ties in  Christ's  time,  and  later,  were  working  at  some  trade. 
Hillel,  Paul's  teacher,  was  a  wood- cutter,  and  his  rival,  Sham- 
mai,  a  carpenter.  It  is  recorded  of  one  of  the  celebrated  Rabbis 
that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  discoursing  to  his  students  from  the 
top  of  a  cask  of  his  own  making,  which  he  carried  every  day  to 
the  academy. 

Tent-makers  {a-KrjvoTroiol).  Not  weavers  of  the  goat's-hair 
cloth  of  which  tents  were  made,  which  could  easily  be  procured 
at  every  large  town  in  the  Levant,  but  makers  of  tents  used  by 
shepherds  and  travellers.  It  was  a  trade  lightly  esteemed  and 
poorly  paid. 

5.  Was  pressed  in  the  spirit  {a-vveix^ro  too  irvevfiari).  In- 
stead of  spirit  the  best  texts  read  \6yqi,  hy  the  word.  On 
pressed  or  constrained,  see  note  on  tahen,  Luke  iv.  38.  The 
meaning  is,  Pmil  was  engrossed  hy  the  word.  He  was  relieved 
of  anxiety  by  the  arrival  of  his  friends,  and  stimulated  to 
greater  activity  in  the  work  of  preaching  the  word. 


548  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XVECt. 

6.  Opposed  themselves  (avnTaa-a-ofiivav).  Implying  an 
organized  or  concerted  resistance.     See  on  resisteth,  1  Pet.  v.  5. 

12.  Gallic.  Brother  of  the  philosopher  Seneca  (Nero's  tu- 
tor), and  nncle  of  the  poet  Lucan,  the  author  of  the  "  Phar- 
salia."     Seneca  speaks  of  him  as  amiable  and  greatly  beloved. 

Deputy.  See  on  ch.  xiii.  7.  The  verb,  to  be  deputy,  occurs 
only  here. 

Judgment-seat.     See  on  ch.  vii.  5. 

14.  Lewdness  (paSiovpyTjfia) .  See  on  mischief,  ch.  xiii.  10. 
Eev.,  villany. 

15.  Question.  The  best  texts  read  the  plural,  questions. 
See  on  ch.  xv.  2. 

Judge.  In  the  Greek  the  position  of  the  vs^ord  is  emphatic, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence:  '■'■Judge  of  these  matters  I 
am  not  minded  to  be." 

17.  Cared  for  none  of  these  things.  Not  said  to  indicate 
his  indifference  to  religion,  but  simply  that  he  did  not  choose 
to  interfere  in  this  case. 

18.  Took  his  leave  (dTrorafa/ievo?).     See  on  Luke  ix.  61 ; 

Mark  vi.  46. 

Priscilla  and  Aquila.  They  are  named  in  the  same  order, 
Eom.  xvi.  3 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  19. 

Having  shorn  his  head.  Referring  to  Paul,  and  not  to 
Aquila. 

He  had  a  vow.  A  private  vow,  such  as  was  often  assumed 
by  the  Jews  in  consequence  of  some  mercy  received  or  of  some 
deliverance  from  danger.     Not  the  Nazarite  vow,  though  simi- 


Ch.  xviil]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  549 

lar  in  its  obligations ;  for,  in  the  case  of  that  vow,  the  cutting 
of  the  hair,  which  marked  the  close  of  the  period  of  obligation, 
could  take  place  only  in  Jerusalem. 

21.  I  must  by  aH  means  keep  this  feast  that  cometh  in 
Jerusalem.    The  best  texts  omit. 

24.  Eloquent  {\6yio';).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
word  is  used  in  Greek  literature  in  several  senses.  As  Xoyoi; 
means  either  reason  or  speech,  so  this  derivative  may  signify 
either  one  who  has  thought  much,  and  has  much  to  say,  or  one 
who  can  say  it  well.  Hence  it  is  used :  1.  Of  one  skilled  in  his- 
tory. Herodotus,  for  example,  says  that  the  Heliopolitans  are 
the  most  learned  in  history  (XoyiayraTot)  of  all  the  Egyptians. 
2.  Oi  an  eloquent  ■person.  An  epithet  of  Hermes  or  Mercury, 
as  the  god  of  speech  and  eloquence.  3.  Of  a  lea/rned  person 
generally.  There  seems  hardly  sufficient  reason  for  changing 
the  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  (Eev.,  learned),  especially  as  the 
scripture-learning  of  Apollos  is  specified  in  the  words  mighty 
in  the  scriptures,  and  his  superior  eloquence  appears  to  have 
been  the  reason  why  some  of  the  Corinthians  preferred  him  to 
Paul.     See  1  Cor.  i.  12 ;  ii.  4  ;  2  Cor.  x.  10. 

25.  Instructed.     See  on  Luke  i.  4. 

Fervent  {^^eav).  Fervent,  which  is  formed  from  the  parti- 
ciple of  the  iLtatin  ferveo,  to  hoil  ov  ferment,  is  an  exact  transla- 
tion of  this  word,  which  means  to  seethe  or  huhble,  and  is  there- 
fore used  figuratively  of  mental  states  and  emotions.  See  on 
leaven.  Matt.  xiii.  33. 

Diligently  (aKpi^m<;).  Kather,  accwrately ;  so  far  as  his 
knowledge  went.  The  limitation  is  given  by  the  words  fol- 
lowing :  knowing  only  the  haptism  of  John.  See  on  Luke  i.  3  ; 
and  compare  the  kindred  verb,  inquired  diligently.  Matt.  ii.  7, 
where  Eev.  renders  lea/rned  carefully. 

26.  More  perfectly  (aKpi^ia-repov).    The  comparative  of  the 

same  word.     More  accurately. 


550  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT,        [Ch.  XIX 

27.  Exhorting  {wporpe'f'dfievoL).  Originally,  to  turn  for- 
wa/rd,  as  in  flight.  Hence,  to  impel  or  urge.  The  word  may 
apply  either  to  the  disciples  at  Corinth,  in  which  case  we  must 
render  as  A.  Y.,  or  to  Apollos  himself,  as  Kev.,  encouraged 
him.  I  prefer  the  former.  Hackett  very  sensibly  remarks  that 
Apollos  did  not  need  encouragement,  as  he  was  disfposed  to  go. 

Helped  (crwe/SaXero).  The  radical  sense  of  the  word  is  to 
throw  together :  hence,  to  contriJmte ;  to  help  ;  to  'be  useful  to. 
He  threw  himself  into  the  work  along  with  them.  On  different 
senses  of  the  word,  see  notes  on  Luke  ii.  19  ;  xiv.  31 ;  and  com- 
pare Acts  iv.  15  ;  xvii.  18  ;  xviii.  27 ;  xx.  14. 

Through  grace.  Orace  has  the  article,  the  special  grace  of 
God  imparted.  Expositors  differ  as  to  the  connection  ;  some 
joining  through  grace  with  tJiem  which  had  helieved,  insisting  on 
the  Qreek  order  of  the  words ;  and  others  with  helped,  refer- 
ring to  grace  conferred  on  Apollos.  1  prefer  the  latter,  princi- 
pally for  the  reason  urged  by  Meyer,  that  "the  design  of  the 
text  is  to  characterize  Apollos  and  his  work,  and  not  those  who 
believed." 

28.  Mightily  {evrovay;).     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  10. 

Convinced  (SiaKaTrjXeyxero).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
See  on  tell  him,  his  fault,  Matt,  xviii.  15.  The  compound  here 
is  a  very  strong  expression  for  thorough  confutation.  Confute 
(Rev.)  is  better  than  convince.  Note  the  prepositions.  He  con- 
futed them  thoroughly  (Sid),  against  {jcaTa)  all  their  arguments. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  Upper  coasts  (ra  avcorepiKa  fj-iprf).  Coasts  is  a  bad  ren- 
dering. Better,  as  Eev.,  "  the  upper  country;  "  lit.,  parts  or 
districts.  The  reference  is  to  districts  like  Galatia  and  Phrygia, 
lying  up  from  the  sea-coast  and  farther  inland  than  Ephesus. 
Hence  the  expedition  of  Cyrus  from  the  sea-coast  toward  Central 
Asia  was  called  Anabasis,  a  going-up. 


Ch.  XIX.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  551 

Certain  disciples.  Disciples  of  John  the  Baptist,  who,  like 
ApolloB,  had  been  instructed  and  baptized  by  the  followers  of 
the  Baptist,  and  had  joined  the  fellowship  of  the  Christians. 
Some  have  thought  that  they  had  been  instructed  by  Apollos 
himself;  but  there  is  no  sufScient  evidence  of  this.  "There 
they  were,  a  small  and  distinct  community  about  twelve  in 
number,  still  preparing,  after  the  manner  of  the  Baptist,  for 
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Something  there  was  which  drew 
the  attention  of  the  apostle  immediately  on  his  arrival.  They 
lacked,  apparently,  some  of  the  tokens  of  the  higher  life  that 
pervaded  the  nascent  church  ;  they  were  devout,  rigorous,  aus- 
tere, but  were  wanting  in  the  joy,  the  radiancy,  the  enthusiasm 
which  were  conspicuous  in  others "  (Plumptre,  "  St.  Paul  in 
Asia  Minor  "). 

2.  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  believed  ? 

The  two  verbs  are  in  the  aorist  tense,  and  therefore  denote  in- 
stantaneous acts.  The  A.  Y.  therefore  gives  an  entirely  wrong 
idea,  as  there  is  no  question  about  what  happened  afUr  believ- 
ing ;  but  the  question  relates  to  what  occurred  when  they  be- 
lieved. Hence  Kev.,  rightly,  Did  ye  recewe  the  Holy  Ohost 
when  ye  believed  ? 

We  have  not  heard.  Also  the  aorist.  We  did  not  hear; 
referring  back  to  the  time  of  their  beginning. 

Whether  there  be  any  Holy  Ghost.  But,  as  Bengel  ob- 
serves, "They  could  not  have  followed  either  Moses  or  John 
the  Baptist  without  having  heard  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The 
words,  therefore,  are  to  be  explained,  not  of  their  being  un- 
aware of  the  existence  of  the  Iloly  Ghost,  but  of  his  presence 
and  baptism  on  earth.  The  woi'd  ecniv,  there  he,  is  to  be  taken 
in  the  sense  of  he  present,  or  he  gvven,  as  in  John  vii.  39,  where 
it  is  said,  "  The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yef  (outtw  ^v),"  and  where 
the  translators  rightly  render,  "  was  not  yet  gvven." 

3.  Unto  what  {ek  rt).  Eev.,  more  correctly,  into.  See  on 
Matt,  xxviii.  19. 


552  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XIX. 

John.  The  last  mention  of  John  the  Baptist  in  the  New 
Testament.  "Here,  at  last,  he  wholly  gives  place  to  Christ" 
(Bengel). 

10.  Asia.     See  on  ch.  ii.  9. 

11.  Special  {ov  ra?  TV)(pv(Ta<;).  A  peculiar  expression.  Lit., 
not  usual  or  common,  such  as  one  might  fall  in  with  frequently. 

12.  Body  (^^pcoTos).  Properly,  the  surface  of  the  body,  the 
shin ;  but,  in  medical  language,  of  the  hody. 

Handkerchiefs  {crovMpia).     See  on  Luke  xix.  20. 

/Kprons  (a-ifUKiv^ia).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  A  Latin 
word,  semi^inctia.  Lit.,  something  passing  half-way  round  the 
body :  an  apron  or  waistband.  Perhaps  garments  worn  by 
Paul  when  engaged  at  his  trade. 

13.  Vagabond  {Trepiepxo/Jiivcov).  Lit.,  going  about.  Rev., 
strolling. 

Exorcists  (efop/eto-Tft)!/).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
kindred  verb,  adjure,  occurs  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  and  means,  origi- 
nally, to  administer  an  oath.  These  Jewish  exorcists  pretended 
to  the  power  of  casting  out  evil  spirits  by  magical  arts  derived 
from  Solomon. 

14.  Did  (TTotowi'Te?).     The  participle  denotes  ^practice. 

15.  I  know — I  know  (7H'(Bo-«;(ii) — eiriaTafiai).  There  is  a  pur- 
pose in  using  two  different  words  to  denote  the  demon's  recog- 
nition of  the  Divine  Master  and  of  the  human  agent,  though 
it  is  not  easy  to  convey  the  difference  in  a  translation.  It  is 
the  difference  between  an  m&imdive  ^perception  or  recognition 
of  a  supreme  power  and  the  more  intimate  Tcnowledge  of  a  hu- 
man agent.  A  divine  mystery  would  invest  Jesus,  which  the 
demon  would  feel,  though  he  could   not  penetrate  it.     His 


Ch.  XIX.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  553 

knowledge  of  a  man  would  be  greater,  in  his  own  estimation  at 
least.  The  difEerence  may  be  given  roughly,  thus :  "  Jesus  I 
recognise,  and  Paul  lam  acquainted  with." 

Overcame  them  (KaraKvpieva-as:).  The  best  texts  read  both 
of  them,  which  would  imply  that  only  two  of  the  seven  were 
concerned  in  the  exorcism.  Rev.,  better,  mastered,  thus  giving 
the  force  of  Kvpto<i,  master,  in  the  composition  of  the  verb. 

16.  Prevailed  against  (to-^wo-e).  See  on  Luke  xiv.  30; 
xvi.  3. 

lY.  Was  known  {iyivero  yvcoa-rbv).  More  correctly,  became 
known. 

18.  Confessed  and. shewed  (e^oju,o\o7ov/tei'ot /cat  ai'a776\- 
Xoj/T6s).  The  two  words  denote  the  fullest  and  most  open  con- 
fession. They  openly  (ef)  confessed,  and  declared  thoroughly 
{ova,  from  tqp  to  bottom)  their  deeds.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  6. 

19.  Curious  arts  (tA  7repie/37a).  The  word  means,  literally, 
overwrought,  elaborate,  and  hence  recondite  or  curious,  as  mag- 
ical practices.  Only  here  and  1  Tim.  v.  13,  in  its  original  sense 
of  those  who  busy  themselves  excessively  (irepl) :  busybodies. 
The  article  indicates  the  practices  referred  to  in  the  context. 

Bool<s.  Containing  magical  formulas.  Heathen  writers  of  ten 
allude  to  the  Ephesiam,  letters.  These  were  symbols,  or  magical 
sentences  written  on  slips  of  parchment,  and  carried  about  as 
amulets.     Sometimes  they  were  engraved  on  seals. 

Burned  (KareKcttoi').  Burned  them  t<^  (/cara).  The  imperfect 
is  graphic,  describing  them  as  throwing  book  after  book  ou  the 
pile. 

Counted  (<rwei^(^t<rai/).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  See 
on  Luke  xiv.  28.  The  preposition  avv,  together,  in  the  com- 
pound verb,  indicates  the  reckoning  up  of  the  sum-total. 


554  WORD  STUDIES  US  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XIX. 

Fifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver.  If  reckoned  in  Jewish 
money,  about  thirty-five  thousand  dollars ;  if  in  Greek  draehmse, 
as  is  more  probable,  about  nine  thousand  three  hundred  dollars. 

23.  Tlie  way.     See  on  ch.  ix.  2. 

24.  Silversmitli  (a/!)7VjOo«o7ro?).     Jjit.,  a  silver-heater. 

Shrines.  Small  models  of  the  temple  of  Diana,  containing 
an  image  of  the  goddess.  They  were  purchased  by  pilgrims  to 
the  temple,  just  as  rosaries  and  images  of  the  Virgin  are  bought 
by  pilgrims  to  Lourdes,  or  bronze  models  of  Trajan's  column 
or  of  the  Colonne  Vendome  by  tourists  to  Rome  or  Paris.* 

Craftsmen  {rexvirai';).  In  the  next  verse  he  mentions  tAe 
worhmen  (ep'ydra'i),  the  two  woi-ds  denoting,  respectively,  the 
artisans,  who  performed  the  more  delicate  work,  and  the  la- 
borers, who  did  the  rougher  work. 

25.  Wealth  (evTropia).  See  on  ability,  ch.  xi.  29.  Lit.,  wel- 
fare.  Wealth  is  used  by  the  A.  Y.  in  the  older  and  more  gen- 
eral sense  of  weal,  or  well-being  generally.  Compare  the  Litany 
of  the  English  Church  :  "  In  all  time  of  our  tribulation,  in  all 
time  of  our  wealth." 

27.  Craft  {fiepo<i).     lAt.,2>art  or  department  of  trade. 

To  be  set  at  nought  (et?  dweXey/iov  eXS-etv).  Lit.,  to  come 
into  refutation  or  eayposure ;  hence,  disrepute,  as  Rev.  Com- 
pare ch.  xviii.  28,  and  see  note  there.  ' Airekey IMG's,  refutation, 
occurs  only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Diana.  Or  Artemis.  "We  must  distinguish  between  the 
Greek  Artemis,  known  to  the  Romans  as  Diana,  and  the  Ephe- 
sian  goddess.  The  former,  according  to  the  legend,  was  the 
daughter  of  Zeus  (Jove),  and  the  sister  of  Apollo.     She  was 

*  For  descriptions  of  the  temple,  see  Conybeare  and  Howson  ;  and  Lewln, 
Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ;  Farrar,  Life  and  Work  of  St.  Paul ;  and  Wood's 
Ephesus. 


Ch.  XIX.J  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  555 

the  patroness  of  the  chase,  the  huntress  among  the  immortals, 
represented  with  bow,  quiver,  and  spear,  clad  in  hunting-habit, 
and  attended  by  dogs  and  stags.  She  was  both  a  destroyer 
and  a  preserver,  sending  forth  her  arrows  of  death,  especially 
against  women,  but  also  acting  as  a  healer,  and  as  the  special 
protectress  of  women  in  childbirth.  She  was  also  the  goddess 
of  the  moon.  She  was  a  maiden  divinity,  whose  ministers  were 
vowed  to  chastity. 

The  Ephesian  Artemis  is  totally  distinct  from  the  Greek, 
partaking  of  the  Asiatic  character,  and  of  the  attributes  of  the 
Lydian  Cybele,  the  great  mother  of  the  gods.  Her  worship 
near  Ephesus  appears  to  have  existed  among  the  native  Asiatic 
population  before  the  foundation  of  the  citj^,  and  to  have  been 
adopted  by  the  Greek  immigrants,  who  gradually  transferred 
to  her  features  peculiar  to  the  Grecian  goddess.  She  was  the 
personiiication  of  the  fructifying  and  nourishing  powers  of 
nature,  and  her  image,  as  represented  on  current  coins  of  the 
time,  is  that  of  a  swathed  figure,  covered  with  breasts,  and 
holding  in  one  hand  a  trident,  and  in  the  other  a  club.  This 
uncouth  figure,  clad  in  a  robe  covered  with  mystic  devices, 
stood  in  the  shrine  of  the  great  temple,  hidden  by  a  purple 
curtain,  and  was  believed  to  have  fallen  down  from  heaven 
(ver.  35).  In  her  worship  the  oriental  influence  was  predomi- 
nant. The  priests  were  eunuchs,  and  with  them  was  associated 
a  body  of  virgin  priestesses  and  a  number  of  slaves,  the  lowest 
of  whom  were  known  as  neocori,  or  temple-sweepers  (ver.  35). 
"  Many  a  time  must  Paul  have  heard  from  the  Jewish  quarter 
the  piercing  shrillness  of  their  flutes,  and  the  harsh  jangling  of 
their  timbrels ;  many  a  time  have  caught  glimpses  of  their  de- 
testable dances  and  Corybantic  processions,  as,  with  streaming 
hair,  and  wild  cries,  and  shaken  torches  of  pine,  they  strove  to 
madden  the  multitudes  into  sympathy  with  that  orgiastic  wor- 
ship which  was  but  too  closely  connected  with  the  vilest  de- 
baucheries "  (Farrar,  "  Life  and  Work  of  Paul "). 

Magnificence.     See  on  2  Pet.  i.  16. 

28.  Cried  out  (eVjoa^ov).     The  imperfect  is  graphic;  they 


556  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XIX 

continued  crying.     This  reiteration  was  a  characteristic  of  the 
oriental  orgiastic  rites. 

29.  The  theatre.  The  site  of  which  can  still  be  traced.  It 
is  said  to  have  been  capable  of  seating  fifty-six  thousand  persons. 

Having  seized  {crvva(yirda-avTe<;).  Lit.,  "  having  seized  «Zow^ 
vnth  (avv) :  "  carried  them  along  with  the  rush. 

Companions  in  travel  {crweKhrjuovi).  Only  here  and  2  Cor. 
viii.  19.  Tlie  word  is  compounded  of  o-w,  along  with,  sk,  forth, 
and  Sjj^ios,  country  or  land,  and  means,  therefore,  one  who  has 
gone  forth  with  another  from  his  country. 

31.  Of  the  chief  officers  of  Asia  {r&v  'Aaiapx&v).  The 
Asiarchs.  These  were  persons  chosen  from  the  province  of 
Asia,  on  account  of  their  influence  and  wealth,  to  preside  at  the 
public  games  and  to  defray  their  expenses. 

33.  They  drew  {■trpoefil^aaav).  More  correctly,  urged  for- 
ward.    See  on  hefore  instructed,  Matt.  xiv.  8. 

34.  With  one  voice  cried  out.  The  reverberations  of  their 
voices  from  the  steep  rock  which  formed  one  side  of  the 
theatre  must  have  rendered  their  frenzied  cries  still  more  ter- 
rific. 

35.  The  town-clerk.  Or  recorder,  who  had  charge  of  the 
city-archives,  and  whose  duty  it  was  to  draw  up  official  decrees 
and  present  them  to  assemblies  of  the  people.  Next  to  the 
commander,  he  was  the  most  important  personage  in  the  Greek 
free  cities. 

Worshipper  (vewKopov).  Lit. ,  a  temple-sweeper.  See  on  ver. 
27.  This  title,  originally  applied  to  the  lowest  menials  of  the 
temple,  became  a  title  of  honor,  and  was  eagerly  appropriated 
by  the  most  famous  cities.  Alexander  says,  "  The  city  of  Eph- 
esus  is  the  sacristan  of  the  great  goddess  Artemis."* 

*  See  Bp,  Lightfoot's  "  Essays  on  Supernatural  Religion,"  p.  297,  and 
Euripides,  "Iphigenia  in  Tauris,'  87. 


Ch.  XX.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  557 

36.  Quiet  {KareaTaXjiivovi).  Compare  quieted  (ver.  35). 
The  verb  means  to  let  down  or  lower  ;  and  so  is  applied,  meta- 
phorically, to  heejnng  one's  self  in  check  /  repressing. 

Rash  {irpoireTh).     Lit.,  headlong. 

37.  Robbers  of  churches  {lepoavkovi).  The  A.  Y.  puts  a 
droll  anachronism  into  the  mouth  of  the  town-clerk  of  a  Greek 
city.     Kender,  rather,  as  Rev.,  robbers  of  temples. 

38.  The  law  is  open  {ayopaloi  ayovTai).  Lit.,  the  court-days 
are  being  kept.     Kev.,  the  courts  are  open.     Compare  ch.  xvii.  5. 

Deputies  {av^viraroC).  Proconsuls,  by  whom  Asia,  as  a  sen- 
atorial province,  was  governed.     See  Introduction  to  Luke. 

40.  Concourse  (o-vo-T/aoi^^?).  JAt.,  &  twisting  together :  heTice 
of  anything  which  is  rolled  or  twisted  into  a  mass ;  and  so  of  a 
mass  of  people,  with  an  underlying  idea  of  confusion :  a  mob. 
Compare  ch.  xxiii.  12. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  Embraced  {a(nraGdyi^o<^.  Better,  as  Rev.,  tooh  leame. 
The  word  is  used  for  a  salutation  either  at  meeting  or  parting. 
See  ch.  xxi.  6,  Y. 

2.  Greece.  The  Roman  province  of  Achaia,  comprehend- 
ing Greece  proper  and  the  Peloponnesus.  Luke  uses  Achaia 
(ch.  xix.  21)  and  Greece  synonymously,  as  distinguished  from 
Macedonia. 

3.  Sail  (aj/oyeo-^at).  Better,  as  Rev.,  set  sail.  See  on  Luke 
viii.  22 ;   and  compare  Luke  v.  3. 

4.  So  pater.  The  best  texts  add,  iSAe  son  (/Py/rAws.  Com- 
pare Rom.  xvi.  21. 

Aristarchus.     Compare  Acts  xix.  29. 


558  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XX. 

Gaius.  Not  the  one  mentioned  in  ch.  xix.  29,  who  was  a 
Macedonian. 

Tychicus  and  Trophimus.  See  Col.  iv.  7,  8  ;  Eph.  vi.  21, 
22  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12  ;  Titus  iii.  12  ;  Acts  xxi.  29  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  20, 

5.  Us.  The  first  person  resumed,  indicating  that  Luke  had 
joined  Paul. 

6.  I  n  five  days  {axpi'<i  vf^ep&v  vivTe).  Lit., "  up  to  five  days," 
indicating  the  duration  of  the  voyage  from  Philippi. 

7.  First  {r^  fua).  Lit.,  "the  one  day."  The  cardinal  nu- 
meral here  \ised  for  the  ordinal. 

Week  {aa^^droav).  The  plural  used  for  the  singular,  in  imi- 
tation of  the  Hebrew  form.  The  noun  Sahiath  is  often  used 
after  numerals  in  the  signification  of  a  week.  See  Matt,  xxviii. 
1 ;  Mark  xvi.  2 ;  John  xx.  19. 

To  break  bread.  The  celebration  of  the  eucharist,  coupled 
with  the  Agajpe,  or  love-feast. 

Preached  {^i€hA'^eT6).  ^q\Xqv,qs,'&&n.,  discoursed  with  thsm. 
It  was  a  mingling  of  preaching  and  conference.  Our  word  dior 
logue  is  derived  from  the  verb. 

8.  Many  liglits.  A  detail  showing  the  vivid  impression  of 
the  scene  upon  an  eye-witness.  It  has  been  remarked  that  the 
abundance  of  lights  shows  how  little  of  secrecy  or  disorder  at- 
tached to  these  meetings. 

The  upper  chamber.    See  on  ch.  i.  13. 

9.  The  window.  See  on  ch.  ix.  25.  The  windows  of  an 
Eastern  house  are  closed  with  lattice-work,  and  usually  reach 
down  to  the  floor,  resembling  a  door  rather  than  a  window. 
They  open,  for  the  most  part,  to  the  court,  and  not  to  the  street, 
and  are  usually  kept  open  on  account  of  the  heat. 


Ch.  XX.]         THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  659 

Fallen  into  a  deep  sleep  {KaTa^ep6fj,evo<;  inrvq)  ^a9-e2).  Lit., 
horne  down  by,  etc.  A  common  Greek  phrase  for  being  over- 
come by  sleep.  In  medical  language  the  verb  was  more  fre- 
quently used  in  this  sense,  absolutely,  than  with  the  addition  of 
sleep.  In  this  verse  the  word  is  used  twice :  in  the  first  instance, 
in  the  present  participle,  denoting  the  coming  on  of  drowsiness 
—falling  asleep ;  and  the  second  time,  in  tlie  aorist  participle, 
denoting  his  heiug  coTnpletely  overpowered hj  sleep.  Mr.  Hobart 
thinks  that  the  mention  of  the  causes  of  Eutychus'  drowsiness — 
the  heat  and  smell  arising  from  the  numerous  lamps,  the  length 
of  the  discourse,  and  the  lateness  of  the  hour — are  characteristic 
of  a  physician's  narrative.     Compare  Luke  xxii.  45. 

Dead  (veKp6<;).     Actually  dead.    Not  as  dead,  or  for  dead. 

10.  Fell  on  him.  Compare  1  Kings  xvii.  21;  2  Kings 
iv.  34. 

Trouble  not  yourselves  (jirj  %pv/3e2(T^e).  Rev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, Tnake  ye  no  ado.  They  were  beginning  to  utter  passion- 
ate outcries.     See  Matt.  ix.  23  ;  Mark  v.  39. 

His  life  is  in  him.  In  the  same  sense  in  which  Christ  said, 
"  The  damsel  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth  "  (Luke  viii.  52). 

11.  Having  gone  up.  From  the  court  to  the  chamber 
above. 

Talked  {ofiiXija-cK).  Rather,  oommimed.  It  denotes  a  more 
familiar  and  confidential  intercourse  than  discoursed,  in  ver.  T. 

13.  To  go  afoot  {'/re^eveiv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
There  is  no  good  reason  for  changing  this  to  by  land,  as  Rev. 
The  A.  V.  preserves  the  etymology  of  the  Greek  verb.  The 
distance  was  twenty  miles ;  less  than  half  the  distance  by  sea. 

15.  Arrived  {irape/SdXo/iev).  Only  here  and  Mark  iv.  30, 
where  it  is  used  more  nearly  according  to  its  original  sense,  to 


560  WORD  STUDIES  Of  THE  ISTEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XX. 

throw  leside;  to  bring  one  thing  beside  another  in  comparison. 
Here,  of  bringing  the  vessel  alongside  the  island.  The  narra- 
tive implies  that  they  only  touched  (Rev.)  there,  but  not  neces- 
sarily the  word. 

16.  To  spend  time  {')(povoTpt,^riaaC).  Only  here  in  'Bew 
Testament.  The  word  carries  the  suggestion  of  a  waste  of 
time,  being  compounded  with  rpi^a,  to  rub ;  to  wear  out  hy 
rubhmg.  The  sense  is  nearly  equivalent  to  our  expression, 
fritter  away  time. 

17.  Having  sent  to  Ephesus,     About  thirty  miles. 
Elders.     Called  overseers  or  hishqps  in  ver.  28. 

20.  Kept  back  {vireareikdfirjv).  A  picturesque  word.  Orig- 
inally, to  draw  in  or  contract.  Used  of  furling  sails,  and  of 
closing  the  fingers ;  of  drawing  back  for  shelter ;  of  keeping 
back  one's  real  thoughts ;  by  physicians,  of  withholding  food 
from  patients.  It  is  rather  straining  a  point  to  say,  as  Canon 
Farrar,  that  Paul  is  using  a  nautical  metaphor  suggested  by  his 
constantly  hearing  the  word  for  furling  sail  used  during  his 
voyage.  Paul's  metaphors  lie  mainly  on  the  lines  of  military 
life,  architecture,  agriculture,  and  the  Grecian  games.  The 
statement  of  Canon  Farrar,  that  he  "  constantly  draws- his  meta- 
phors from  the  sights  and  circumstances  immediately  around 
him,"  is  rather  at  variance  with  his  remark  that,  with  one  ex- 
ception, he  "  cannot  find  a  single  word  which  shows  that  Paul 
had  even  the  smallest  susceptibility  for  the  works  of  nature  " 
("  Paul,"  i.,  19).  Nautical  metaphors  are,  to  say  the  least,  not 
common  in  Paul's  writings.  I  believe  there  are  but  three  in- 
stances :  Eph.  iv.  14 ;  1  Tim.  i.  19 ;  vi.  9.  Paul  means  here 
that  he  suppressed  nothing  of  the  truth  through  fear  of  giving 
offence.     Compare  Gal.  ii.  12 ;  Heb.  x.  38. 

21.  Repentance  toward  God.  JSepentance  has  the  artich: 
the  repentance  which  is  due  to  God.  So,  also,  faith:  the  faith 
which  is  due  toward  Christ,  as  the  advocate  and  mediator. 


Ch.  XX.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  561 

22.  Bound  in  the  spirit.  In  Ms  own  spirit.  Constrained 
by  an  invincible  sense  of  duty.  ITot  hy  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
is  mentioned  in  the  next  verse  and  distinguished  by  the  epithet 
the  Holy. 

23.  Testifieth  {Bia/MapTvperai,).  The  compound  verb  signi- 
&esfull,  clear  testimony.  Not  by  internal  intimations  of  the 
Spirit,  but  by  prophetic  declarations  "  in  every  city."  Two  of 
these  are  mentioned  subsequently,  at  Tyre  and  Caesarea  (ch. 
xxi.  4,  11). 

24.  But  none  of  these  things  move  me,  neither  count  I, 

etc.     The  best  texts  omit  neither  count  I,  and  render,  I  esteem 
•my  life  of  no  account,  as  if  it  were  precious  to  myself. 

Dear  {rtixCav).     Of  value ;  precious. 

Course  {Spofiov).  A  favorite  metaphor  of  Paul,  from  the 
race-course.    See  1  Cor.  ix.  24-27  ;  Philip,  iii.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  Y. 

25.  I  know.  The  /is  emphatic:  /  know  through  these 
special  revelations  to  myself  (ver.  23). 

26.  This  day  {ttj  arnxepov  rj/x,6pa).  Very  forcible.  Lit.,  on 
to-dafs  day  ;  this,  our  parting  day. 

27.  Shunned.     The  same  word  as  in  ver.  20 :  Icept  hacTc. 

28.  To  yourselves  and  to  ail  the  flock.  Tlo  yourselves 
first,  that  you  may  duly  care  for  the  _^oc^.  Compare  1  Tim. 
iv.  16. 

Overseers  (eVto-KOTrow?).  Denoting  the  official  function  of 
the  elders,  but  not  in  the  later  ecclesiastical  sense  of  hishops,  as 
implying  an  order  distinct  irom  presbyters  or  elders.  The  two 
terms  are  synonymous.  The  elders,  by  virtue  of  their  office, 
were  overseers.* 

*  See  Bishop  Lightfoot's  Commentary  on  Philippians,  p.  93 ;  and  the  Essay 
on  the  Christian  Ministry,  in  the  same  volume,  p.  179  Bq.  ;  also,  Conyheare 
and  Howson,  vol.  i.,  ch.  xiii. 
86 


562  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  XX. 

To  feed  (Trot/iaiWw).  See  on  Matt.  ii.  6.  The  word  embraces 
move  than  feeding  ;  signifying  all  that  is  included  in  the  office 
of  a  shepherd  :  tending,  or  shepherding. 

Purchased  {-n-epieTrotija-aro).  Only  here  and  1  Tim.  iii.  13. 
See  on  peculiar  people,  1  Pet.  ii.  9.  The  verb  means,  originally, 
to  make  (Trotew)  to  remain  over  and  above  {"rrepi) :  hence  to  keep 
or  save  for  one^s  self ;  to  compass  or  acquire. 

29.  Grievous  (/3a/36ts).     lAt.,  heavy :  violent,  rapacious. 

31.  Watch  {jfyrffopeiTe).     See  on  Mark  xiii.  35. 

To  warn  {vov^eTUiv).  From  voO?,  the  mind,  and  tIBtj/mi,  to 
put.  Lit.,  to  put  in  mind;  admonish  (so  Rev.,  better  than 
warn).  "  It's  fundamental  idea  is  the  well-intentioned  serious- 
ness with  which  one  would  influence  the  mind  and  disposition 
of  another  by  advice,  admonition,  warning,  putting  right,  ac- 
cording to  circumstances  "  (Cremer). 

32.  I  commend.     See  on  1  Pet.  iv.  19. 

Build  you  up.  A  metaphor  in  constant  use  by  Paul,  and 
preserved  in  the  words  edify,  edification  (Latin,  aedes,  "  a  house," 
and  fa^ere,  "  to  make ")  by  which  oUoSofiio)  and  its  kindred 
words  are  frequently  rendered.  In  old  English  the  word  edify 
was  used  in  its  original  sense  of  build.  Thus  Wycliffe  renders 
Oen.  ii.  22,  "  The  Lord  God  edified  the  rib  which  he  took  of 
Adam,  into  a  woman." 
So,  too,  Spenser : 

' '  a  little  wide 
There  was  a  holy  temple  edified." 

Faerie  Queene,  i.,  1,  34. 

33.  Raiment.  Mentioned  along  with  gold  and  silver  be- 
cause it  formed  a  large  part  of  the  wealth  of  orientals.  They 
traded  in  costly  garments,  or  kept  them  stored  up  for  future  use. 
See  onpurple,  Luke  xvi.  19;^  and  compare  Ezra  ii.  69;  Neh. 
vii.  70  ;  Job  xxvii.  16.  This  fact  accounts  for  the  allusions  to 
the  destructive  power  of  the  moth  (Matt.  vi.  19  ;  Jas.  v.  2). 


Ch.  XXI.]         THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  563 

35.  I  have  shewed  you  all  things  {Travra  viriiei^a  viuv). 
The  verb  means  to  shew  ly  exam^ple.  Thus,  Luke  vi.  47,  "  I 
■will  shew  you  to  whom  he  is  like,"  is  followed  by  the  illustra- 
tion of  the  man  who  built  upon  the  rock.  So  Acts  ix.  16.  God 
will  shew  Paul  by  practical  experience  how  great  things  he  must 
suffer.  The  kindred  noun  inroheir/fia  is  always  rendered  exam/pie 
ov pattern.  See  John  xiii.  15  ;  Jas.  v.  10,  etc.;  and  note  on  2 
Pet.  ii.  6.    Eev.,  correctly.  In  all  things  I  game  you  am,  example. 

So.     As  I  have  done. 

To  help  {avTCKafi^dvea^ai).     See  on  Luke  i.  54. 

He  said  {clvtoi  elire).  Bev.,  more  strictly,  "  he  himself  said." 
This  saying  of  Jesus  is  not  recorded  by  the  Evangelists,  and  was 
received  by  Paul  from  oral  tradition. 

The  speech  of  Paul  to  the  Ephesian  elders  "  bears  impressed 
on  it  the  mark  of  Paul's  mind :  its  ideas,  its  idioms,  and  even 
its  very  words  are  Pauline ;  so  much  so  as  to  lead  Alford  to  ob- 
serve that  we  have  probably  the  literal  report  of  the  words 
spoken  by  Paul.  'It  is,'  he  remarks,  'a  treasure-house  of 
words,  idioms,  and  sentences  peculiar  to  the  apostle  himself ' " 
(Gloag). 

37.  Kissed  {KaTe<^i\ow).     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  49. 

38.  See  {^empelv).  See  on  Luke  x.  18.  The  word  for  sfeat?- 
fast,  earnest  contemplation  suggests  the  interest  and  affection 
with  which  they  looked  upon  his  countenance  for  the  last  time. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

1.  Gotten  from  {airocnra<TMvTa<;).  "Withdrawn.  Some  see 
in  the  word  an  expression  of  the  grief  and  reluctance  with  which 
they  parted,  and  render  homing  torn  ourselmes  away.  See  on 
Luke  xxii.  41. 


564  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXL 

With  a  straight  course.     See  on  ch.  xvi.  11. 

2.  Set  forth  [avijx^/^ev).  Or  set  sail.  See  on  Luke  viii. 
22 ;  V.  3. 

3.  Discovered  {ava(j)dvavTe<;).  Better,  sighted.  A  nautical 
phrase.  The  verb  literarlly  means  to  bring  to  Ught :  and  its  use 
here  is  analogous  to  the  English  marine  phrase,  to  raise  the  land. 

4.  Finding  disciples  (dz^eu/aoWe?  tow  fioB^jra';).  The  verb 
means  to  discover  afier  search  ;  and  the  article,  the  disciples, 
refers  to  the  disciples  who  lived  and  were  recognized  members 
of  the  church  there.  The  A.  V.  overlooks  both  the  preposition 
and  the  article.  The  verb  might  be  rendered  strictly  by  our 
common  phrase,  "  having  loohed  itpthe  disciples."  See  on  Luke 
ii.  16.     A  small  number  of  disciples  is  implied  in  ver.  5. 

5.  Accomplished  {i^apTia-ai).  Only  here  and  2  Tim.  iii.  17, 
where  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  equip  ox  furnish. 

Children.  The  first  time  that  children  are  mentioned  in 
the  notice  of  a  Christian  church. 

Shore  {alyiaXbv).     Kev.,  heach.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  2. 

6.  Taken  leave.     See  on  ch.  xx.  1. 

7.  Finished  {hiavva-avTe<;).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Saluted.  The  word  rendered  take  leave  in  ver.  6.  See  on 
ch.  XX.  1. 

8.  We  that  were  of  Paul's  company.  The  best  texts 
omit. 

Philip.     See  ch.  viii. 

The  seven.     The  first  deacons.     See  ch.  vi.  5. 


Ch.  XXI.]        THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  565 

11.  Bound  his  own  feet  and  hands.  Imitating  the  sym- 
bolical acts  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets.  See  1  Kings  xxii. 
11 ;  Isa.  XX.  1-3 ;  Jer.  xiii.  1-7 ;  Ezek.  iv.  1-6.  Compare  John 
xxi.  18. 

12.  Besought  him  not  to  go  up.  This  suggests  the  case 
of  Luther  when  on  his  journey  to  the  Diet  of  Worms,  and  the 
story  of  Eegulus  the  Eoman,  who,  being  permitted  to  return  to 
Kome  with  an  embassy  from  the  Cai-thaginians,  urged  his  coun- 
trymen to  reject  the  terms  of  peace,  and  to  continue  the  war, 
and  then,  against  the  remonstrances  of  his  friends,  insisted  on 
fulfilling  his  promise  to  the  Carthaginians  to  return  in  the  event 
of  the  failure  of  negotiations,  and  went  back  to  certain  torture 
and  death. 

13.  I  am  ready  (eToi'/ia)?  ex<^)-    Lit.,  I  hold  myself  in  readi- . 

ness. 

15.  Took  up  our  carriages  {a-n-ocrKevaa-d/Mepoi,).  The  verb 
means  to  pack  up  and  carry  off,  or  simply  to  jpacTc  or  store 
away.  Hence,  some  explain  that  Paul  packed  and  stored  the 
greater  part  of  his  luggage  in  Caesarea.  The  best  texts,  how- 
ever, read  eiria-Kevaadixevot,,  having  equipped  oursel/oes.  Car- 
riages is  used  in  the  old  English  sense,  now  obsolete,  of  that 
which  is  carried,  haggage.     See  1  Sam.  xvii.  22,  A.  Y. 

16.  Bringing  with  them,  etc.  This  would  imply  that 
Mnason  was  at  Caesarea,  and  accompanied  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions to  Jerusalem.  It  seems  better  to  suppose  that  the  dis- 
ciples accompanied  the  apostle  in  order  to  introduce  him  to 
Mnason,  whom  they  knew.  Pender,  conducting  us  to  Mnason, 
with  whom  we  should  lodge. 

Old  (apxaim).  Better,  as  Rev.,  ea/i'ly.  The  rendering  old 
might  be  taken  to  mean  aged;  whereas  the  word  means  of 
long  standing. 

21.  They  are  informed  {KarrfyriBTiaav).     More  than  in- 


566  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXI. 

formed.     They  had  been  carefully  instructed,  probably  by  the 
Judaizing  teachers.     See  on  mstrucied,  Luke  i.  4. 

To  forsake  Moses  {airoa-raa-iav  dirb  Maxrewi).  Lit.,  apos- 
tasy froTn  Moses.     Compare  2  Thess.  ii.  3. 

22.  What  is  it  therefore?  How  does  the  matter  lie? 
What  is  to  be  done  ? 

The  multitude  must  needs  come  together.  Some  texts 
omit.     So  Rev.     If  retained,  we  should  read  a  multitude. 

23.  A  vow.     The  Nazarite  vow.     See  jSTum.  vi.  1-21. 

24.  Be  at  charges  with  them  {SaTrdvrja-ov  eV  avrot?).  Lit., 
spend  upon  them.  Pay  the  necessary  charges  on  their  account. 
Hence  Rev.,  rightly,  "for  them."  The  person  who  thus  paid 
the  expenses  of  poor  devotees  who  could  not  afford  the  neces- 
sary charges  shared  the  vow  so  far  that  he  was  required  to  stay 
with  the  Nazarites  until  the  time  of  the  vow  had  expired. 
"  For  a  week,  then,  St.  Paul,  if  he  accepted  the  advice  of  James 
and  the  presbyters,  would  have  to  live  with  four  paupers  in 
the  chamber  of  the  temple  which  was  set  apart  for  this  pur- 
pose; and  then  to  pay  for  sixteen  sacrificial  animals  and  the 
accompanying  meat-offerings "  (Farrar,  "  Life  and  Work  of 
Paul ").  He  must  also  stand  among  the  Nazarites  during  the 
offering  of  the  sacrifices,  and  look  on  while  their  heads  were 
shaved,  and  while  they  took  their  hair  to  burn  it  under  the 
caldron  of  the  peace-offerings,  "  and  while  the  priest  took  four 
sodden  shoulders  of  rams,  and  four  unleavened  cakes  out  of  the 
four  baskets,  and  four  unleavened  wafers  anointed  with  oil,  and 
put  them  on  the  hands  of  the  ISTazarites,  and  waved  them  for  a 
wave-offering  before  the  Lord"  (Farrar). 

Walkest  orderly  (o■To^J^6t9).    See  on  elements,  2  Pet.  iii.  10. 

25.  Blood.     See  on  ch.  xv.  29. 


Ch.  XXI.]  THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  567 

26.  Purifying  liimself  {djvicr^eh).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  22  ; 
Jas.  iv.  8. 

Declaring  {Sia^eWcav).  To  the  priests  who  directed  the 
sacrifices  and  pronounced  release  from  tlie  vow. 

Fulfilment— until,  etc.  There  is  some  dispute  and  confu- 
sion here  as  to  the  precise  meaning.  The  general  sense  is  that, 
having  entered  the  temple  toward  the  close  of  the  period  re- 
quired for  the  fulfilment  of  these  men's  vow,  he  gave  notice 
that  the  vowed  number  of  Nazarite  days  had  expired,  after 
which  only  the  concluding  oJBfering  was  required 

27.  Asia.     See  on  ch.  ii.  9. 

Stirred  up  {a-vvexeov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit., 
poured  together,  threw  into  confusion.  See  on  confoimded,  ch. 
ii.  6 ;  and  confusion,  ch.  xix.  29. 

28.  This  place.  The  temple.  Compare  the  charge  against 
Stephen,  ch.  vi.  13. 

Greeks.     See  on  ch.  vi.  1, 

Temple  (lephv).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  5.  The  Jews  evidently 
meant  to  create  the  impression  that  Paul  had  introduced  G-en- 
tiles  into  the  inner  court,  which  was  restricted  to  the  Jews.  The 
temple  proper  was  on  the  highest  of  a  series  of  terraces  which 
rose  from  the  outer  court,  or  Court  of  the  Gentiles.  In  this 
outer  court  any  stranger  might  worship.  Between  this  and  the 
terraces  was  a  balustrade  of  stone,  with  columns  at  intervals,  on 
which  Greek  and  Latin  inscriptions  warned  all  Gentiles  against 
advancing  farther  on  pain  of  death.  Beyond  this  balustrade 
rose  a  fiight  of  fourteen  steps  to  the  first  platform,  on  which  was 
the  Court  of  the  Women,  surrounded  by  a  wall.  In  this  court 
were  the  treasury,  and  various  chambers,  in  one  of  which  the 
Nazarites  performed  their  vows.  It  was  here  that  the  Asiatic 
Jews  discovered  Paul. 


568  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXI. 

29.  Trophimus.  See  on  ch.  xx.  4.  As  an  Ephesian  he 
would  be  known  to  the  Asiatic  Jews. 

30.  Drew  him  out  of  thetemple.  Better,  as 'Rev.,  dragged 
(elXKov).  Out  of  the  sacred  enclosure  and  down  the  steps  to  the 
outer  court,  as  they  would  not  defile  the  temple  proper  with 
blood. 

The  doors  were  shut.     Between  the  inner  and  outer  courts. 

31.  Chief  captain  (;:^tXta/3;;^&)).  A  commander  of  a  thousand 
men.     See  on  Mark  vi.  21  ;  and  on  centurion,  Luke  vii.  2. 

Band  {a-veipri'i).  Or  cohort.  See  on  Mark  xv.  16.  These 
troops  were  quartered  in  the  tower  of  Antonia,  which  was  at 
the  northwestern  corner  of  the  temple-area,  and  communicated 
with  the  temple-cloisters  by  staircases. 

32.  Centurions.     See  on  Luke  vii.  2. 
Unto  them  (eV  aurow).     Better,  upon  them. 

33.  Chains  {aXvaeaC).     See  on  Mark  v.  4. 

34.  Castle  (jTrape/M^oXojv).  Better,  iarracks.  The  main 
tower  had  a  smaller  tower  at  each  corner,  the  one  at  the  south- 
eastern corner  being  the  largest  and  overlooking  the  temple.  In 
this  tower  were  the  quarters  of  th^  soldiers.  The  word  is  de- 
rived from  the  verb  irapeix^aXKw,  toj)ut  in  heside,  used  in  mil- 
itary language  of  distributing  auxiliaries  among  regular  troops 
and,  generally,  of  drawing  up  in  battle-order.  Hence  the  noun 
means,  a  tody  drawn  up  in  hattle-array,  and  passes  thence 
into  the  meaning  of  an  encampment,  soldier^  quarters,  harrachs. 
In  Heb.  xi.  34,  it  occurs  in  the  earlier  sense  of  an  army  ;  and  in 
Heb.  xiii.  11,  13  ;  Apoc.  xx.  9,  in  the  sense  of  an  encampment. 
In  grammatical  phraseology  it  signifies  b. parenthesis,  according 
to  its  original  sense  of  insertion  or  interpolation. 


Ch.  XXI.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  569 

35.  Stairs.  Leading  from  the  temple-court  to  the  tower. 
There  were  two  flights,  one  to  the  northern  and  the  other  to 
the  western  cloister,  so  that  the  guard  could  go  different  ways 
among  the  cloisters  in  order  to  watch  the  people  at  the  Jewish 
festivals. 

So  it  .was  {avve^T]).  Lit.,  it  Jiappened.  The  verb  means,  lit- 
erally, to  come  together;  hence,  of  a,  coincidence  of  events.  It  is 
designedly  introduced  here  to  express  more  vividly  the  fact  of 
the  peculiar  emergency  and  the  peril  of  Paul's  situation.  Things 
came  to  such  a  pass  that  he  had  to  be  carried  up  the  stairs. 

37.  Canst  thou  speak  (ycvoiaKeis:)-  Lit.,  dost  thou  know? 
So  Eev. 

38.  Art  thou  not  {ovk  apa  trv  et).  Indicating  the  officer's 
surprised  recognition  of  his  own  mistake.  "  Thou  art  not,  then, 
as  I  supposed."     Rev.  properly  adds  th^n  {apa). 

The  Egyptian.  A  false  prophet,  who,  in  the  reign  of  Nero, 
when  Felix  was  governor  of  Judaea,  collected  a  multitude  of 
thirty  thousand,  whom  he  led  from  the  wilderness  to  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  saying  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  would  fall  down 
at  his  command  and  give  them  free  entrance  to  the  city.  Felix 
with  an  army  dispersed  the  multitude,  and  the  Egyptian  him- 
self escaped.  There  is  a  discrepancy  in  the  number  of  fol- 
lowers as  stated  by  Josephus  (30,000)  and  as  stated  by  the 
commandant  here  (4,000).  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that 
Josephus  alludes  to  the  whole  rabble,  while  Lysias  is  referring 
only  to  the  armed  followers. 

Mad  est  an  uproar.  Better,  as  Eev.,  stirred  up  to  sedition. 
The  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  is  too  vague.  The  verb  means  to 
unsettle  or  upset,  and  the  true  idea  is  given  in  the  A.  V.  of  Acts 
xvii.  6,  ham  turnsd  the  world  upside  down.  Compare  Gal.  v. 
12,  and  kindred  w^ords  in  Mark  xv.  7 ;  Luke  xxiii.  19. 

That  were  murderers  {rmv  aiKapUov).    The  A.  V.  is  too 


570  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXTL 

genera],  and  overlooks  the  force  of  the  article,  which  shows  that 
the  word  refers  to  a  class.  Kev.,  rightly,  the  assassins.  The 
word,  which  occurs  only  here,  and  notably  on  the  lips  of  a 
Koman  officer,  is  one  of  those  Latin  words  which  "  followed  the 
Roman  domination  even  into  those  Eastern  provinces  of  the  em- 
pire which,  unlike  those  of  the  West,  had  i-efused  to  be  Latin- 
ized, but  still  retained  their  own  language"  (Trench,  "Syn- 
onyms ").  The  Sicarii  were  so  called  from  the  weapon  which 
they  used — the  sica,  or  short,  curved  dagger.  Josephus  says: 
"  There  sprang  up  in  Jerusalem  another  description  of  robbers 
cailled /Sikars,  who,  under  the  broad  light  of  day,  and  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  city,  assassinated  men ;  chiefly  at  the  festivals, 
however,  when,  mixing  among  the  crowd,  with  daggers, con- 
cealed under  their  cloaks,  they  stabbed  those  with  whom  they 
were  at  variance.  When  they  fell,  the  murderers  joined  in  the 
general  expressions  of  indignation,  and  by  this  plausible  pro- 
ceeding remained  imdetected "  ("  Jewish  War,"  c.  xiii.).  The 
general  New  Testament  term  for  murderer  is  ^ovev<;  (see  Matt, 
xxii.  7  ;  Acts  iii.  14  ;  xxviii.  4,  etc.). 

39.  Mean  {aarjfiov).  JAt.,  without  amarh  or  token  {afjij,a). 
Hence  used  of  uncoined  gold  or  silver :  of  oracles  which  give  no 
intelligible  response  :  of  inarticulate  voices :  of  disease  without 
distinctive  symptoms.  Generally,  as  here,  undistinguished, 
mean.  There  is  a  conscious  feeling  of  patriotism  in  Paul's  ex- 
pression. 

40.  Beckoned  with  the  hand.  Compare  ch.  xxvi.  L 

Tongue  {haXsKToi).  Lit.,  dialect:  the  language  spoken  by 
the  Palestinian  Jews — a  mixture  of  Syriac  and  Chaldaic. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

1.  Defence  {aTroXoyias:).     See  on  answer,  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

2.  Kept— silence  {irapicrxov  ■^crvxiav).    Lit.,  gave  quiet. 


Ch.  XXII.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  571 

3.  At  the  feet.  Keferring  to  the  Jewisli  custom  of  the 
pupils  sitting  on  benches  or  on  the  floor,  while  the  teacher  oc- 
cupied an  elevated  platform. 

Gamaliel.  One  of  the  seven  Eabbis  to  whom  the  Jews 
gave  the  title  Bahhan.  Rah,  "  teacher,"  was  the  lowest  degree ; 
Rahhi,  "  my  teacher,"  the  next  higher ;  and  Rabhan,  "  our 
teacher,"  the  highest.  Gamaliel  was  a  liberal  Pharisee.  "  As 
Aquinas  among  the  schoolmen  was  called  Doctor  Angelicus, 
and  Bonaventura  Doctor  Seraphious,  so  Gamaliel  was  called 
the  Beauty  of  the  Law.  He  had  no  antipathy  to  the  Greek 
learning.  Candor  and  wisdom  seem  to  have  been  features  of 
his  character  "  (Oonybeare  and  Howson).     See  eh.  v.  34  sq. 

Instructed  {"TreTraiBev/ievoi;).     See  on  chastise,  liuke  xxiii.  16. 

According  to  the  perfect  manner  {Kara  uKpl^eiav).  Lit, 
according  to  the  strictness.  See  on  perfect  understanding,  Luke 
i.  3 ;  and  diUgenth/,  Acts  xviii.  25.  Compare,  also,  Acts  xviii. 
26 ;  xxvi.  5. 

Zealous  {!^i]XMTrj<;).  Or  a  zealot.  On  the  word  as  a  title,  see 
on  Mark  iii.  18. 

4.  Way.     See  on  ch.  ix.  2. 

5.  Estate  of  the  elders  {irpea-^vrepmv).  The  eldership  or 
Sanhedrim. 

Went.     The  imperfect :  was  journeying. 

6.  About  noon.     Not  mentioned  in  ch.  ix. 

8.  Of  Nazareth  (6  Na^apalo';).  Lit.,  the  Naza/rene.  Not 
mentioned  in  ch.  ix. 

9.  Heard  not  {ovk  rjKova-av).  The  verb  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  understood,  as  Mark  iv.  33 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  2,  which  ex- 
plains the  apparent  discrepancy  with  ch.  ix.  7. 


572  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXU 

11.  For  the  glory  of  that  light.  The  cause  of  his  blind- 
ness is  not  stated  in  ch.  ix. 

12.  A  devout  man,  etc.  In  ch.  ix.  10,  he  is  called  a  dis- 
ciple. Paul  here  "  affirms  that  he  was  not  introduced  to  Chris- 
tianity by  an  opponent  of  Judaisna,  but  by  a  strict  Jew" 
(Gloag). 

13.  Stood  (eVtcTTa?).  More  correctly,  as  Eev.,  "standing 
ly  {i-TTi)." 

Receive  thy  sight  (avd^eijrov).  Better,  look  up.  See  the 
following  words  :  Hooked  up  xtpon  him.  The  word  admits  of 
both  translations,  to  look  up  and  to  recover  sight. 

I  looked  up  upon  him.  Some  unite  both  meanings  here: 
/  looked  up  with  recovered  sight.     So  Rev.,  in  margin. 

14.  The  God  of  our  fathers— Just  One.  A  conciliatory 
touch  in  Paul's  speech,  mentioning  both  God  and  Christ  by 
their  Jewish  names.     Compare  ch.  iii.  14  ;  vii.  52. 

Hath  chosen  {Trpoexeipia-aro).  See  on  ch.  iii.  20.  Better, 
as  Rev.,  appointed. 

15.  All  men.  He  keeps  back  the  offensive  word  Gentiles 
(ch.  ix.  15). 

16.  Wash  away  {aTroXovcrai).     See  on  ch.  xvi.  33. 

17.  I  was  in  a  trance  {yeviaSai,  fie  iv  eKUTaaeC).  Rev., 
more  correctly,  I  fell  into  a  trance ;  the  verb  meaning  to  he- 
come,  rather  than  the  simple  to  he.  On  trawe,  see  note  on 
astonishment,  Mark  v.  42  ;  and  compare  note  on  Acts  x.  10. 

20.  Martyr.  Better,  as  Rev.,  witness.  The  special  sense  of 
the  word  was  probably  not  in  use  at  this  time.  See  on  ch.  i. 
22.     It  occurs,  however,  in  Apoc.  ii.  13 ;  xvii.  6. 


Ch.  XXII.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  573 

Standing  by.     See  on  ver.  13. 

Consenting  {a-vvevSoK&v).  See  on  allow,  Luke  xi.  48 ;  and 
compare  Acts  viii.  1. 

Slew.     See  on  Luke  xxiii.  32. 

21.  Gentiles.  "  The  fatal  word,  which  hitherto  he  had  care- 
fully avoided,  but  which  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  avoid  any- 
longer,  was  enough.  .  .  .  The  word  'Gentiles,'  confirm- 
ing all  their  worst  suspicions,  fell  like  a  spark  on  the  inflam- 
mable mass  of  their  fanaticism"  (Farrar,  "Life  and  Work  of 
Paul "). 

22.  They  gave  him  audience  (fiKovov).  The  imperfect. 
Up  to  this  word  they  were  listening. 

Lifted  up  their  voice,  etc.  "  Then  began  one  of  the  most 
odious  and  despicable  spectacles  which  the  world  can  witness, 
the  spectacle  of  an  oriental  mob,  hideous  with  impotent  rage, 
howling,  yelling,  cursing,  gnashing  their  teeth,  flinging  about 
their  arms,  waving  and  tossing  their  blue  and  red  robes,  casting 
dust  into  the  air  by  handfuls,  with  all  the  furious  gesticulations 
of  an  uncontrolled  fanaticism "  (Farrar).  Plackett  cites  Sir 
John  Chardin  ("  Travels  into  Persia  and  the  East  Indies ")  as 
saying  that  it  is  common  for  the  peasants  in  Persia,  when  they 
have  a  complaint  to  lay  before  their  governors,  to  repair  to 
them  by  hundreds  or  a  thousand  at  once.  They  place  them- 
selves near  the  gate  of  the  palace,  where  they  suppose  they  are 
most  likely  to  be  seen  and  heard,  and  there  set  up  a  horrid  out- 
cry, rend  their  garments,  and  throw  dust  into  the  air,  at  the 
same  time  demanding  justice.     Compare  2  Sam.  xvi.  13. 

24.  Examined  {aveTa^etr^ai).  Only  here  and  ver.  29.  Not 
found  in  classical  Greek.     Apocrypha,  Susanna,  ver.  14. 

By  scourging  (jida-rt^iv).     JAt,  with  scourges. 


574  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.         [Ch.  XXIH 

25.  Bound  him  with  thongs  (Trpoeretvav  aiirov  Toh  l/J-acriv). 
Against  the  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  is  the  word  Trpoereivav,  they 
stretched  forward,  in  allusion  to  the  position  of  the  victim  for 
scourging,  and  the  article  with  thongs  ;  "  the  thongs,"  with  ref- 
erence to  some  well-known  instrument.  If  the  words  referred 
simply  to  binding  him,  with  thongs  would  be  superfluous.  It 
is  better,  therefoi-e,  to  take  thongs  as  referring  to  the  scourge, 
consisting  of  one  or  more  lashes  or  cords,  a  sense  in  which  it 
occurs  in  classical  Greek,  and  to  render  stretched  him  out  for 
{or  hefore)  the  thongs.  The  word  is  used  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  of  a  shoe-latchet  (Mark  i.  1 ;  Luke  iii.  16 ;  John  i.  27). 

Roman.     See  on  ch.  xvi.  37. 

28.  Sum  {Ke^aXaiov).  Lit.,  capital.  The  purchase  of  Eo- 
man  citizenship  was  an  investment.  Under  the  first  Roman 
emperors  it  was  obtained  only  at  large  cost  and  with  great  diffi- 
culty ;  later,  it  was  sold  for  a  trifle. 

I  was  free-born  {iym  kuI  yeyevvrjfiac).  Lit.,  T  am  even  so 
born,  leaving,  the  mind  to  supply ^//-ee  or  a  Homan.  Better,  as 
Rev.,  Jam  a  Roman  horn. 

30.  Brought  Paul  down.  To  the  meeting-place  of  the 
Sanhedrim :  probably  not  their  usual  place  of  assembly,  which 
lay  within  the  wall  of  partition,  which  Lysias  and  his  soldiers 
would  not  have  been  allowed  to  pass. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

1.  Earnestly  beholding.  See  on  Luke  iv.  20.  Some,  who 
hold  that  Paul's  eyesight  was  defective,  explain  this  steadfast 
look  in  connection  with  his  imperfect  vision. 

Men  and  brethren.  He  addresses  the  Sanhedrim  as  an 
equal. 

I  have  lived  {ireTroKlrevnai).     Lit.,  have  Uved  as  a  citizen, 


Ch.  XXni.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  575 

with  special  reference  to  the  charge  against  him  that  he  taught 
men  against  the  law  and  the  temple.  He  means  that  he  has 
lived  as  a  true  and  loyal  Jew. 

Conscience  (o-weiS^o-et).     See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  16. 

2.  Ananias.  He  is  described  as  a  revengeful  and  rapacious 
tyrant.  We  are  told  that  he  reduced  the  inferior  priests  almost 
to  starvation  by  defrauding  them  of  their  tithes,  and  sent  his 
creatures  to  the  threshing-floors  with  bludgeons  to  seize  the. 
tithes  by  force. 

3.  Shall  smite  thee  {rvirreiv  o-e  fiekXei).  More  strictly,  is 
about  to  smite.  The  words  are  not  an  imprecation,  but  a 
prophecy  of  punishment  for  his  violent  dealing.  According  to 
Josephus,  in  the  attack  of  the  Sicarii  upon  Jerusalem,  he  was 
dragged  from  his  hiding-place,  in  a  sewer  of  the  palace,  and 
murdered  by  assassins. 


t/roms- 


Thou  whited  wall.     Compare  Matt,  xxiii.  27. 

Contrary  to  the  law  {^apavofi&v).    A  verb.     Lit., 
gressing  the  law. 

4.  Revilest  (XotBopeZ?).  The  word  signifies  vehement  abuse, 
scolding,  ieralMig. 

6.  The  one  part  were  Sadducees,  etc.  Perceiving  the 
impossibility  of  getting  a  fair  hearing,  Paul,  with  great  tact, 
seeks  to  bring  the  two  parties  of  the  council  into  collision  with 
each  other. 

The  resurrection.  A  main  point  of  contention  between 
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  the  latter  of  whom  denied  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  of  a  future  state,  and  of  any 
spiritual  existence  apart  from  the  body. 

8.  Both.     Showing  that  1/wo  classes  of  doctrines  peculiar  to 


576  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXIH. 

the  Sadducees,  and  not  three,  are  meant :  1.  The  resurrection. 
2.  The  existence  of  spirits,  whether  angels  or  souls  of  men ; 
"  neither  angel  nor  spirit." 

9.  Strove.  The  diversion  was  successful.  The  Pharisees' 
hatred  of  the  Sadducees  was  greater  than  their  hatred  of 
Christianity. 

What  if  a  spirit,  etc.  ISTeither  the  A.  V.  nor  Eev.  give  the 
precise  form  of  this  expression.  The  words  form  a  broken 
sentence,  followed  by  a  significant  silence,  which  leaves  the 
hearers  to  supply  the  omission  for  themselves :  "  But  if  a  spirit 

or  angel  has  spoken  to  him "     The  words  which  the  A.  Y. 

supplies  to  complete  the  sentence,  let  us  not  fight  against  God, 
are  spurious,  borrowed  from  ch.  v.  39. 

12.  Banded  together  {iroirjaavTe'i  avaTpo<prjv).  Lit.,  hewing 
made  a  conspiracy.     See  on  concourse,  ch.  xix.  40. 

Bound  themselves  under  a  curse  {ave^efidna-av  eavTov^). 
Lit.,  anathematised  or  cursed  themselves  ;  invoked  God's  curse 
on  themselves  if  they  should  violate  their  vow.  On  the  kindred 
noun  avdSefia,  a  curse,  see  note  on  ojferings,  Luke  xxi.  5.  In 
case  of  failure,  they  could  procure  absolution  from  their  oath 
by  the  Eabbis. 

13.  Conspiracy  (cruvm/iocrtai').  \Ai.,sioearing together' con- 
juration. According  to  its  etymology,  conspiracy  is  a  breath- 
ing or  blowing  together  (Latin,  conspirare).  Hence,  of  concerted 
thought  and  action. 

14.  We  have  bound  ourselves  under  a  great  curse  {ava- 
3-efiaTL  dveS^enaTia-afiev  eavTow).  Lit.,  we  have  anathematised 
ourselves  with  an  anathema.  A  very  strong  expression.  For 
similar  expressions,  see  Luke  xxii.  15  ;  John  iii.  29  ;  Acts  iv.  17. 

15.  Enquire  {Siayiveoa-Keiv).  Only  here  and  ch.  xxiv.  22. 
Originally,  to  distinguish  or  discern;  hence,  to  decide,  as  a  suit. 
Kev.,  more  correctly,  therefore,  judge. 


Ch.  XXIII.]  THE  ACTS   OF  THE   APOSTLES.  577 

More  perfectly  {aKpi^iffrepov).  Eev.,  better,  more  exactly. 
See  on  Luke  i.  3  ;  Acts  xviii.  25,  26. 

Concerning  him  {to,  irepl  avrov).  Lit.,  the  things  about  Mm. 
Rev.,  better,  his  case. 

18.  The  prisoner  (o  SeV/ito?).  ¥vom  Bico,  to  Mnd.  Paul,  as 
a  Eoman  citizen,  was  held  in  custodia  militaris,  "  military  cus- 
tody." Three  kinds  of  custody  were  recognized  by  the  Eoman 
law  :  1.  Custodia jpublica  (public  custody) ;  confinement  in  the 
public  jail.  This  was  the  worst  kind,  the  common  jails  being 
wretched  dungeons.  Such  was  the  confinement  of  Paul  and 
Silas  at  Philippi.  2.  Custodia  libera  (free  custody),  confined  to 
men  of  high  rank.  The  accused  was  committed  to  the  charge 
of  a  magistrate  or  senator,  who  became  responsible  for  his  ap- 
pearance on  the  day  of  trial.  3.  Custodia  miUtaris  (military 
custody).  The  accused  was  placed  in  charge  of  a  soldier,  who 
was  responsible  with  his  life  for  the  prisoner's  safe-keeping, 
and  whose  left  hand  was  secured  by  a  chain  to  the  prisoner's 
right.  The  prisoner  was  usually  kept  in  the  barracks,  but  was 
sometimes  allowed  to  reside  in  a  private  house  under  charge  of 
his  guard. 

21.  Have  bound  themselves.  "If  we  should  wonder  how, 
so  early  in  the  morning,  after  the  long  discussion  in  the  Sanhe- 
drim, which  must  have  occupied  a  considerable  part  of  the  day, 
more  than  forty  men  should  have  been  found  banded  together, 
under  an  anathema,  neither  to  eat  nor  to  drink  till  they  had 
killed  Paul ;  and,  still  more,  how  such  a  conspiracy,  or,  rather, 
conjuration,  which,  in  the  nature  of  it,  would  be  kept  a  profound 
secret,  should  have  become  known  to  Paul's  sister's  son — the 
circumstances  of  the  case  furnish  a  sufficient  explanation.  The 
Pharisees  were  avowedly  a,  fraternity  or  guild;  and  they,  or 
some  of  their  kindred  fraternities,  would  furnish  the  ready 
material  for  such  a  band,  to  whom  this  additional  vow  would  be 
nothing  new  or  strange,  and,  murderous  though  it  sounded, 
only  seem  a  further  carrying  out  of  the  principles  of  their  order. 
Again,  since  the  wife  and  all  the  children  of  a  member  were 
37 


578  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXHL 

ipso  facto  members  of  the  guild,  and  Paul's  father  had  been  a 
Pharisee  (ver.  6),  Paul's  sister  also  would,  by  virtue  of  her  birth, 
belong  to  the  fraternity,  even  irrespective  of  the  probability 
that,  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  party,  she  would 
have  married  into  a  Pharisaical  family  "  (Edersheim,  "  Jewish 
Social  Life  "). 

23.  Soldiers  (o-T/aaTKBTa?).  Heavy- armed  footmen  :  legion- 
aries. 

Spearmen  (Se^toXa/Sov?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament,  and 
not  in  classical  Greek.  From  Sefto?,  right,  and  Xafi^dvoa,  to 
take.  The  exact  meaning  is  uncertain.  Some  explain  it  as 
those  who  take  the  right  side  of  the  prisoners  whom  they  have 
in  charge  ;  others,  those  who  grasp  if  heir  weapon)  with  the  right 
hand ;  others,  again,  those  who  hold  {a  second  horse)  Tjy  the 
right  hand.  They  are  here  distinguished  from  the  heavy-armed 
legionaries  and  the  cavalry.  They  were  probably  light-armed 
troops,  javelin-throwers  or  slingers.  One  of  the  principal  man- 
uscripts reads  Se^to/SoXou?,  "those  who  throw  with  the  right 
hand." 

24.  Beasts  {KTrivif).    See  on  Luke  x.  34. 

26.  After  this  manner  (TrepteT^ouo-av  Tov  TUTToi'TouToi').  Lit., 
containing  this  form  or  type.     See  on  it  is  contained,  1  Pet.  ii.  6. 

26.  To  the  most  excellent  (tm  KpaTlara).  "His  excel- 
lency : "  an  official  title.     Compare  ch.  xxiv.  3  ;  xxvi.  25. 

Greeting  {xaipeiv).     See  on  ch.  xv.  23. 

27.  Rescued.  Bengel  says,  "  a  lie."  Lysias  wishes  to  make 
the  impression  that  Paul's  citizenship  was  the  cause  of  his  res- 
cuing him ;  whereas  he  did  not  know  of  this  until  afterward. 
He  says  notliing  about  the  proposed  scourging. 

29.  Questions.    See  on  ch.  xv.  2. 


Ca  XXIV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  579 

Nothing— worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds.  Every  Eoman 
magistrate  before  whom  the  apostle  is  brought  declares  him  in- 
nocent. 

30.  When  it  was  told  {iJU7]vv^ela-'r)<s).  Lit.,  pointed  out.  Or 
shown,  as  Kev.     See  on  Luke  xx.  37. 

Feirewell.     The  best  texts  omit.     See  on  eh.  xv.  29. 

31.  Took  {ava\a^6vTe<}).  Lit.,  "having  taten -wp."  Com- 
pare set  Paul  on,  ver.  24. 

To  Antipatris.     A  hard  night's  ride :  forty  miles. 

32.  On  the  morrow.     After  arriving  at  Antipatris. 

33.  Caesarea.     Twenty-six  miles  from  Antipatris. 

34.  Of  what  province  (e'/c  ■7rota9e7ra/3;;^ta9).  Rather,  '■'■from 
what  hind  of  a  province ; "  whether  senatorial  or  imperial. 
See  Introduction  to  Luke.     Cilicia  was  an  imperial  province. 

35.  I  will  hear  thee  {hiaKova-ofiai).     Better,  as  Kev.,  will 
hea/r  thy  cause ;  the  word  meaning  "  to  hQ&r  fully  (Bid)  in  a 
judicial  sense."     The  present  questioning  was  merely  prelimi- , 
nary. 

Herod's  palace.  Built  by  Herod  the  Great.  Judaea  being 
now  a  Koman  province,  the  palace  of  its  former  kings  had  be- 
come the  governor's  official  residence.  It  thus  appears  that 
Paul  was  leniently  dealt  with,  and  not  cast  into  the  common 
prison. 

^CRAPTER  XXIY. 

1.  An  orator  {pqropo'i).  An  advocate.  The  Jews,  being 
little  acquainted  with  Eoman  forms  and  laws,  had  to  employ 
Roman  advocates. 


580  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.       [Ch.  XXIV. 

3.  Very  worthy  deeds  («;aTo/5,9<o/4ttT6)i/).  Yrom  Karop^oa,  to 
set  upright.  Hence,  a  success  consequent  on  right  judgment  ; 
a  right  action.  The  best  texts,  however,  read  SiopSw/MTcov, 
settings  right;  amendments.  Thus  the  sentence  reads,  literally, 
obtaining  much  peace  through  thee,  and  amendments  taJcmg 
place  for  this  naUon  through  thy  providence,  we  accejpt,  etc. 

Providence  i^povoLa<i).  Forethought.  Providentia  Au- 
gusti  {the  providence  of  the  emperor)  was  a  common  title  on  the 
coins  of  the  emperors. 

4.  Be  tedious  {eyKowTa).  See  on  hindered,  1  Pet.  iii.  Y. 
The  meaning  is,  rather,  "  that  I  may  not  further  hinder  thee,  or 
detain  thee. 

Clemency  (eVtei/ceta).     See  on  gentle,  1  Pet.  ii.  18. 

A  few  words  {a-vvr6/jLa><;).  Lit.,  concisely.  From  a-vvTe/ivo), 
to  cut  down  or  cut  short. 

5.  Pestilent  fellow  (Koifiov).     Lit.,  a,plague  or  pest. 

Ringleader  iTrpwToa-TdTTfv).  Originally,  one  who  stands  first 
on  the  right  of  a  line ;  a  file-leader.  Thus  Thucydides  says 
that  all  armies  when  engaging  are  apt  to  thrust  outward  their 
right  wing ;  and  adds,  "  The  first  man  in  the  front  ra/rik 
(d  TT/atoTocTTaT');?)  of  the  right  wing  is  originally  responsible  for 
the  deflection"  (v.,  71).  Here,  of  course,  metaphorically,  as 
A.  V.  and  Rev.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Sect  (alpeaeo><s).     See  on  heresies,  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

Nazarenes.  The  only  passage  in  scripture  where  this  term 
is  used  to  denote  the  Christians.     See  on  Matt.  ii.  23. 

6.  To  profane  {^e^rjKSsaai).  The  word  is  akin  to  /StjXo?, 
threshold,  and  ^alvw,  to  step ;  and  its  fundamental  idea,  there- 
fore, is  that  of  overstepping  the  threshold  of  sacred  places.   The 


Ch.  XXIV,]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  581 

word  jprofane  is  the  Latin  ^o/imwm,  vn  front  of  the  somcktary  ; 
that  which  is  kept  outside  the/«ne  because  unholy. 

We  laid  hold.  The  best  texts  omit  all  after  these  words  as 
far  as  hy  examining. 

8.  From  whom.  Paul.  It  would  refer  to  Lysias  if  the 
omitted  passage  above  were  retained. 

9.  Assented  {avve^evro).  But  the  best  texts  read  trvveire- 
^evTo,  joimthj  set  upon  or  assailed.  So  Rev.,  joined  in  the 
charge. 

10.  The  more  cheerfully  {evJ^vfiorepov).  The  best  texts 
read  the  positive  of  the  adverb,  evBvfua'i,  cheerfully. 

14.  The  way.     See  on  ch.  ix.  2. 

A  sect.  See  on  ver.  5.  The  word  is  commonly  used  in  an 
indifferent  sense,  as  signifying  merely  a  school  or  jpa/rty.  So 
ch.  XV.  5  ;  xxviii.  22.  Here,  however,  in  a  bad  sense — a  schis- 
matic  sect,  as  in  1  Cor.  xi.  19. 

Worship  {\aTpeva>).  Better,  as  Eev.,  serve.  See  on  Luke 
i.  74. 

God  of  my  fathers  (reS  irarpdito  &ea>).  A  familiar  classical 
phrase,  and  therefore  well  known  to  Felix.  Thus  Demosthenes 
calls  Apollo  the  •jrarpSo';  (ancestral  god)  of  Athens.  Socrates 
is  asked  (Plato,  "  Euthydemus,"  302),  "  Have  you  an  ancestral 
Zeus  {Zev<;  iraTpaio<;)  ? "  So,  frequently,  in  the  classics.  Simi- 
larly, the  Eoman  phrase,  Dipatrii,  "the  gods  of  the  forefa- 
thers." On  the  Eoman  reverence  for  the  ancestral  religion,  see 
note  on  ch.  xvi.  21.  The  Eoman's  own  sentiment  would  pre- 
pare him  to  respect  Paul's. 

15.  Allow  (7r/3oo-Se;y;oi/Tat).  Or,  as  Eev.,  ^0^/bn  The  word 
admits  of  either  sense. 


582  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXIV. 

16.  Exercise  myself  {aaK&).  Originally,  to  work  raw  ma- 
terial, to  form:  hence,  to  practise,  exerdse,  discvplvne  ;  and  so, 
in  ecclesiastical  language,  to  mortify  the  lody.  Of  the  kindred 
adjective  aa-KTjTiKO'i,  our  word  ascetic  is  a  transcript. 

Void  of  offence  {airpocrKoirov).  Lit.,  without  stumblmg ;  wn- 
shaken.  The  word  is  used  thus  in  z.passvv6  sense  here,  as  in 
Philip,  i.  10.  In  1  Cor.  x.  32,  it  occurs  in  the  actvve  sense  of 
giving  offence  to  others,  or  causing  them  to  stumble. 

18.  Whereupon  (eV  oh).  More  correctly,  in  which  (occupa- 
tion) ;  while  so  engaged.  The  best  texts,  however,  read  ev  ah, 
in  which,  the  pronoun  agreeing  in  gender  with  offerings.  The 
sense,  according  to  this,  is,  as  Kev.,  margin,  in  presenting  which 
{offerings). 

22.  Deferred  {avejSaXeTo).  Adjourned  the  case.  Only  here 
in  New  Testament. 

I  will  know  the  uttermost  {Sia/yvma-ofiai).  Better,  as  Kev., 
.7  wUl  determine.     See  on  ch.  xxiii.  15. 

23.  Liberty  (avea-iv).  From  dviTjfii,,  to  send  up  /  thence,  ^o 
loosen,  release.  It  is  almost  exactly  expressed  by  our  vulgarism, 
to  let  up.  The  noun  here  is  more  correctly  rendered  by  Kev., 
indulgence.  In  all  the  other  New  Testament  passages  it  is  ren- 
dered rest,  ease,  or  relief.  See  2  Cor.  ii.  13  ;  vii.  5 ;  viii.  13 ;  2 
Thess.  i.  Y. 

To  minister  {virrjperetv).     See  on  officer.  Matt.  v.  25. 

25.  Righteousness,  temperance,  the  judgment  to  come. 

Three  topics  which  bore  directly  upon  the  character  of  Felix. 
Tacitus  says  of  him  that  he  "  exercised  the  authority  of  a  king 
with  the  spirit  of  a  slave  ; "  and  that,  by  reason  of  the  powerful 
influence  at  his  command,  "  he  supposed  he  might  perpetrate 
with  impunity  every  kind  of  villany."  He  had  persuaded  his 
wife  Drusilla  to  forsake  her  husband  and  marry  him.     He  had 


Ch.  XXV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  583 

employed  assassins  to  murder  the  high-priest  Jonathan,  and 
might  well  tremble  at  the  preaching  of  the  judgment  to  come. 
Temperance  {iyKpuTeia)  is,  properly,  self-control;  holding  the 
passions  in  hand. 

Trembled  {efj^o^oi;  yevo/ievo's).  Lit.,  homing  become  i/iifear. 
Eev.,  better,  was  terrified. 

For  this  time  (to  vvv  e^ov).  Ov,  for  the  present.  Very 
literally,  as  to  what  has  itself  now. 

26.  He  hoped  also  {afia  Se  koI  eKiri^cav).  A  comma  should 
be  placed  after  thee  (ver.  25),  and  the  participle  ekTri^mv,  hoping, 
joined  with  answered :  "Felix  answered,  'Go  thy  way,  etc.,' 
hoping  withal  that  money  would  be  given  him." 

Communed  (m/it'Xet).     See  on  talked,  ch.  xx.  11. 

27.  Porcius  Festus  came  into  Felix's  room  {k\a^e  Sid- 
ho')(pv  6  ^TjKi^  IIopKiov  ^rja-Tov).  Kev.,  better,  Felix  was  suc- 
ceeded hy  Porcius  Festus.  The  Greek  idiom  is,  Felix  received 
Porcius  Festus  as  a  successor. 

To  shew  the  Jews  a  pleasure  {')(apiTa<i  KaTo^ea^ai  tok 
^lovBaloLi;).  Lit.,  to  lay  v/p  thanks  for  himself  with  the  Jews. 
Eev.,  correctly,  to  gain  favor  with  the  Jews. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

1.  Was  come  into  the  province  (etri^a<!  rr}  i-n-apxlq,).   Lit., 
ha/ovng  entered  upon  the  province. 

2.  Besought.     The  imperfect    denotes  their  persistence: 
Tcept  ieseeching. 

3.  Laying  wait  {ivehpav  Trotowre?).    Lit.,  mahing  or  arrang- 
ing an  ambush. 


584  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.        [Ch.  XXV, 

4.  Should  be  kept  {TTjpelaSai).  This  puts  it  as  a  peremp- 
tory denial  of  the  Jews'  request  by  Festus ;  whereas  it  is  only 
his  statement  of  a  fact.  Eender,  as  Eev.,  that  Paul  was  kept 
m  charge.  Festus'  reply  is  conciliatory,  and  is  put  on  the  ground 
of  convenience. 

6.  Judgment-seat.     See  on  ch.  vii.  5. 

8.  Have  I  offended  {ruiapTov).  See  on  the  kindred  noun 
dfiapria,  sin,  Matt.  i.  21. 

9.  Do  a  pleasure.  See  on  ch.  xxiv.  27.  Eev.,  better,  to 
gain  favor. 

Before  me  (eV  e/xoO).  Not  with  him  as  judge,  but  by  the 
Sanhedrim  in  his  presence. 

10.  Very  well  (koXXiov).  The  force  of  the  comparative 
should  be  preserved  :  "  thou  knowest  better  than  thy  question 
implies." 

11.  Deliver  (xapicraa-Sai).  With  an  underlying  sense  of  giv- 
ing him  up  as  a  favor  to  the  Jews. 

I  appeal  (IttlkcCKovpmC).  The  technical  phrase  for  lodging  an 
appeal.     The  Greek  rendering  of  the  Latin  formula  ajp^pello. 

12.  The  council.  A  body  of  men  chosen  by  the  governor 
himself  from  the  principal  Eomans  of  the  province.  These 
were  called  assessors,  sometimes  friends,  sometimes  cajptains. 
Though  a  Eoman  citizen  had  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  emperor, 
a  certain  discretion  was  allowed  the  governors  of  provinces  as 
to  admitting  the  appeal.  It  might  be  disallowed  if  the  affair 
did  not  admit  of  delay,  or  if  the  appellant  were  a  known  robber 
or  pirate.  In  doubtful  cases  the  governor  was  bound  to  consult 
with  his  council,  and  his  failure  to  do  so  exposed  him  to  censure. 
Cicero,  in  his  impeachment  of  Yerres,  the  brutal  governor  of 
Sicily,  says ;  "  Will  you  deny  that  you  dismissed  your  council, 


Ch.  XXV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  585 

the  men  of  rank  with  whom  your  predecessor  and  yourself  had 
been  wont  to  consult,  and  decided  the  case  yourself  ? "  (ii.,  33). 
That  Festus  exercised  this  discretion  in  Paul's  case  is  shown  by 
his  conferring  with  the  council. 

13.  Agrippa  the  king.  Herod  Agrippa  IL,  son  of  the 
Herod  whose  death  is  recorded  in  Acts  xii.  20-23. 

Bernice.  Sister  of  Drusilla,  the  wife  of  Felix.  She  is  said 
to  have  lived  in  incestuous  relations  with  her  brother.  Juvenal, 
in  his  sixth  satire,  alludes  to  this :  "  A  most  notable  diamond, 
made  more  precious  by  having  been  worn  on  the  finger  of  Ber- 
nice. This  a  barbarian  king  once  gave  to  his  incestuous  love. 
This  Agrippa  gave  to  his  sister." 

16.  Opportunity  (rorn-ov).  liit.,  j)laee.  An  unclassical  use 
of  the  word. 

18.  Stood  up  (^Ta^evrei).     See  on  Luke  xviii.  11 ;  xix.  8. 

19.  Superstition  (Seto-tSai/iow'a?).  See  on  ch.  xvii.  22.  Bet- 
ter, religion,  as  Kev.  As  Agrippa  was  a  Jew  by  religion,  Fes- 
tus would  not  have  insulted  him  by  applying  the  word  swper- 
siition  to  his  faith.  Note,  however,  that  he  speaks  of  it  as 
their  own  religion,  not  identifying  Agrippa  with  them.  It  was 
a  non-committal  expression,  since  the  word  meant  either  religion 
or  superstition  according  to  circumstances.  He  left  Agrippa 
"  to  take  the  word  in  a  good  sense,  but  reserved  his  own  view, 
which  was  certainly  the  Eoman  one "  (Meyer).  There  is,  in- 
deed, a  similar  tact  in  Paul's  use  of  the  word  to  the  Athenians. 
He  selected  "  a  word  which  almost  imperceptibly  shaded  off 
from  praise  to  blame ''  (Trench).  * 

*  ' '  Benihardy  very  aptly  remarks  that  the  entrance  of  the  word  SenriSaiiiovia 
marks  a  critical  point  in  the  history  of  the  life  of  the  Greek  people.  It  marks 
the  wavering  between  scepticism  and  despondency.  It  leaves  the  conception 
of  the  object  of  religious  reverence  wavering  between  God  and  demon,  and 
thns  fearing  becomes  the  dominant  notion.  Hence  the  word  carries  more  re- 
proach than  credit "  (Zeschwitz,  Profangracitat  und  Biblischer  Sprachgeist ). 


686  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      [Ch.  XXVI 

Affirmed  {6<j)a&Kev).  The  imperfect  implies  something  ha- 
bitual .     ' '  Paul  kept  asserting. " 

21.  Of  the  Emperor  {tov  Se^aa-Tov).  JAi.,  the  august  one ,' 
hence  a  translation  of  Augustus,  which  was  not  a  proper  name, 
but  a  title  of  the  Roman  emperors. 

26.  Lord  (xvpltp).  An  instance  of  Luke's  accuracy.  The 
title  "  lord  "  was  refused  by  the  first  two  emperors,  Augustus 
and  Tiberius.  The  emperors  who  followed  accepted  it.  In  the 
time  of  Domitian  it  was  a  recognized  title.  Antoninus  Pius  was 
the  first  who  put  it  on  his  coins. 

27.  Crimes  (atr/a?).     Kev.,  more  correctly,  cha/rges. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

2.  Happy  (jiaKapiov).     See  on  Messed,  Matt.  v.  3. 
Answer  {airoXoyelaS-ai).     See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

3.  Expert  {yvdxrrTjv).     Lit.,  a  knower. 
Questions  {^7)T7}/j,dTa)v).     See  on  ch.  xv.  2. 

4.  My  manner  of  life,  etc.  The  repeated  articles  give  ad- 
ditional precision  to  the  statement :  "  the  manner  of  life,  that 
which  was  from  my  youth ;  that  which  was  from  the  beginning." 

6.  For  tlie  hope  (eV  e)^-rr(Si).  Lit.,  "on  the  ground  of  the 
hope." 

Made  of  God.  The  article  clearly  defines  what  promise, 
"  the  one,  namely,  made  of  God." 

7.  Twelve  tribes  (ScoBeica^vXov).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. A  collective  term,  embracing  the  tribes  as  a  whole. 
Meyer  renders  our  twehe-tribe- stock. 


Ch.  xxvx]  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  687 

Instantly  {ev  eicrevda).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit., 
in  imtemity.  See  on  fervently,  1  Pet.  i.  22.  Compare  more 
ecmiestly,  Luke  xxii.  44 ;  without  ceasing,  Acts  xii.  5  •  fervent, 
1  Pet.  iv.  8.  See,  also,  on  instantly  and  vnstant,  Luke  vii.  4 ; 
xxiii.  23. 

Serving.     Compare  ch.  xxiv.  14  ;  and  see  on  Luke  i.  74. 

Come  {KaTavrfjffai,).  Lit.,  to  arrive  at,  as  if  at  a  goal.  Com- 
pare ch.  xvi.  1  ;  xviii.  19 ;  xxv.  13,  etc.     Eev.  attain. 

8.  That  God  should  raise  the  dead  {el  6  Oebi  veKpoixs 
iyeipei).  Much  better,  as  Eev.,  if  God  raises  the  dead.  He  does 
not  put  it  as  a  supposition,  but  as  a  fact:  if  God  raises  the  dead, 
as  you  admit  that  he  has  the  power  to  do,  and  as  your  own  writ- 
ings tell  you  that  he  has  done. 

10.  Saints  {t&v  wyimv).  Lit.,  the  holy  ones.  Paul  did  not 
call  the  Christians  by  this  name  when  addressing  the  Jews,  for 
this  would  have  enraged  them  ;  but  before  Agrippa  he  uses  the 
word  without  fear  of  giving  offence.  On  this  word  07109,  holy, 
which  occurs  over  two  hundred  times  in  the  New  Testament,  it 
is  to  be  noted  how  the  writers  of  the  Greek  scriptures,  both  in 
the  New  Testament  and,  what  is  more  remarkable,  in  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  bring  it  out  from  the  background  in  which  it  was  left 
by  classical  writers,  and  give  preference  to  it  over  words  which, 
in  pagan  usage,  represented  conceptions  of  mere  externality  in 
religion.  Even  in  the  Old  Testament,  where  externality  is  em- 
phasized, 0740?  is  the  standard  word  for  holy.* 

*  Thus,  though  the  priest  is  Upeis,  the  holy  place  is  t^  &yiov,  and  the  most 
holy  place,  ri.  &yia  t&v  aylwv :  Up6v  is  never  used  in  the  Septuagint  for  the 
temple,  except  in  1  Ohron.  xxix.  4 ;  Ezek.  xlv.  19 ;  and  in  both  oases  the 
temple  is  referred  to  in  its  outward  aspect.  In  Ezek.  xxvii.  6 ;  xxviii.  18, 
Th  tfpi  is  used  of  the  heathen  sanctuaries  of  Tyre.  In  the  New  Testament 
Upis  never  implies  moral  excellence.  Excepting  in  the  neuter  form,  t^  Up6i; 
the  temple,  it  occurs  but  twice  (1  Cor.  ix.  13 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15),  and  is  never  used 
of  a  person.  'Seiiiv6s  is  reverend;  ayv6s,pure,  in  the  sense  of  cluutity,  freedom 
from  admixture  of  eoil ;  and  is  applied  once  to  God  himself  (1  John  iii.  3). 
"Oaios  is  holy  liy  sanction.     Trench  remarks  the  sharp  distinction  maintained 


588  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVI 

Gave  my  voice  [KaTriver^Ka  yfrrj(f)ov).  Lit.,  laid  down  my 
vote.  See  on  counteth,  Luke  xiv.  28.  Some  suppose  that  Paul 
here  refers  to  casting  his  vote  as  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim  ; 
in  which  case  he  must  have  been  married  and  the  father  of  a 
family.  But  this  there  is  no  reason  for  believing  (compare  1 
Cor.  vii.  7,  8) ;  and  the  phrase  may  be  taken  as  expressing 
merely  moral  assent  and  approval. 

12.  Whereupon  (eV  oh).  See  on  ch.  xxiv.  18.  Better,  on 
which  err  (Mid ;  in  which  affairs  of  persecution. 

13.  Above  the  brightness  of  the  sun.  Peculiar  to  this 
third  account  of  Paul's  conversion.  The  other  peculiarities  are : 
the  falling  of  his  companions  to  the  ground  along  with  himself ; 
the  voice  addressing  him  in  Hebrew;  and  the  words,  "It  is 
hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks." 

14.  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks.     Or, 

goads.  The  sharp  goad  carried  in  the  ploughman's  hand,  against 
which  the  oxen  kick  on  being  pricked.  The  metaphor,  though 
not  found  in  Jewish  writings,  was  common  in  Greek  and  Eo- 
man  writings.  Thus,  Euripides  ("  Bacchae,"  791) :  "  Being  en- 
raged, I  would  kick  against  the  goads,  a  mortal  against  a  god." 
Plautus  ("  Truculentus,  4,  2,  55) :  "  If  you  strike  the  goads 
with  your  fists,  you  hurt  your  hands  more  than  the  goads." 
"  Who  knows  whether  at  that  moment  the  operation  of  plough- 
ing might  not  be  going  on  within  sight  of  the  road  along  which 
the  persecutor  was  travelling?  (Howson,  "Metaphors  of  St. 
Paul  ")•. 

16.  Have  \  appeared  (&<})Br]v).     See  on  Luke  xxii.  43. 

To  make  {trpoyetpia-aa-^ai).  Better,  as  Kev.,  ajppoi/nt.  See 
on  ch.  iii.  20. 


by  the  Septuaeint  translators  between  it  and  Syioi ;  the  two  words  being  used 
to  render  two  different  Hebrew  words,  and  never  interchanged.  The  Greek 
student  will  find  an  interesting  discussion  of  this  subject  in  Zeschwitz,  Pro- 
faugriicitat  und  Biblischer  Spraohgeist. 


Ch.  XXVI.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  589 

A  minister  and  a  witness.   See  on  Matt.  v.  25;  Acts  i.  22. 
17.  The  people.     The  Jews. 

22.  Help  of  God  (eVtKov/ata?  t^?  irapa  rov  Qeov).  Lit., 
"  help  that  is  from  God."  The  article  defines  the  nature  o£  the 
help  more  sharply  than  A.  Y.  The  word  for  heljj  originally 
meant  alliance. 

23.  That  Christ  should  suffer  {el  ■jto^to'^  6  Xptarbf). 
Eather,  if  or  whether  the  Messiah  is  liable  to  suffering.  He 
expresses  himself  in  a  problematic  form,  because  it  was  the 
point  of  debate  among  the  Jews  whether  a  suffering  Messiah 
was  to  be  believed  in.  They  believed  in  a  triumphant  Mes- 
siah, and  the  doctrine  of  his  sufferings  was  an  obstacle  to  their 
receiving  him  as  Messiah.  Note  the  article,  "  the  Christ,"  and 
see  on  Matt.  i.  1. 

24.  Much  learning  doth  make  thee  mad  (ra  iroWa  a-e 
rypd/jLfiaTa  el<;  fiavlav  irepirpeirei).  The  A.  V.  omits  the  article 
with  much  learning :  "  the  much  knowledge  "  with  which  thou 
art  busied.  Eev.,  "  ^Ay  much  learning."  Doth  mahe  thee  mad: 
literally,  is  turning  thee  to  madness. 

25.  Speak  forth  {airocpSe'yyo/j^ai).     See  on  ch.  ii.  4. 

28.  Almost  thou  persuadest  (eV  oXiym  fie  Tre/^et?).  Lit.,  in 
a  little  thoujpersxiadest.  The  rendering  almost  must  be  rejecte'd, 
being  without  sufficient  authority.  The  phrase,  im,  a  little,  is 
adverbial,  and  means  in  brief ;  summa/rily .  We  may  supply 
paJms  or  talk.  "  With  little  pains,  or  with  a  few  words."  The 
words  are  ironical,  and  the  sense  is,  "  You  are  trying  to  per- 
suade me  offhand  to  he  a  Christian."  Thou  persuadest  {irei^ei^) 
is,  rather,  thou  a/rt  for  persuading  ;  thou  attemptest  to  persuade  ; 
a  force  which  both  the  present  and  the  imperfect  sometimes 
have.* 


*  As  in  John  x.  33  :  "  For  whicli  of  these  works  are  you  for  stoning  me  (Xiftii- 
fere)?"  Johnxiii.  6:  "Dost  Miio^'a.  mean  to  waah  (Wirreir)  my  feet?"  Luke 
i.  59 :  "  They  were  for  caUing  (iKdhovy)  him  Zacharias."  Matt.  iii.  14 ;  "  John 
tried  to  prevent  {SieKiiKvey)." 


590  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    [Ch.  XXVII. 

29.  Almost  and  altogether   {iv  oXiya  koI  iv  /Meyak^).* 

Lit.,  in  little  and  in  great;  i.e.,  with  little  or  with  great  pains. 

Were  {yeve(T^ai).    Better,  as  Rev.,  might  hecome.    Agrippa's 
word,  "to  hecome  a  Christian,"  is  repeated. 

Except  these  bonds.  An  exquisite  touch  of  Christian  cour- 
tesy. 

30.  The  king,  the  governor,  Bernice.     Mentioned  in  the 
order  of  their  rank. 

31.  Doeth.   Eeferring,  not  to  Paul's  past  conduct,  but  to  the 
general  character  of  his  life. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

1.  Sail  (aTTOTrXeti/).     Lit.,  sail  away. 
Band.     See  on  Mark  xv.  16. 

2.  Meaning  to  sail  {fi,i\\ovT6<i  TrXeiv).  This  refers  the  in- 
tention to  the  voyagers  ;  but  the  best  texts  read  fieWovri,  agree- 
ing with  TrXoicp,  ship;  so  that  the  correct  rendering  is,  as  Rev., 
a  ship — which  was  about  to  sail. 

3.  Touched  {KaTrix^liev).  From  Kara,  down,  and  ayoa,  to 
lead  or  hring.  To  bring  the  ship  down  from  deep  water  to  the 
land.  Opposed  to  avrix^H'^v,  put  to  sea  (ver.  2);  which  is  to 
bring  the  vessel  wp  {avd)  from  the  land  to  deep  water.  See  on 
Luke  viii.  22.  Touched  is  an  inferential  rendering.  landed 
would  be  quite  as  good.  From  Caesarea  to  Sidon,  the  distance 
was  about  seventy  miles. 

Courteously  {^tXavSpdoTrco';).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Lit.,  in  a  moM-loving  way  ;  humanely  ;  kindly.    Rev.,  kindly, 

*  So  the  best  texts,  instead  of  iroXA^,  much. 


Ch.  XXVII.]  THE   ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  591 

better  than  couTteovisl/y.    Courteous,  from  oourt,  expresses  rather 
polish  of  mcmners  than  real  kindness. 

To  refresh  himself  {e-miieKeia';  rvxeiv).  Lit.,  to  recewe  care 
or  att&nMon. 

4.  We  sailed  under  {vireirXevaafiev).  Rev., correctly,  ■M/ic?e7' 
the  lee  of:  nnder  the  protection  of  the  land. 

6.  A  ship  of  Alexandria.  Employed  in  the  immense  corn 
trade  between  Italy  and  Egypt.  See  ver.  38.  The  size  of  the 
vessel  may  be  inferred  from  ver.  37. 

1.  Many  {iKavah).     See  on  Luke  vii.  6. 

Scarce  (/toXt?).  Incorrect.  Render,  as  Rev.,  with  difficulty. 
So,  also,  ha/rdh),  in  ver.  8.  The  meaning  is  not  that  they  bad 
scarcely  reached  Cnidus  when  the  wind  became  contrary,  nor  that 
they  had  come  only  as  far  as  Cnidus  in  many  days ;  but  that  they 
were  retarded  by  contrary  winds  between  Myra  and  Cnidus,  a 
distance  of  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  miles,  which,  with  a 
favorable  wind,  they  might  have  accomplished  in  a  day.  Such 
a  contrary  wind  would  have  been  the  northwesterly,  which  pre- 
vails during  the  summer  months  in  that  part  of  the  Archi- 
pelago. 

9.  The  Fast.  The  great  day  of  atonement,  called  "  the 
Fast "  by  way  of  eminence.  It  occurred  about  the  end  of  Sep- 
tember. Navigation  was  considered  unsafe  from  the  beginning 
of  November  until  the  middle  of  March. 

10.  I  perceive  {!^ewp&).  As  the  result  of  careful  observa- 
tion.    See  on  Luke  x.  18. 

Hurt  (Jj^peai).  The  word  literally  means  insolence,  injury, 
and  is  used  here  metaphorically :  insolence  of  the  winds  cmd 
waves,  "like  our  'sport'  or  'riot'  of  the  elements"  (Hackett). 
Some  take  it  literally,  with  jpresumpUon,  as  indicating  the  folly 


592  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVIL 

of  undertaking  a  voyage  at  that  season  ;  but  the  use  of  the  word 
in  ver.  21  is  decisive  against  this. 

Damage  {^r]/j,ia<;).  Better,  asEev.,  Zoss.  Burt  and  damage 
(A.  V.)  is  tautological.  See  on  the  kindred  verb,  notes  on  lose, 
Matt.  xvi.  26,  and  cast  away,  Luke  ix.  25. 

11.  Master  (Kv^epv^Trj).  Only  here  and  Apoc.  xviii.  17. 
Lit.,  the  steersman. 

12.  Not  commodious  (aveu^eTou).      JAi.,  not  well  situated. 

Lieth  toward  the  southwest  and  northwest  {^eirovTa 
Kara  Ai^a  koX  Kara  X&pov).  Instead  of  lieth,  Eev.,  literally 
and  correctly,  renders  looking.  The  difference  between  the 
Eev.  and  A.  Y.,  as  to  the  points  of  the  compass,  turns  on  the 
rendering  of  the  preposition  Kara.  The  words  southwest  and 
northwest  mean,  literally,  the  southwest  and  northwest  winds. 
According  to  the  A.  Y.,  Kara,  means  toward,  and  has  reference 
to  the  quarter /rom  which  these  winds  blow.  According  to  the 
Eev.,  KUTCi  means  down :  "  looking  down  the  southwest  and 
northwest  winds,"  i.e.,  in  the  direction  toward  which  they  blow, 
viz.,  northeast  and  southeast.  This  latter  view  assumes  that 
Phenice  and  Lutro  are  the  same,  which  is  uncertain.  For  full 
discussion  of  the  point,  see  Smith,  "  Yoyage  and  Shipwreck  of 
St.  Paul ; "  Hackett,  "  Commentary  on  Acts ; "  Conybeare  and 
Howson,  "  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul." 

13.  Loosing  thence  {apavres:).  Lit.,  having  taken  ujp.  It 
is  the  nautical  phrase  for  weighing  anchor.     So  Eev. 

14.  There  arose  against  it  (e/SaXe  Ka-v'  avTfj<;).  Against 
what?  Some  say,  the  island  of  Crete;  in  which  case  they 
would  have  been  driven  against  the  island,  whereas  we  are  told 
that  they  were  driven  away  from  it.  Others,  the  ship.  It  is 
objected  that  the  pronoun  avr^?,  it,  is  feminine,  while  the 
feminine  noun  for  ship  {vav<;)  is  not  commonly  used  by  Luke, 
but  rather  the  neuter,  irXoiov.    I  do  not  think  this  objection 


Ch.  XXVn.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  593 

entitled  to  much  weight.  Luke  is  the  only  New  Testament 
writer  who  uses  vav<}  (see  ver.  41),  though  he  uses  it  but  once  ; 
and,  as  Hackett  remarks,  "  it  would  be  quite  accidental  which 
of  the  terms  would  shape  the  pronoun  at  this  moment,  as  they 
were  both  so  familiar."  A  third  explanation  refers  the  pro- 
noun to  the  island  of  Crete,  and  renders,  "  there  beat  down 
from  «^."  This  is  grammatical,  and  according  to  a  well-known 
usage  of  the  preposition.  The  verb  /SaXXw  is  also  used  intran- 
sitively in  the  sense  of  to  fall/  thusPlomer  ("  Iliad,"  xi.,  722), 
of  a  river  falling  into  the  sea.  Compare  Mark  iv.  37 :  "  the 
waves  heat  (iire^aXKev)  into  the  ship  ;  "  and  Luke  xv.  12 :  "  the 
portion  of  goods  that  falleth  (e7ri^dX\.ov)'to  me."  The  rendering 
of  the  Kev.  is,  therefore,  well  supported,  and,  on  the  whole, 
preferable :  there  heat  down  from  it.  It  is  also  according  to 
the  analogy  of  the  expression  in  Luke  viii.  23,  there  ca/me  down 
a  storm.     See  note  there,  and  on  Matt.  viii.  24. 

A  tempestuous  wind  {ave/ji,o<;  tvcjjcoviko^).  Lit.,  a  typhonic 
wind.  The  word  tu^wj/  means  a  typhoon,  and  the  adjective 
formed  from  it  means  of  the  character  of  a  typhoon. 

Euroclydon  (EvpoKKvSmv).  The  best  texts  read  Ew/aa/euXmi', 
Euraquilo :  i.e.,  between  Eurus,  "  the  E.S.E.  wind,"  and 
Aquilo,  "the  north- vsdnd,  or,  strictly,  N.  i  E."   Hence,  E.  N.  E. 

15.  Bear  up  {avT0<f>3-aXfieiv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
From  ami,  opposite,  and  6cj)Sa\fi6<;,  the  eye.  Lit.,  to  look  the 
wind  in  the  eye.  The  ancient  ships  often  had  an  eye  painted 
on  each  side  of  the  bow.  To  sail  "into  the  eye  of  the  wind  " 
is  a  modern  nautical  phrase. 

We  let  her  drive  (iTri,B6vTe<;  e^epo/ieSa).  Lit.,  homing  gvuen 
v/p  to  it,  vie  were  home  along. 

16.  We  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  boat  (/i6\t?  to-%v- 
aafiev  TrepiKpareli  yeveaS-ai  Trj<;  a-icd^iq<s).  Lit.,  we  were  with 
difficulty  able  to  hecome  masters  of  the  hoat:  i.e.,  to  secure  on 
deck  the  small  boat  which,  in  calm  weather,  was  attached  by  a 

38 


694  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVU 

rope  to  the  vessel's  stern.    Rev.,  we  were  able  with  difficulty  to 
secure  the  boat.    On  with  difficulty,  see  note  on  sca/rce,  ver.  T. 

17.  Helps  {^orilieiaK).  Any  apparatus  on  hand  for  the  pur- 
pose :  ropes,  chains,  etc. 

Undergirding  (inro^mwvvTe^).  In  modern  nautical  language, 
/rapping :  passing  cables  or  chains  round  the  ship's  hull  in 
order  to  support  her  in  a  storm.  Mr.  Smith  ("Yoyage  and 
Shipwreck  of  St.  Paul ")  cites  the  following  from  the  account 
of  the  voyage  of  Captain  George  Back  from  the  arctic  regions 
in  1837  :  "  A  length  of  the  stream  chain-cable  was  passed  under 
the  bottom  of  the  ship  four  feet  before  the  mizzen-mast,  hove 
tight  by  the  capstan,  and  finally  immovably  fixed  to  six  ring- 
bolts on  the  quarter-deck.  The  effect  was  at  once  manifest  by 
a  great  diminution  in  the  working  of  the  parts  already  men- 
tioned ;  and,  in  a  less  agreeable  way,  by  impeding  her  rate  of 
sailing." 

Quicksands  {rr)v  (rvpriv).  The  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  is  too 
general.  The  word  is  a  proper  name,  and  has  the  article. 
There  were  two  shoals  of  this  name — the  "  Greater  Syrtis " 
{Syrtis  Major),  and  the  "  Smaller  Syrtis  "  {Syrtis  Mi/nor).  It 
was  the  former  upon  which  they  were  in  danger  of  being 
driven ;  a  shallow  on  the  African  coast,  between  Tripoli  and 
Barca,  southwest  of  the  island  of  Crete. 

Strake  sail  (^(cCKAaaine'i  to  oK^voi).  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  lowered 
the  gear.  See  on  goods.  Matt.  xii.  29.  It  is  uncertain  what  is 
referred  to  here.  To  strike  sail,  it  is  urged,  would  be  a  sure 
way  of  running  upon  the  Syrtis,  which  they  were  trying  to 
avoid.  It  is  probably  better  to  understand  it  generally  of  the 
gear  connected  with  the  fair-weather  sails.  "  Every  ship  sit- 
uated as  this  one  was,  when  preparing  for  a  storm,  sends  down 
upon  deck  the  '  top-hamper,'  or  gear  connected  with  the  fair- 
weather  sails,  such  as  the  topsails.  A  modern  ship  sends  down 
top-gallant  masts  and  yards ;  a  cutter  strikes  her  topmast  when 
preparing  for  a  gale"  (Smith,  "Voyage,"  etc.).  The  storm- 
sails  were  probably  set. 


Ca  XXVn.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  595 

18.  Lightened  (ew/SoX^i;  eTrotovvro).  Lit.,  made  a  casting  out. 
Eev.,  began  to  throw  t/ie  freight  overhoa/rd.  Note  the  imper- 
fect, hegam,  to  throw.  The  whole  cargo  was  not  cast  overboard : 
the  wheat  was  reserved  to  the  last  extremity  (ver.  38). 

19.  Tackling  {trxevriv).  The  word  means  equipment,  fumi- 
tv/re.  The  exact  meaning  here  is  uncertain.  Some  suppose  it 
to  refer  to  the  main-yard  ;  an  immense  spar  which  would  re- 
quire the  united  efforts  of  passengers  and  crew  to  throw  over- 
board. It  seems  improbable,  however,  that  they  would  have 
sacrificed  so  large  a  spar,  which,  in  case  of  shipwreck,  would 
support  thirty  or  forty  men  in  the  water.  The  most  generally 
received  opinion  is  that  it  refers  to  the  furniture  of  the  ship — 
beds,  tables,  chests,  etc. 

21.  Hearkened  {^iidapyr\<TavTWi).     See  on  obey,  ch.  v.  29. 

Loosed  {dvarfeaSai).     Eev.,  set  sail.     See  on  Luke  viii.  22- 

Harm  (v0piv).     See  on  ver.  10. 

23.  Tlie  angel.  Eev.,  correctly,  an  angel.  There  is  no 
article. 

Of  God  {tov  Qeov).  Eev.,  correctly,  sxipplies  the  article  :  "  the 
God,"  added  because  Paul  was  addressing  heathen,  who  would 
have  understood  by  angel  a  messenger  of  the  gods. 

27.  Ad  ria.  The  Adriatic  Sea :  embracing  all  that  part  of  the 
Mediterranean  lying  south  of  Italy,  east  of  Sicily,  and  west  of 
Greece. 

Deemed  {virevoovv).   Better,  as  Eev.,  susfpected  or  surmised. 

That  they  drew  near  to  some  country.  Lit.,  that  some 
Iwnd  is  drawing  near  to  them. 

30.  Under  color  {irpo^da-et,).     Lit.,  on  pretence. 


596  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVII 

Cast  {iKTelveiv).  Lit.,  to  stretch  out.  The  meaning  is,  to 
carry  out  an  anchor  to  a  distance  from  the  prow  by  means  or 
the  small  boat.     Kev.,  la/y  out. 

33.  While  the  day  was  coming  on  {a'xpi'  Se  ov  efieXXev 

r)ix6pa<^ive(T^a(,).     lAt.,  untilit  sJiould  lecome  day :  in  the  inter- 
val between  midnight  and  morning. 

39.  Bay  (koXttov).     See  on  hosom,  Luke  vi.  38. 

Shore  (alyiaXov).  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  2.  Better,  as  Kev., 
beach. 

They  were  minded  {e/3ovXeva-avro).  Better,  as  Kev.,  took 
counsel.     See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

40.  Taken  up  (Tre/ateXoi/re?).  Wrong.  The  word  means  to 
remove,  and  refers  here  to  cutting  the  anchor-cables,  or  casting 
off,  as  Kev. 

Committed  themselves  (etW).  Wrong.  The  reference  is 
to  the  anchors.     Kev.,  correctly,  left  them  in  the  sea. 

Rudder-bands  (feuKXT^pia?  twv  'irrjBaXleov).  Lit.,  the  hands 
of  the  rudders.  The  larger  ships  had  two  rudders,  like  broad 
oars  or  paddles,  joined  together  by  a  pole,  and  managed  by  one 
steersman.  They  could  be  pulled  up  and  fastened  with  bands 
to  the  ship  ;  as  was  done  in  this  case,  probably  to  avoid  fouling 
the  anchors  when  they  were  cast  out  of  the  stern.  The  bands 
were  now  loosened,  in  order  that  the  ship  might  be  driven  for- 
ward. 

Mainsail  {apriumva).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Prob- 
ably the  foresail.     So  Kev. 

Made  toward  {Kurelxov).     Lit.,  held ;  bore  down  for. 


Ch.  XXVm.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  597 


CHAPTER  XXYIII. 

1.  They  knew.  The  best  texts  read  we  Jcnew:  ascertained 
or  recognised:  with  a  reference  tover.  39. 

2.  Barbarous  people.  From  the  Eoman  point  of  view,  re- 
garding all  as  barbarians  who  spoke  neither  Greek  nor  Latin. 
Not  necessarily  %mcivilized.  It  is  equivalent  to  foreigners. 
Compare  Kom.  i.  14  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  11.  The  inhabitants  of  Malta 
were  of  Carthaginian  descent.  "Even  in  the  present  day  the 
natives  of  Malta  have  a  peculiar  language,  termed  the  Maltese, 
which  has  been  proved  to  be  essentially  an  Arabic  dialect,  with 
an  admixture  of  Italian  "  (Gloag). 

No  little  (ou  Tvxoverav).  See  on  special,  ch.  xix.  11.  Rev., 
much  better,  "  no  common  kindness." 

Kindness  {<\}£Kav^pwiriav).  See  on  the  kindred  adverb 
courteously,  ch.  xxvii.  3. 

Present  rain  {verov  top  i(f>earSiTa).  Lit.,  which  was  wpon  us, 
or  had  set  in.  No  mention  of  rain  occurs  up  to  this  point  in 
the  narrative  of  the  shipwreck.  The  tempest  may  thus  far 
have  been  unattended  with  rain,  but  it  is  hardly  probable. 

3.  Of  sticks  {^pvydvtov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
From  ^pvyeo,  to  roast  or  parch.     Hence,  dry  sticks. 

Out  of  (ew).     The  best  texts  read  d-iro,  by  reason  of. 

4.  Justice  {AUri).    Personified. 

Suffereth  not  {ovk  eiaaev).  The  aorist  tense:  did  not  suffer. 
His  death  is  regarded  as  fixed  by  the  divine  decree. 

5.  The  beast  {to  Sijpiov).  Luke  uses  the  word  in  the  same 
way  as  the  medical  writers,  who  employed  it  to  denote  venom- 


598  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVIIL 

ous  serpents,  and  particularly  the  viper ;  so  much  so  that  an 
antidote,  made  chiefly  from  the  flesh  of  vipers,  was  termed 
^TjpMK'q.  A  curious  bit  of  etymological  history  attaches  to  this 
latter  word.  From  it  came  the  Latin  theriaea,  of  which  our 
treacle  (molasses)  is  a  corruption.  Treacle,  therefore,  is  origi- 
nally a  preparation  of  viper's  flesh,  and  was  used  later  of  any 
antidote.  Thus  Coverdale's  translation  of  Jer.  viii.  22  has, 
"  There  is  no  more  treacle  in  Gilead."  Gurnall  ("  Christian  in 
Complete  Armor  ")  says :  "  The  saints'  experiences  help  them 
to  a  sovereign  treacle  made  of  the  scorpion's  own  flesh  (which 
they  through  Christ  have  slain),  and  that  hath  a  virtue  above 
all  other  to  expel  the  venom  of  Satan's  temptations  from  the 
heart."  So  Jeremy  Taylor :  "  "We  kill  the  viper  and  make 
treacle  of  him." 

6.  Swollen  {vijxirpaa^ai).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  usual  medical  word  for  inflammation. 

Looked  {^poahoKwvrwv).  Occurring  eleven  times  in  Luke, 
and  only  five  times  in  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament.  Fre- 
quent in  medical  writers,  to  denote  expectation  of  the  fatal  re- 
sult of  illness. 

No  harm  {fj,7jSev  aToirov).  Lit.,  nothing  out  of  place.  The 
word  aTO'Ko<;  occurs  three  times  in  Luke,  and  only  once  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament  (2  Thess.  iii.  2).  Used  by  physicians  to 
denote  something  unusual  in  the  sj'mptoms  of  disease,  and  also 
something  fatal  or  deadly  as  here.  Eev.,  nothing  a/miss.  Com- 
pare Luke  xxiii.  41 ;  and  Acts  xxv.  5,  where  the  best  texts  in- 
sert the  word. 

Said  {eKepfov).     The  imperfect,  denoting  current  talk. 

A  god.  "  Observe,"  says  Bengel,  "the  fickleness  of  human 
reasoning.  He  is  either  an  assassin,  say  they,  or  a  god.  So 
at  one  time  hulls,  at  another  stones  "  (Acts  xiv.  13,  19). 

7.  The  chief  man  {r^  -n-pcoT^).     Official  title,  without  refer- 


Ch.  XXVIII.]  THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  599 

ence  to  his  rank  and  possessions.  Though  not  occurring  as  the 
official  designation  of  the  governor  of  Malta  in  any  ancient 
author,  it  has  been  found  in  two  inscriptions  discovered  in  the 
island. 

8.  Sic)<  (avvexofievov).  JAt.,  taken  or  holden.  Seeon  taken, 
Luke  iv.  38. 

Fever  (Truperot?).  Ijit.,yevers.  This  peculiarly  medical  use 
of  the  plural  is  confined  to  Luke  in  the  New  Testament.  It  de- 
notes successive  and  varying  attacks  of  fever. 

Bloody  flux  {Bva-evrepla).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Our  word  dysentery  is  nearly  a  transcript  of  it.  Hippocrates 
often  speaks  of  the  two  complaints  in  combination. 

Healed  {Ida-aro).     See  on  Luke  vi.  19. 

10.  Honors  {TifiaU).  The  word  was  applied  to  payments 
for  professional  services,  and  that  fact  may  have  influenced  Luke 
in  selecting  it ;  but  it  is  evidently  not  used  in  that  sense  here. 

11.  Sign.  Answering  to  the  ship's  wawie  in  modern  times. 
It  was  the  image  of  a  god,  a  man,  a  beast,  or  of  some  other 
object,  sculptured  or  painted  on  the  prow.  The  figure  of  the 
guardian  deity  was  affixed  to  the  stern. 

Castor  and  Pollux.  Known  as  the  t^oin  brothers  and  the 
Dioscuri,  or  sons  of  Jove.  They  were  regarded  as  tutelary 
deities  of  sailors. 

16.  The  centurion  delivered  the  prisoners  to  the  cap- 
tain of  the  guard.     The  best  texts  omit. 

20.  I  am  bound  (Trep^Keifiai).     Lit.,  comvpassed. 

22.  We  desire  {a^iovfiev).  Kather,  we  think  it  fitting. 
Compare  ch.  xv.  38. 

Sect.     See  on  heresies,  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 


600  WORD  STUDIES  IJS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     [Ch.  XXVIIi 

25.  Agreed  not.     See  on  agreed  together,  ch.  v.  9. 

27.  Waxed  gross.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  15. 

Their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing.  Lit.,  with  their  ea/rs  they 
heard  hea/oily. 

Closed.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  15. 

30.  Hired  house  (;tt{CT-.9w/iaTt).  Probably  different  from  the 
^6i/wi,  or  lodging-place,  where  he  resided  for  the  first  few  days, 
perhaps  as  the  guest  of  friends,  though  under  custody,  and 
where  he  received  the  Jews  (ver.  23). 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


(A.  Acts.) 


ayKoKri,  arm,  ii.,  28 
ayviiriios,  purification,  A.  xxi.,  26 
ayvaaros,  unknown,  A.  xvii.,  23 
dyopalos,  pertaining  to  the  market- 
place, base,  A.  xvii.,  5 
ayopalot,  court-days,  A.  xix.,  38 
aypa,  draught,  v.,  4,  9 
dypdntiaTos,  unlearned,  A.  iv.,  13 
dypavKca,  abide  in  the  field,  ii.,  8 
dyavta,  agony,  xxii.,  44 
aio-Sara/uai,  perceive,  ix.,  45 
alrlafia,  complaint,  A.  XXV.,  7 
diTiov,  fault,  xxiii.,   4,  14,  22 ;  A. 

xix.,  40 
ai;f/xd\<BT09,  captive,  iv.,  18,  19 
oKaraiipiTos,  uncondemned,  A.  xvi., 

37;  xxii.,  25 
wepificia,  exactness,  perfect  manner, 

A.  xxii.,  3 
uKpi^iaTaTO!,  most  strict,  A.  xxvi.,  5 
aKpi^earepov,  more  perfect,  A.  xviii., 

26;  xxiii.,  15,  20;  xxiv.,  22 
aKpoarfipiov,   place    of   hearing,  A. 

XXV.,  23 
dKa>\vTa)s,    without    hindrance,    A. 

xxviii.,  31 
dKiayriiia,  pollution,  A.  XV.,  20 
dWoytvfis,  stranger,  xvii.,  18 
oXXo^vXof,   of  another  nation,   A. 

X.,  28 
diidprvpos,  without  witness,  A.  xiv., 

17 


dfiireKovpyos,  dresser  of  the  vineyard, 

xiii.,  7 
dfivvoiuu,  defend,  A.  vii.,  24 
aw/SaSjiidf,  stair,  A.  xxi.,  35,  40 
dva^aK\op,ai,  put  oflf,  defer,  A.  xxiv., 

22 
dcd/SXei/rts,  recovering  of  sight,  iv., 

18 
dva^oKrj,  delay,  A.  xxv.,  17 
dvayvapi^ojiai,  to  be  made  known,  A. 

vii.,  13 
dvabeiKvviu,  appoint,  shew,  X.,  1 ;  A. 

i.,  24 
dvdbd^is,  shewing,  i.,  80 
dvaSiSafit,  deliver,  A.  xxiii.,  33 
di/afijTfo),  seek,  ii.,  44  ;  A.  xi.,  25 
dvatrj/ia,  gift,  offering,  xxi.,  5 
dvaiSeia,  importunity,  xi.,  8 
dvaipca-is,  death,  A.  viii.,  1 ;  xxii,,  20 
dvaKaSlCo),  setup,  vii.,  15  ;  A.  ix.,  40 
dvaKpuTis,  examination,  A.  xxv.,  26 
dvaKqy^is,  taking  up,  ix.,  51 
dvavTipprjTos,    not    to    be    spoken 

against,  A.  xix.,  36 
dvavTippj}Ta>s,    without    gainsaying, 

A.  X.,  29 
dvairfiia,  persuade,  A.  xviii.,  13 
dvaTtTvaa-a,  open,  unroll,  iv.,  17 
avaa-Kevd^w,  subvert,  A.  XV.,  24 
afao-Trdo),  pull  or  draw  up,  xiv.,  5 ; 

A.  xi.,  10 
apaTdanrofiai.,  set  forth  in  order,  i.,  1 


602 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WOBDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


ai/aTpe(f>a>,  nourisli  up,  A.  vii.,  20, 21 ; 

xxii.,  3 
dva^aivw,   bring  to  light,    appear, 

to  sight,  xix.,  11 ;  A.  xxi.,  3 
ava<f>a>via),  speak  out,  i.,  42 
avd^v^it,  refreshing,  A.  iii.,  19 
dv«Xfi7rT0f,  that  faileth  not,  xii.,  33 
avivbcKTov,  impossible,  xvii.,  1 
ai/erafm,  examine,  A.  xxii.,  24,  29 
awiJSfT-oj,     not     commodious,     A. 

xxvii.,  12 
apevpia-KO),  find,  ii.,  16  ;  A.  xxi.,  4 
av^o/j.o'Koyeofiai,  give  thanks,  ii.,  38 
av'SvnaTfvw,  to  be  deputy  or  procon- 
sul, A.  xviii.,  12 
av'^vnaTos,    deputy,    proconsul,    A. 

xiii.,  7,  8,  12;  xix.,  38 
avoLKoSofieoi,  build  again,  A.  xv.,  16 
dvTe'inov,  gainsay,  xxi.,  15  ;  A.  iv.,  14 
axn/SriXXo),  exchange,  have    one   to 

another,  xxiv.,  17 
avTiKoKea,  bid  again  in  return,  xiv., 

12 
avTiKpi,  over  against,  A.  xx.,  15 
avTmapfpxoficti,  pass  by  on  the  other 

side,  X.,  31,  32 
avTiirepav,  over  against,  viii.,  26 
dvTinmTai,  resist,  A.  vii.,  51 
avTo(f>'tsa\p€<o,  bear  up  into  (into  the 

eye  of),  A.  xxvii.,  15 
avarepiKos,  upper,  A.  xix.,  1 
dn-a«-€i»,  ask  again,  require,  vi.,  30  ; 

xii.,  20 
aTrapna-pos,  finishing,  xiv.,  28 
dvelpi,  go  (away),  A.  xvii.,  10 
dwfXauVo),  drive  away,  A.  xviii.,  16 
dfffXpy/io't,  refutation,  contempt,  A. 

xix.,  27 
dwtXTTifm,  hope  for  in  return,  vi.,  35 
airepiTpriTos,  uncircumcised,  A.  vii., 

51 
diroypa<f>ri,  taxing  (enrolment),  ii., 

2  ;  A.  v.,  37 


airoSixop-ai,  receive,  viii.,  40  ;  A.  ii., 
41 ;  XV.,  4 ;  xviii.,  27;  xxiv.,  3  ; 
xxviii.,  30 

dn-oSXi'^o),  press,  viii.,  45 

avoKardtTTacns,  restitution,  A.  iii.,  21 

aiTOKKfla,  shut  to,  xiii.,  25 

anofidira-opai,  wipe  off,  X.,  11 
anoTrinTco,  fall  from.  A.,  ix.,  18 
airojrXf'o),  sail  away,  A.  xiii.,  4 ;  xiv., 

26;  XX.,  15  ;  xxvii.,  1 
cmopla,  perplexity,  xxi.,  25 
anoppivTm,  cast,  A.  xxvii.,  43 
dnoaTopariia,  provoke  to  speak,  xi., 

53 
dnoTivdacro),   shake  off,  ix.,   5 ;   A, 

xxviii.,  5 
awof^'ieYyopai,  speak  forth,  A.  ii.,  4, 

14 ;  xxvi. ,  25 
dnofj>opTi^op.m,  unlade,  A.  xxi.,  3 
dTro-<\rvx<i>,  fail  at  heart,  xxi.,  26 
ajrro),  to  light,  viii.,  16 ;  xi.,  33  ;  xv., 

8;  xxii.,  55 
dirmSfo/uat,  put  away  from,  A.  xiii., 

46 
dpyvpoKOTTos,  silversmith,  A.  xix.,  24 
dprjv    (dpj/of,  dpvos),  lamb,  X.,  3 
aporpov,  plough,  ix.,  62 
apTep.a>v,  mainsail,  A.  xxvii.,  40 
apxitpanKos,  of  the  high-priest,  A. 

iv.,  6 
dpxireXa>vT]9,  chief  among  the  publi- 
cans, xix.,  2 
acTTipos,  mean,  undistinguished,   A. 

xxi.,  39 
aa-iTta,  abstinence,  A.  xxvii.,  21 
ao-iTOf,  fasting,  A.  xxvii.,  33 
diTKeo),  to  exercise,  A.  xxiv.,  16 
a(Tii€vws,  gladly,  A.  ii.,  41  ;  xxi.,  17 
Stro-ov,  close  by,  nearer,  A.  xxvii. ,  13 
d(TTpdwTa>,  to  lighten  (of  lightning), 

xvii.,  24;  xxiv.,  4 
davpffnovos,  not  agreeing,  A.  xxviii, 

25 


LIST  OF  GREEK  "WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


603 


ao-ffirmr,  wastefully,  unsavingly,  xv., 

13 
aTfKvos,  without  children,  xx.,  28, 

29,  30 
arep,  in  the  absence  of,  ■without, 

xxii.,  6,  35 
aiyr),  break  of  day,  A.  xx.,  11 
aviTTripos,  austere,  xix.,  21,  22 
avToiTTTjs,  eye-witness,  i.,  2 
airoxeip,  with  one's  own  hands,  A. 

xxYii.,  19 
S^avTos,  vanished    out     of   sight, 

xxiv.,  31 
oKpeXorris,  singleness,  A.  ii.,  46 
acpi^is,  departure,  A.  xx.,  29 
O01/IU,  suddenly,  A.  ii.,  2 ;  xvi.,  26 ; 

xxviii.,  6 
a<pp6s,  foaming,  ix.,  39 
d<t)imv6a>,  fall  asleep,  viii.,  23 
ix^iis,  mist,  A.  xiii.,  11 

^afsvva,  deepen,  make  deep,  vi.,  48 
^aXdvnov,  purse,  X.,  4;  xii.,  33 ;  xxii., 

35,  36 
jSaffiXfia,     royal     mansion,    king's 

court,  vii.,  25 
/3ao-is,  foot,  A.  iii.,  7 
fiaros,  measure,  xvi.,  6 
^(kovt),  needle,  xviii.,  25 
fila,  violence,  A.  v.,   26  ;  xxi.,  35  ; 

xxiv.,  7 ;  xxvii.,  41 
^mtof,  mighty,  A.  ii.,  2 
/Siwcrts,  manner  of  life,  A.  xxvi.,  4 
/SoXij,  a  throw,  oast,  xxii.,  41 
^oXi'fo),  to  sound  (with  a  lead),  A. 

xxvii.,  28 
/Soura'i,  hill,  iii.,  5 ;  xxiii.,  30 
^pabvirKoeai,  sail  slowly,  A.  xxvii.,  7 
■  ^pvxa,  gnash,  A.  vii.,  54 
^paxrtfios,  meat,  xxiv.,  41 
(Suptrfur,  tanner,  A.  ix.,  43 ;  x.,  6, 

32 
^(o/udv,  altar,  A.  xvii.,  23 


ya^a,  treasure,  A.  viii.,  27 

■yfXdcB,  laugh,  vi.,  21,  25 

yepoviria,  senate,  A.  v.,  21 

ynpas,  old  age,  i.,  36 

yXeuKof,  new  or  sweet  wine,  A.  ii.,  13 

yvoxTTT/f,  expert,  A.  xxvi.,  3 

baKriiXioi,  ring,  xv.,  22 
SaxeioTijs,  creditor,  vii.,  41 
bajravr),  cost,  xiv.,  28 
8fimSaip.ovf(TTepos,  very  religious,  A. 

xvii.,  22 
SeKriSai/iovia,  religiousness,  A.  xxv., 

19 
Se|ioXd^os,  spearman,  A.  xxiii.,  23 
b(ap.iut,  to  bind,  viii.,  29 
8eo-^o(^ijXu|,  jailer,  A.  xvi.,  23,  27, 

36 
Sftr;ii(iTT;i-,  prisoner,  A.  xxvii.,  1,  42 
bevrepaios,   on  the  second   day,   A. 

xxviii.,  13 
bfVTepoirpaTos,  Second  after  the  first, 

vi.,  1 
SjjfiTjyopeto,  make  an  oration,  A.  xii., 

21 
8^/xos,  people,  A.  xii.,  22  ;  xvii.,  5  ; 

xix.,  30,  33 
Sijfio'a-ioE,  public,  open,   A.  v.,  18; 

xvi.,  37;  xviii,  28  ;  xx.,  20 
Sia/3dXXo/iat,  to  be  accused,  xvi.,  1 
fiiayii/cia-Kci),    judge,    determine,   A. 

xxiii.,  15  ;  xxiv.,  22 
biayvaxTiSi  decision,  A.  xxv.,  21 
hiayoyyv^w,  murmur,  xv.,  2 ;  xix.,  7 
diayprjyopca,  to  keep  awake,  or  be 

fully  awake,  ix.,  32 
giaSe'xoniai,  receive  by  succession,  A. 

vii.,  45 
SidSo^os,  successor,  A.  xxiv.,  27 
SiaKareXeyxo/iM,  convince,  A.  xviii., 

28 
SiaKovofim,  hear  (a  cause),  A.  xxiii., 

35 


604 


LIST  OF   GREEK  WORDS   USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


SioXaXfQ),  noise  abroad,  converse,  i., 

65;  vi.,  11 
Sidkeina,  cease,  vii.,  45 
SidXeKTos,  tongue,  dialect,  A.  i.,  19; 

ii.,    6,  8;   xxi.,   40;    xxii.,  2; 

xxvi.,  14 
SiaKvoiiai,  to  be  scattered,  A.  v.,  36 
SiafidxoiiM,  strive,  A.  xxiii.,  9 
Sianepicriios,  division,  xii.,  51 
hiaveii.ofx.ai,  to  be  spread  abroad,  A. 

iv.,  17 
hiaveva,  to  beckon,  i.,  21 
biavorjiia.,  thought,  xi.,  17 
biavvKTepda,  continue  all  night,  vi., 

12 
biavvm,  finish,  A.  xxi.,  7 
hiaTvKim,  sail  over,  A.  xxvii.,  5 
8iairov€ofiai,  to  be  grieved,  A.  iv.,  2  ; 

xvi.,  18 
bmnopim,   to  be  perplexed,  ix.,  7 ; 

xxiv.,  4 ;  A.  ii.,  12  ;  v.,  24 ;  x., 

17 
bianpayii.aTevoix.ai,  gain  by  trading, 

xix.,  15 
hiairpiofiai,  to  be  cut  to  the  heart ; 

lit.,  sawn,  A.  v.,  33;  vii.,  54 
Siao-fio),  do  violence,  iii.,  14 
biaa-rreipoi,  scatter  abroad,  A.  viii., 

1,  4 ;  xi.,  19 
diaa-nj/ia,  space,  A.  v.,  7 
SiarapaTTOi,  to  trouble,  i.,  29 
SiareXea,  to  continue,  A.  xxvii.,  33 
8iaT7;p€(i),  to  keep,   ii.,  51 ;  A.  xv., 

29 
Sia0Euy(B,  to  escape,  A.  xxvii.,  42 
8ia03opu,  corruption,  A.  ii.,  27,  31 ; 

xiii.,  34,  35,  36,  37 
8ia(pv\aTTa>,  keep,  iv.,  10 
Sia;(fipifo^ai,  slay,  A.  v.,  30;  xxvi., 

21 
SiaxXfudfm,  mock,  A.  ii.,  13 
Si,ax(optCoix.at,  depart,  ix.,  38 
duparda,  make  inquiry,  A.  x.,  17 


Sieria,    two    years,   A.     xxiv.,    27; 

xxviii.,  30 
birjyrjcris,  declaration,  i.,  1 
StaSdXacro-of,  where  two  seas  meet, 

A.  xxvii.,  41 
bucTTTjiii.,  separate,  intervene,  put  a 

space  between,  xxii.,  59;  xxiv., 

51 ;  A.  xxvii.,  28 
bua-)(ypi^ofi.ai,     confidently      affirm, 

xxii.,  59  ;  A.  xii.,  15 
SiKaa-Trjs,  judge,  xii.,  14;  A.  vii.,  27, 

35 
biobeva,  go  throughout,  viii.,  1 ;  A. 

xvii.,  1 
bioTreTTj?,  fallen  from  Jupiter,  A.  xix., 

35 
SiopSm/ia,  a  setting  right,  A.  xxiv.,  3 
bovXr],  handmaid,  i.,  38,  48  ;  A.  ii., 

18 
bo^r],  feast,  reception,  v.,  29;    xiv., 

13 
bpaxpfj,  drachma,  xv.,  8,  9 
bva-evrepia,  dysentery,  A.  xxviii.,  8 
ba>beKa(^vKov,  the  twelve  tribes  (col- 
lective), A.  xxvi.,  7 

s^bopifKovTa,  seventy,  X.,   1,   17;  A. 

vii.,  14;  xxiii.,  23  ;  xxvii.,  37 
c/3pa'((co's,  Hebraic,  xxiii.,  38 
iPpais,  Hebrew,  A.  xxi.,  40 ;  xxii., 

2  ;  xxvi.,  14 
fyKateros,  spy,  XX.  20 
eyKKijfia,  charge,  A.  xxiii.,  29;  xxv., 

16 
fyKuos,  great  with  child,  ii.,  5 
ibatptCto,  lay  even  with  the  ground, 

xix.,  44 
eba(pos,  ground,  A.  xxii.,  7 
f'Sifo),  to  accustom,  ii.,  27 
eio-KoXem,  call  in,  A.  X.,  23 
fitrnribda,   spring   in,   A.  xiv.,   14; 

xvi.,  29 
eiaTpexo',  run  in,  A.  xii.,  14 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


605 


iKaTovTapxts,    centurion,    A.  x.,  1, 

22;  xxiv.,  23;  xxvii.,  1,31 
fK/SoXij,  casting  out,  A.  xxvii.,  18 
fKyaiii(TKOfiai,   to  be  given  in  mar- 
riage, XX.,  34,  35 
cKSiriyiofiai,   declare,    A.   xiii.,   41; 

XV.,  3 
€k8otos,  delivered,  A.  ii.,  23 
fKciae,  thither,  A.  xxi.,  3;  xxii.,  5 
€K?:aii^os,  greatly  wondering,  A.  iii., 

11 
cicSfTor,  exposed,  A.  vii.,  19 
eKKoXvfi^aa,  swim  out,  A.  xxvii.,  42 
€KKOfiiCoiiai,  to  be  carried  out,  vii.,  12 
fKKpefMfiat,  to  hang  upon,  be  atten- 
tive, xix.,  48 
exXaXfo),  tell,  A.  xxiii.,  22 
(KfivKTrjpl^to,  deride,  xvi.,  14;  xxiii. 

35 
iKvejina,   send    forth,   A.   xiii.,  4; 

xvii.,  10 
cKirKco),  sail  forth,  A.  xv.,  39  ;  xviii., 

18 ;  XX.,  6 
€K7r\rjp6io,  fulfil,  A.  xiii.,  33 
eK-rrKri  pmiTis,  accomplishment,  A.xxi., 

26 
eKTapaaa-a,  exceedingly  trouble,  A. 

xvi.,  20 
fKTeXfo),  finish,  xiv.,  29,  30 
cKTeveta,  intensity,  A.  xxvi.,  7 
ficTcvitTTepov,  more  earnestly,   xxii., 

44 
€KTi'37;/it,    cast    out,   set   forth,    ex- 
pound, A.  vii.,  21 ;  xi.,  4 ;  xviii., 
26 ;  xxviii.,  23 
(Kxopfco,  depart  out,  xxi.,  21 
EKi^iJX"'  gi^®  '^P  *^®  ghost,  A.  v.,  5, 

10;  xii.,  23 
fXaicav,  of  olives.  Olivet,  A.  i.,  12 
eXeuo-er,  coming,  A.  vii.,  52 
iXKoopat,  to  be  ulcerated,  xvi.,  20 
f'/i^aXXo),  cast  into,  xii.,  5 
e'/i/Si/Safo),  cause  to  enter,  A.  xxvii.,  6 


ffinalvoiuu,  to  be  mad,  A.  xxvi.,  11 
epmiTrKaai,  fill,  A.  xiv.,  17 
(finvia),  breathe,  A.  ix.,  1 
evavTi,  before,  i.,  8 
eVSe^f,  needy,  A.  iv.,  34 
ivSexerai,   it  is  admissible  or  pos- 
sible, xiii.,  33 
ivdiSvcTKopai,    to  be  clothed,   viii., 

27;  xvi.,  19 
€viSpa,  a  lying  in  wait,  A.  xxiii.,  16 ; 

XXV.,  3 
fveSpeia,    to  lie   in   wait,  xi.,   54 ; 

xxiii.,  21 
evcifiL,  to  be  in  (ye  have),  xi.,  41 
evia-xva,  to  strengthen,  xxii.,  43 ;  A. 

ix.,  19 
imca,  nine,  xvii.,  17 
tVfo's,  speechless,  A.  ix,,  7 
evveva,  make  signs,  i.,  62 
cvTomos,  belonging  to  a  place,  A. 

xxi.,  12 
ivvnviov,  dream,  A.  ii.,  17 
EKtBTifo/iai,  hearten,  A.  ii.,  14 
i^aiTeopm,  to  desire,  xxii.,  31 
i^ahXopai,  leap  up,  A.  iii.,  8 
e$a<rTpdnTm,  to  be  glistering,  ix.,  29 
f'lci/ii,  depart,  A.  xiii.,  42  ;  xvii.,  15; 

XX.,  7;  xxvii.,  43 
e^rjs,  next  (day),  vii.,  11;  ix.,  37; 

A.  xxi.,  1;  XXV.,  17;   xxvii.,  18 
i^oKoHpevofiai.,  to  be  destroyed,  A. 

iii.,  23 
f§opKi(TTrjs,  exorcist,  A.  xix.,  13 
e$oxri,  eminence,  A.  xxv.,  23 
f|u7ri/of,  out  of  sleep,  awakened,  A. 

xvi.,  27 
e^mSm,  drive  out,  A.  vii.,  45 ;  xxvii., 

39 
iiratpolCopai,  to  be  gathered  thickly 

together,  xi.,  29 
inaiTim,  to  beg,  xvi.,  3 
enaKpoaopm,  to  listen,  A.  xvi.,  25 
firdvayKes,  necessary,  A.  xv.,  28 


606 


LIST  OP  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BT  LUKE  ONLT. 


iiravepxofiai,  to  return,  X.,  35 ;  xix,, 

15 
iirapxla,    province,    A.   xxiii.,   34; 

XXV.,  1 

nravXic,  habitation,  A.  i.,  20 
ineytipa,  stir  up,  A.  xiii.,  50 ;  xiv.,  2 
iirtibifnep,  forasmuch,  i.,  1 
(viKtiva,  beyond,  A.  vii.,  43 
fTTt^t^dCa,  to  set  upon,  x.,  34  ;  xix., 

35  ;  A.  xxiii.,  24 
tVi/SodiB,  to  cry  out  upon,  A.  xxv.,  24 
tm^ovKii,  plot,  A.  ix.,  24;    xx.,  3, 

19;  xxiii.,  30 
imyivofiai,    spring     up,     arise,    A. 

xxviii.,  13 
cVtfiij/icm,  to  dwell  as  a  stranger,  A. 

ii.,  10  ;  xvii.,  21 
iniKovpla,  help,  A.  xxvi.,  22 
ciriKplvw,  give  sentence,  xxiii.,  24 
fTriXei'xo),  lick,  xvi.,  21 
tVt/ie'Xfia,  care,  A.  xxvii.,  3 
fnifj-eXas,  diligently,  xv.,  8 
firivevai,  to  consent,  A.  xviii.,  20 
tirivoia,  thought,  A.  viii.,  22 
iniovaa,  next  (day),  A.  vii.,  26 ;  xvi., 

11 ;  XX.,  15 ;  xxi.,  18  ;  xxiii.,  11 
inmopevoiim,  to  come  to,  viii.,  4 
iiriaiTitrjios,  victuals,  ix.,  12 
firia-Krva^a,  to  prepare  baggage,  A. 

xxi.,  15 
emaraais,  a  stirring  up,  A.  xxiv.,  12 
ETTWTdnjs,  master,  v.,  5 ;  viii.,  24, 45; 

ix.,  33,  49  ;  xvii.,  13 
(maTTipi^a,  confirm,  A.  xiv.,  22 ;  xv., 

32,  41 ;  xviii.,  23 
em(TTpo(f)ri,  conversion,  A.  xv.,  3 
fm<T<f>aKris,  dangerous,  A.  xxvii.,  9 
cma-xva>,  to  grow  stronger,  become 

more  vehement,  xxiii.,  5 
fmrponfj,  commission,  A.  xxvi.,  12 
ini.(f)ai>ris,  notable,  A.  ii.,  20 
tnt(t><i>pca,  cry  upon  or  against,  xxiii., 

21;  A.  xii.,  22;  xxii.,  24 


imxfipfo),  take  in  hand,  i.,  1 ;  A.  ix, 

29 ;  xix.,  13 
iinx(o>,  pour  upon,  x.,  34 
cVoKfXXcD,  run  aground,  A.  xxvii.,  41 
ipfi&a,  stick  fast,  A.  xxvii.,  41 
fffSijo-w,  raiment,  xxiv.,  4 
ianipa,  evening,  xxiv.,  29;  A.  iv,, 

3 ;  xxviii.,  23 
fiepyma,  do  good,  A.  X.,  38 
evepyenii;  benefactor,  xxii.,  25 
fiSvSpofif'w,  run  straight,  A.  xvi.,  11 ; 

xxi.,  1 
eifSu/iof,  of  good  cheer,  A.  xxvii.,  36 
fvivfioTfpov,    more    cheerfully,    A. 

xxiv.,  10 
eiXa^ris,  devout,  u.,  25 ;  A.  ii.,  5 ; 

viii.,  2 
fiTTopeofiat,  to  prosper,  A.  xi.,  29 
evnopla,  prosperity,  A.  xix.,  25 
fiiTovats,  vehemently,  strongly,  xxiii., 

10 ;  A.  xviii.,  28 
ev^opia,    bring    forth    plentifully, 

xii.,  16 
i^aKKopiai,  leap  Upon,  A.  xix.,  16 
€(j>Tllj.fpia,  course  (of  priests),  i.,  5,  8 
e(j)opaa,  look  upon,  i.,  25  ;  A.  iv.,  29 

ffjyos,  pair,  yoke,  ii.,  24 ;  xiv.,  19 
(cvKTTipia,  rudder-bands,   A.  xxvii., 

40 
CfiTTjiia,  question,  A.  xv.,  2 ;  xviii., 

15;     xxiii.,     29;     xxv.,     19; 

xxvi.,  3 
fojoyoi/EO),  to  preserve  alive,  xvii., 

33;  A.  vii.,  19 

fiytfiovla,  reign,  iii.,  1 
fiycfiovevQi,  to  be  govemor,  ii.,  2; 
iii.,  1 

Sd^^or,  amazement,  iv.,  36;  v.,  9; 

A.  iii.,  10 
sdpo-os,  courage,  A.  xxviii.,  15 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


607 


Htd,  goddess,  A.  xix.,  27,  35,  37 
3eo/xaxc(tt,  to  fight  against  God,  A. 

xxiii.,  9 
3€o/xdxor,  a  fighting  against  God,  A. 

v.,  39 
if  PUT),  heat,  A.  xxviii.,  3 
3ca>p(a,  a  sight,  xxiii.,  48 
iqptiat,  to  catch  (as  a  hunter),  xi., 

54 
dopu^a^o/xai,  to  be  troubled,  x.,  41 
Spaiio,  bruise,  iv.,  18 
ipopfios,  great  drop,  xxii.,  44 
avfiidai,  to  bum  incense,  i.,  9 
Sv/io/Mixc'a),  to  be  highly  displeased, 

A.  xii.,  20 

uuris,  cure,   healing,  xiii.,  32;   A. 

iv.,  22,  30 
i8pas,  sweat,  xxii.,  44 
Upartvat,    to    perform    the  priest's 

duty,  i.,  8 
up6<Tv\os,  robber  of  temples,  A.  xix., 

37 
hepas,  moisture,  yiii.,  6 
inirevs,  horseman,  A.  xxiii.,  23,  32 
lo-dyycXoi,  equal  to  the  angels,  xx., 

36 
la-as,  perhaps,  xx.,  13 

jcaSdirro),    fasten,    seize    upon,     A. 

xxviii.,  3 
xaSe^rjs,  in  order  or  succession,  i.,  3  5 

viii.,    1;    A.   iii.,  24;    xi.,   4; 

xviii.,  23 
KaSripepcvos,  daily,  A.  vi.,  1 
KoSiript,  let  down,  v.,  19;  A.  ix.,25; 

X.,  11;  xi.,  5 
KaioKov,  at  all,  A.  iv.,  18 
Ka3o7rXi^o/iai,  to  be  fully  armed,  xL, 

21 
jea3oVj,  because,  according  as,  i.,  7 ; 

xix.,  9  ;  A.  ii.,  24,  45  ;  iv.,  35 
KOLKavis,  aflSiotion,  A.  vii.,  34 


KapSiayvaxrrrjs,  knower  of  the  heart, 

A.  i.,  24;  XV.,  8 
Kapiro<f>6pDt,  fruitful,  A.  xiv.,  17 
Kard/3acr((,  descent,  xix.,  37 
KaTaYYf\.evs,  setter  forth,  A.  xvii.,  18 
Kara&ea,  bind  up,  X.,  34 
KaraKkfiai,  shut  Up,  iii.,  20 ;  A.  xxvi., 

10 
KaTaieXtjpodoTew,  divide    by    lot,    A. 

xiii.,  19 
KaraKKivio,  to  ma&e  recline,  ix.,  14 ; 

xiv.,  8  ;  xxiv.,  30 
KoraKoKov'Sfa),  follow  after,  xxiii .,  55 ; 

A.  xvi.,  17 
KaraKpTipvi^a,  to  cast  down  headlong, 

iv.,  29 
(caraXi3d^u,  to  stone,  XX.,  6 
KaToXoiTTor,  residue,  A.  xv.,  17 
KaTaptva,  abide,  i.,  13 
Karavfia,  beckon,  v.,  7 
KaTavv<T<Ta,  to  prick  or  pierce,  A.  ii., 

37 
KarairiVrtu,  to  fall  down,   A.  xxvi., 

14 ;  xxviii.,  6 
KormrXda,  arrive  at  (by  sea),  viii.,  26 
Karapitpeopiu,  to  be  numbered  with, 

A.  i.,  17 
KaraiTcla),  to  move  (the  hand),  as  a 

signal  of  silence,   A.   xii.,  17; 

xiii.,  16;  xix.,  33;  xxi.,  40 
Karau-cxjjl^opai,  deal  subtly  with,  A. 

vii.,  19 
KOToo-rtXXm,   to  appease,   quiet,  A. 

xix.,  35,  36 
Karaa-vpo),  to  drag  along,  xii.,  58 
KaTa<T(pdTT<o,  slay,  xix.,  27 
KardcrxfTts,  possession,  A.  vii.,  5,  45 
KaraTpix'"}  run  down,  A.  xxi.,  32 
Kara^cpo),  bear  down ;  oppress,  A. 

XX.,  9 ;  xxvi.,  10 
KaTa(j)povriTTis,  despiser,  A.  xiii.,  41 

Kara\/n^;^iu,  to  COOl,  Xvi.,  24 

KaTfidwXos,  full  of  idols,  A.  xvii.,  16 


608 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


KaroiKw,  habitation,  A.  xvii,,  26 
Kepafios,  tiling,  v.,  19 
Kepdnov,  husk,  XV.,  16 

Krjpiov,  comb  (honey),  xxiv.,  42 
K\d(ns,  breaking,  xxiv.,  35 ;  A.  ii.,  42 
K\ivi8iov,  couch,  v.,  19,  24 
Kkiaia,  company  (at  table),  ix.,  14 
KoiTwv,  bedchamber,  A.  xii.,  20 
KoKvii^da,  swim,  A.  xxvii,,  43 
KoXavla,  colony,  A.  xvi.,  12 
Koneros,  lamentation,  A.  viii.,  2 
KOTrpla,  dung,  xiii.,  8  ;  xiv.,  35 
Kopa^,  raven,  xii.,  24 
Kopos,  measure,  xvi.,  7 
Kov(pi^ai,   lighten    (as    a    ship),   A. 

xxvii.,  38 
KpamaXt],  surfeiting,  xxi.,  34 
Kpanaros,  most  excellent,  i.,  3 ;  A. 

xxiii.,  26;  xxiv.,  3;  xxvi.,  25 
KTrjTap,  possessor,  A.  iv.,  34 

XaK€<a,  burst  asunder,  A.  i.,  18 
Xaxri^o),  to  kick,  A.  xxvi.,  14 
Xa^evTos,  rock  hewn,  xxiii.,  53 
Xflos,  smooth,  iii.,  5 
Xfiri's,  a  scale,  A.  ix.,  18 
Xrjpos,  tattle,  idle  talk,  xxiv.,  11 
\ifirjv,  a  haven,  A.  xxvii.,  8,  12 
Xi'i/',  the  southwest  wind,  A.  xxvii., 

12 
Xo'yiof,  eloquent,  A.  xviii.,  24 
\vpaivopaL,  to  make  havoc,  A.  viii.,  3 
Xuo-ireXfi,  it  is  better,  xvii.,  2 
\vTpaiTrjs,  deliverer,  A.  vii.,  35 

payda,  sorcftry,  A.  viii.,  11 
pajfiw,  to  use  sorcery,  A.  viii.,  9 
pia'irjTpta,  female  disciple,  A.  ix.,  36 
fioKpo^vpas,  patiently,  A.  xxvi.,  3 
fiavta,  madness,  A.  xxvi.,  24 
fiavrevofiai,  to  divine,  practise  sooth- 
saying, A.  xvi.,  16 
(xao-Tifo),  to  scourge,  A.  xxvi.,  25 


fieyaXeia,  great  things,  i.,  49 ;  A.  ii., 

11 
fiekia-aios,  of  honey,  xxiv.,  42 
fiepKTTTjs,  divider,  xii.,  14 
fietrrifi^pia,  south,  A.  viii.,  26 ;  xxii.,  6 
lifiTTow,  to  fill,  A.  ii.,  18 
fiera^dWop^i,  to  change  one's  mind, 

A.  xxviii.,  6 
lUTaKaKiofim,  call  for,  A.  vii.,  14;  x., 

32;  XX.,  17;  xxiv.,  25 
lifTaircprrio,  send  for,  A.  x.,  5,  22,  29 ; 

xi.,  13 ;  xxiv.,  24,  26 ;  xxv.,  3 
pcTeapi^oiim,  to  be  of  doubtful  mind, 

xii.,  29 
p.eToiKi(co,  to  remove   the  dwelling- 
place,  A.  vii. ,  4,  43 
licTpiws,  moderately,  A.  xx. ,  12 
fii)8a/ia>s,  by  no  means,  not  so,  A. 

X.,  14  ;  xi.,  8 
/iiVStoy,  hired,  salaried,  xv.,  17,  19 
/iiVSco/ia,  hired  house,  A.  xxviii.,  30 
fivd,  pound,  mina,  xix.,  13,  16,  18, 

20,  24,  25 
lidyis,  hardly,  ix.,  39 
fiotrxoTTOLfa,  to  make  a  calf,  A.  vii., 

41 

vavicXrjpos,  ship-owner,  A.  xxvii.,  11 

vavs,  ship,  A.  xxvii.,  41 

veavlas,  young  man,  A.  vii.,  58;  xx., 

9 ;  xxiii.,  17,  18,  22 
veoo-trdr,  young  (especially  of  birds), 

ii.,  24 
vcwKopos,  temple-sweeper,  xix.,  35 
vrjo-lov,  island,  A.  xxvii.,  16 
voo-o-td,  brood,  xiii.,  34 

dySoTJKovra,  fourscore,  ii.,  37  ;  xvi.,  7 

oSfum,  to  journey,  x.,  33 

SSomopeco,  to  go  on  one's  journey, 

A.  X.,  9 
oSvvdofiai,  to  be  sorrowful,  ii.,  48 ; 

xvi.,  24,  25;  A.  xx.,  88 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


609 


otovr},  sheet,  A.  x.,  11 ;  xi.,  5 
oiKrjfia,  cell,  A.  xii.,  7 
olKovofiiai,  to  be  a  steward,  xvi.,  2 
oKvca,  to  delay,  A.  ix.,  38 
oKoKKrjpia,  perfect  soundness,  A.  iii., 

16 
ofji^pos,  shower,  xii.,  54 
o/itXe'w,    talk    together,    commune, 

xxiv.,  14, 15  ;  A.  xx.,  11 ;  xxiv., 

26    . 
oiioTfxvof,   of    the    same  craft,   A. 

xviii.,  3 
oVfiSor,  reproach,  i.,  25 
oTTOTf,  when,  vi.,  3 
oTrTiivofiai,  to  be  seen,  A.  i.,  3 
oTTTos,  broiled,  xxiv.,  42 
opyvtd,  fathom,  A.  xxvii.,  28 
opeivos,  hilly,  mountainous,  i.,  39,  65 
6p3pifei),  to  rise  early,  xxi.,  38 
opo3ecria,  boundary,  A.  xvii.,  26 
oipavo'Sfv,  from  heaven,  A.  xiv.,  17; 

xxvi.,  13 
oiaia,  substance,  property,  xv.,  12, 

13 
6(f)piis,  brow,  iv.,  29 
oxXoTToif'to,  gather  a  company,    A. 

xvii.,  5 

natriTos,  destined  to  suffer,  A.  xxvi., 

23 
TTaii-rrKrfSel,  all  at  once,  xxiii.,  18 
navho)^eiov,  inn,  X.,  34 
navbox^vs,  host,  X.,  35 
naPoiKi,   with  all    one's   house,    A. 

xvi.,  34 
irdvTrj,  always,  A.  xxiv.,  3 
Trapa^La^onai,    constrain,  xxiv.,  29 ; 

A.  xvi.,  15 
rrapado^os,  Strange,  v.,  26 
wapa?i€apea,  neglect,  A.  vi.,  1 

jrapatvea,  admonish,  A.  xxvii.,  9,  22 
irapaKaii^o),  sit  by,  x.,  39 
irapaKaXvTTTm,  to  hide,  ix.,  45 
89 


napoKiyoixai,    to    sail  near   by,   A. 

xxvii.,  8,  13 
TrapaiKiot,  near  or  by  the  sea,  vi,,  17 
irapavoiiia,   to   transgress    law,    A. 

xxiii.,  3 
TTapanKeo),  to  sail  by,  A.  XX.,  16 
napdirrinos,    sign    or    emblem,    A. 

xxviii.,  11 
napuTeiva,    Continue,    prolong,    A. 

XX.,  7 
Traparfipria-is,  observation,  xvii.,  20 
TrapaTvyxdval,  fall  in  with,  meet,  A. 

xvii.,  17 
napaxetpaa-ta,  wintering  near  or  at, 

A.  xxvii.,  12 
irapcvoxKiio,  trouble,  A.  XV.,  19 
naptevia,  virginity,  ii.,  36 
Trapolxopxu,  to  pass  away,  A.  xiv.,  16 
naporpiva,  stir  up,  A.  xiii.,  50 
jrarpaos,  of  the  fathers,  A.  xxii.,  3  ; 

xxiv.,  14;  xxviii.,  17 
TTcSivos,  plain,  vi.,  17 
TTcffum,  to  go  afoot,  A.  XX.,  13 
Treipao),  attempt,  A.  ix.,  26 ;  xxvi., 

21 
nevixpds,  poor,  xxi.,  2 
TrevTeKaiSiKaros,  fifteenth,  iii.,  1 
wepiaTrTm,  kindle,  xxii.,  55 
TTfpiaa-TpdiTTw,   shine  round  about, 

A.  ix.,  3;  xxii.,  6 
nepixparris,  master  (of  the  boat),  A. 

xxvii.,  16 
rrepiKpiiTTTm,  hide,  i.,  24 
7repiKVK\6a>,  compass  round,  xix.,  43 
TTfpiXd/ijrcD,  shine  round  about,  ii., 

9  ;  A.  xxvi. ,  13 
rrepip.€va>,  wait  for,  A.  i.,  4 
fff'pil,  round  about,  A.  v.,  16 
nfpioiKea,  dwell  round  about,  i.,  65 
TTfpioiKor,  neighbor,  i.,  58 
irfptoxrit  place,  contents  of  a  passage 

(of  scripture),  A.  viii.,  32 
nepipprjyvvjii,  rend  off,  A.  xvi.,  22 


610 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


nepi<T7raofuu,  to  be  cumbered,  x.,  40 
nepirpfirai,  pervert,  A.  xxvi.,  24 
wfjyamv,  rue,  xi.,  42 
TTicf^j  press  down,  vi.,  38 
TrifiTTpafiat,  to  be  inflamed  or  swollen, 

A.  xxviii.,  6 
TTimKi&wi/,  writing-tablet,  i.,  63 
jrXe'co,  to  sail,  viii.,  23;  A.  xxi.,  3; 

xxvii.,  2,  6,  24 
TrXrififivpa,  flood,  vi. ,  48 
TrXdor,  sailing,  voyage,  A.  xxi.,   7; 

xxvii.,  9,.  10 
TToKiTapxv'i  ruler  of  the  city,  A.  xvii., 

6,8 
TToXtTT/f,  citizen,  xv.,  15;    xix.,  14; 

A.  xxi.,  39 
TToWairKaacaiv,  manifold  more,  xviii., 

30 
7rop<pvpma>\is,    seller  of  purple,  A. 

xvi.,  14 
Trpayp-arevopai,  to  trade,  xix.,  13 
TrpaxTiop,  officer,  exactor,  xii.,  58 
Trpca-^eia,  embassy,  xiv.,  32 ;  xix.,  14 
irprjujis,  headlong,  A.  i.,  18 
jrpo/3aXX<i),  put  forward,  xxi.,  30;  A. 

xix.,  33 
TrpoKrjpva-a-a,  preach  before  (time), 

A.  iii.,  20;  xiii.,  24 
Trpo/ifXei-dti),    meditate    beforehand, 

xxi.,  14 
npoopato,  see  before,  A.  ii.,  25 ;  xxi., 

29 
trpo7ropfijop,m,  go  before,  i.,  76 ;    A. 

vii.,  40 
irpoa-avafiaiva^  go  Up,  xiv.,  10 
7rpo(Tava\ia-Ka>,  spend,  viii.,  43 
7rpo(Ta7r(i\fopai,  threaten  farther,  A. 

iv.,  21 
irpoa-Sanavda,  spend  more,  x.,  35 
Trpoa-Sfofiat,  to  need,  xvii.,  25 
jrpoo-SoKi'a,  expectation,  xxi.,  26 ;  A. 

xii.,  11 
Trpoo-fdo),  permit,  A.  xxvii.,  7 


npoirepya^ofim,  gain,  xiX.,  16 
npocrKKripooiiai,  consort  with,  A.  xvii., 

4 
Trpoo-XaXf'o),  speak  to,  A.  xiii.,  43 ; 

xxviii.,  20 
npoaneivos,  very  hungry,  A.  x.,  10 
npoo-jTriyvvpi,  crucify,  A.  ii.,  23 
n-poo-TroKo/iai,  make  as  though,  xxiv., 

28 
npoa-priyvvni,  beat  vehemently  upon, 

vi.,  48,  49 
7rpo(r<j>dTa>s,  lately,  A.  xviii.,  2 
TTpo<T\jfava,  touch,  xi.,  46 
Trpoo-oiTroKrjpnTrjs,   respecter   of  per- 
sons, A.  X.,  34 
irpoTacraopat,  be  appointed  before- 
hand, A.  xvii.,  26 
vpoTeivco,  bind,  A.  xxii.,  25 
npoTpinop.aL,  exhort,  A.  xviii.,  27 
irpovrrdpxo,  to  be  beforetime,  xxiii., 

12;  A.  viii.,  9 
7rpo(f)epai,  bring  forth,  vi.,  45 
npox^i-pi-ioiiai,  choose,    appoint,    A. 

xxii.,  14 ;  xxvi.,  16 
7rpo;(fipoTocfo/iiat,  to  be  chosen  be- 
fore, A.  X.,  41 
Trpapa,  prow,  A.  xxvii.,  30,  41 
TrpaiTodTaTrjs,  ringleader,  A.  xxiv.,  5 
TTToeopai,   to  be  terrified,    xxi.,   9 ; 

xxiv.,  37 
iTTJcTcra,  to  roll  together  (a  parch- 
ment), iv.,  20 
TTvpd,  fire,  A.  xxviii.,  2,  3 

pa^8ovxos,  Serjeant,  A.  xvi.,  35,  38 
paSwvpyripa,  Crime, villany,  A.  xviii., 

14 
pabiovpyia,  villany,  mischief,  A.  xiii., 

10 
prjyiia,  ruin,  vi.,  49 
pr)Tap,  orator,  A.  xxiv.,  1 
pawvpiai,  farewell,  A.  xv.,  29 ;  xxiii., 

30 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


611 


vaikos,  swell  of  the  sea,  billows,  xxi., 

25 
travis,  board,  A.  xxvii.,  44 
a-e^aoTos,  Augustan,  A.  xxvii.,  1 
a-iKapios,  assassin,  A.  xxi,,  38 
trUepa,  strong  drink,  i.,  15 
a-iniKiv^iov,  apron,  A.  xix.,  12 
a-ivid^m,  sift,  xxii.,  31 
aiTOfierpiov,  portion  of  meat,  xii.,  42 
a-Kcmra,  dig,  vi.,  48  ;  xiii.,  8  ;  xvi.,3 
a-xdipri,  boat,  A.  xxTii.,  16,  30,  32 
a-KevTj,  tackling,  A.  xxvii. ,  19 
o-KTjcojrotdr,  tent-maker,  A.  xviii.,  3 
a-KipTaa,  leap,  frisk,  i.,  41,  44;  vi., 

23 
ariiKripoTpdxriKos,  stiff-necked,  A.  vii., 

51 
o-KiiXa,  spoUs,  xi.,  22 
o-opdj,  bier,  vii.,  14 
(Twapyavoa,     wrap     in    swaddling- 
clothes,  ii.,  7,  12 
{TTTtpp-okoyos,  babbler,  A.  xvii.,  18 
cTTciiiia,  garland,  A.  xiv.,  13 
o-Tepeoto,  to  strengthen,  A.  iii.,  7,  16 ; 

xvi.,  5 
a-nynri,  moment  (of  time),  iv.,  5 
(TTparriyos,  captain,  magistrate,  xxii., 

4,  52;  A.  iv;,  1  ;  v.,  24,  26; 

xvi.,  20-38 
irTpaTia,  host,  ii.,  13  ;  A.  vii.,  42 
(TTpaToirfSdpx^Sj     captain     of     the 

guard,  A.  xxviii.,  16 
(TTpaToireSov,  army,  xxi.,  20 
(Tvyyiveia,  kindred,  i.,  61;  A.  vii., 

3,  14 
crvyyevis,  kinswoman,  i.,  36 
a-vyKaXvitTo/iai,  to  be  coyered,  xii.,  2 
crvyKara^alva,  to  go  down  with,  A. 

XXV.,  5 
o-uyKOTariSf/iaj,  to  consent,  xxiii.,  51 
a■vyKaTa^jfr|(j)lCofuu,  to  be  numbered 

with,  A.  i.,  26 
ovyKivea,  stir  Up,  A.  vi.,  12 


o-uyKOfiifo),  carry  away  (for  burial), 

A.  viii.,  2 
ovyKxmTw,  to  be  bent  together,  xiii., 

11 
(Tvy Kvpla,  chance,  coincidence,  x.,  31 
avyxta,  stir  up,  A.  xxi.,  27 
irvyxvva,  confound  or  confuse,  A.  ii., 

6  ;  ix.,  22  ;  xix.,  32  ;  xxi.,  31 
avyxvcris,  confusion,  A.  xix.,  29 
<rufijTi;o-is,  disputation,  A.  xv.,  2,  7  ; 

xxviii.,  29 
avKapwos,  sycamine,  xvii.,  6 
crvKoiitopaia,  sycamore,  xix.,  4 
<rvKo<f)avTea),  accuse  falsely,  iii.,  14  ; 

xix.,  8 
(TvWoy'i^ofiai,  to    reason    together, 

XX.,  5 
iTvp^dWa,  to  put  together  in  mind, 

ponder,     confer,      encounter, 

meet,  help,   ii.,  19 ;   xiv.,  31 ; 

A.  iv.,  15  ;  xvii.,  18  ;  xviii.,  27; 

XX.,  14 
<Tvpirdpeiiu,  to  be  present  with,  A. 

XXV.,  24 
(Tvii7r€pi\afi^dva>,  embrace,  A.  xx.,  10 
avimwa,  drink  with,  A.  x.,  41 
(TviiTTiirTa,  fall  in,  vi.,  49 
CTv/mrXijpdo),  fill ;   of  time,  to  come 

fully,  viii.,  23  ;  ix.,  51 ;  A.  ii.,  1 
a-vfufivofiat,  spring  up  with,  viii.,  7 
<Tvp,(t>(ovia,  music,  XV.,  25 
(Tvp.\jfri(j)i{^a>,  count,  or  reckon  up,  A. 

xix.,  19 
<7vm3porf<o,  gather  together,  xxiv., 

33;  A.  xii.,  12;  xix.,  25 
(TvvdKl^oiiai,   to   be    assembled  to- 
gether, A.  i.,  4 
trvvaprrd^aj,  catch,  viii.,  29;  A.  vi., 

12;  xix.,  29;  xxvii.,  15 
avvbpop.fl,  a  running  together,  con- 
course, A.  xxi. ,  80 
trivtifu,  to  be  with,  x. ,  18 ;  A.  xxii., 

11 


612 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS   USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


<Tvvetiu  {eiiu,  to  go),  to  be  gathered 

together,  viii.,  4 
a-vve\avvm,  set  at  one,  A.  vii.,  26 
(Tvvenonai,  accompany,  A.  xx.,  4 
irvve(j>iaTriiii,    assail    together,    A. 

xvi.,  22 
o-ucS/juTTT-o),  break,  A.  xsi.,  13 
(TvvoSeito,  joumey  with,  A.  ix.,  7 
trvvoSla,  company  (of  travellers),  ii., 

44 
(rvvofiiKea,  talk  with,  A.  X.,  27 
a-vvonopeat,   to  border  together,  to 

adjoin,  A.  xviii.,  7 
(rvvToiias,  concisely,  A.  xxiv.,  4 
<T\ivTpo<pos,    brought    Tip    with,    A 

xiii.,  1 
(TvvTvyxavo),  to  come  to,  or  at,  Tiii., 

19 
avvanoala,  conspiracy,  A.  xxiii.,  13 
aipns,  quicksand,  A.  xxvii.,  17 
<rvanapa(r<ju>,  to  tear,  ix.,  42 
(rv<TTpe(fia),  gather,  A.  xxviii.,  3 
avcrTpoct>fj,  concourse,  A.   xix.,  40 ; 

xxiii.,  12 
<r(j)ayiov,  victim,  slain  beast,  A.  vii., 

42 
tr^ohptos,  exceedingly,  A.  xxvii.,  18 
(T(j)vp6v,  ankle-bone,  A.  iii.,  7 
o-xoX^,  school,  A.  xix.,  9 

TaKTos,  set,  appointed,  A.  xii.,  21 

ravvv,  now,  A.  iv.,  29  ;  v.,  88 ;  ivii., 
30;  XX.,  32;  xxvii.,  22 

rdpaxos,  stir,  A.  xii.,  18 ;  xix.,  23 

Taxia-ra,  with  all  speed,  A.  xvii.,  5 

TfKprjptov,  proof,  A.  i.,  3 

T(\((r(f>ope'a,  bring  fruit  to  -perfec- 
tion, viii.,  14 

Tf(TcrapaKOVTafTr)s,     period     of    forty 

years,  A.  vii.,  23 
Tf<Ta-apc(TKmdtKaTos,    fourteenth,     A. 

xxvii.,  27,  33 
TeT-pciSiof,  quaternion,  A.  xii.,  4 


reTpanXoos,  fourfold,  xix.,  8 
rerpapxia,  to  be  tetrarch,  iii.,  1 
Tipatpea,  punish,  A.  xxii.,  5;  xxvL, 

11 
Tolxos,  wall,  A.  xxiii.,  3 
Tpavp.a,  wound,  X.,  34 
TpavfuiTL^a,  to  wound,  XX.,  12 ;  A. 

xix.,  16 
rpaxis,  rough,  iii.,  5  ;  A.  xxvii.,  29 
Tpij/jLa,  eye  (of  a  needle) ,  xviii.,  25 
Tpianyov,  third  loft,  A.  xx.,  9 
Tpt.a-xiKi.ot,  three  thousand,  A.  ii. ,  41 
Tpo<j)o(t)opea>,   to   bear  as   a  nursing 

father,  A.  xiii.,  18 
rpvydiv,  turtle-dove,  ii.,  24 
TvcjxovtKos,  tempestuous,    whirling, 

A.  xxvii.,  14 

iypos,  moist,  fresh,  green,  xxiii.,  31 
iSpamiKos,  a  dropsical  person,  xiv.,  2 
vnepciSo),  overlook,  A.  xvii.,  30 
vitepfKxvvoixai,  run  over,  vi.,  38 
vntp^ov,  upper  room,  A.  i.,  13;  ix., 

37,  39  ;  XX.,  8 
vnrjpfTeas,  serve,   minister,  A.  xiii., 

36;  XX.,  34;  xxiv.,  23 
xmo^aKKa,  subom,  A.  vi.,  11 
inro^anvvp.t,  undergird,  A.  xxvii.,  17 
xmoKplvopai,  feign,  XX.,  20 
{mo\ap.pdva,    suppose,    answer,  re- 
ceive, vii.,  43  ;  X.,  30;  A.  i.,  9; 
ii.,  15 
vTromeio,  think,  suppose,  A.  xiii.,  25 ; 

XXV.,  18  ;  xxvii.,  27 
vTTOjrXe'o),  sail  under,  A.  xxvii.,  4,  7 
vTroirvfw,  blow  softly,  A.  xxvii.,  13 
vnotTTpmuwiit,  spread,  xix.,  36 
viTToTpe^ffl,  run  tmder,  A.  xxvii.,  16 
vnoxoipsa,  withdraw,  v.,  16;  is.,  10 

(^ai/TOo-ia,  pomp,  A.  XXV. ,  23 
<t>dpay^,  valley,  iii.,  5 
cjiatrts,  tidings,  A.  xxi.,  31 


LIST  OF  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  LUKE  ONLY. 


613 


<j>dTvri,  manger,  ii.,  7,  12,  16;  xiii., 

15 
KJiiXav^pairas,  COIirteOTlsly,  A.  XXTli., 

3 
tfiiKovfiKla,  strife,  xxii.,  24 
<J3iK6iTo<f)os,  philosopher,  A.  xvii.,  18 
(jiiKtxfipovat,  courteously,  A.  xxTiii.,  7 
<j)6^riTpov,   a  terror,    fearful   sight, 

xxi.,  11 
(jiopTos,  lading,  A.  xxvii.,  10 
<f>povlp.a>s,  "wisely,  xvi.,  8 
<f>pva(T(ra>,  rage,  A.  iv.,  25 
^pvyavov,  stick,  A.  xxviii.,  3 
(^vXaKi'^o),  imprison,  A.  xxii.,  19 
4ivKa^,  keeper,   A.  v.,  23 ;  xii.,  6, 

19 

X^P"i>  trench,  xix.,  43 

p^acr/ia,  gulf,  X.,  26 


xeipia(op.ai,  to  be  tempest-tossed,  A. 

xxvii.,  18 
xeipayayia,   lead  by  the  hand,  A. 

ix.,  8  ;  xxii.,  11 
Xfipayayos,  one  leading  by  the  hand, 

A.  xiii.,  11 
X^evd^oj,  mock,  A.  xvii.,  32 
Xop6s,  dancing,  xv.,  25 
xopraa-p-a,  sustenance,  A.  Tii.,  11 
XP^'^'t  lend,  xi.,  5 

XpeatpeiKeTris,  debtor,  vii.,  41 ;  xvi.,  5 
Xpovorpi^ea,  spend  time,  A.  xx.,  16 
Xptas,  body,  skin,  A.  xix.,  12 
X^pos,  northwest,  A.  xxvii.,  12 

^jfa>xa>!  to  rub,  vi.,  1 

wveopMi,  to  buy,  A.  vii.,  16 
aov,  egg,  xi.,  12 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLES  OF 
JAMES,  PETER,  AND  JUDE. 


The  name  "  catholic  "  is  applied  to  the  epistle  of  James,  the 
two  epistles  of  Peter,  the  three  of  John,  and  the  epistle  of 
Jude.  The  term  is  variously  explained,  some  regarding  it  as 
equivalent  to  canonical,  others  as  opposed  to  heretical,  and  as 
applied  to  writings  which  agree  with  the  doctrines  of  the  uni- 
versal church.  Others,  again,  suppose  that  this  group  of  epistles 
was  so  designated,  in  order  to  distinguish  it  from  the  two  other 
groups  formed  by  the  Gospels  and  Acts,  and  the  Pauline  epis- 
tles, as  a  general  collection  of  the  writings  of  other  apostles. 

The  better  explanation  is  that  they  are  called  "  catholic, "  or 
general,\)&Q,2M&Q  addressed  to  no  particular  church  or  individual, 
but  to  a  number  of  scattered  churches  or  people  (see  1  Pet.  i.  1, 
and  James  i.  1).  In  this  sense  the  term  does  not  strictly  appjy 
to  the  second  and  third  epistles  of  John,  which  are  addressed 
to  individuals,  and  includes  them  only  when  regarded  in  the 
light  of  appendices  to  the  first  epistle.  We  speak  in  this  Intro- 
duction of  the  epistles  of  James,  Peter,  and  Jude  only,  reserving 
remarks  on  the  epistles  of  John  for  the  general  introduction 
to  the  Johannine  writings,  in  the  second  volume. 

THE   EPISTLE    OF   JAMES. 

According  to  the  oldest  arrangement  of  the  New  Testament, 
the  epistle  of  James  stands  first  in  order  of  all  the  apostolical 
epistles.     The  most  competent  critics  generally  agree  in  desig- 


616      INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMES,  PETER,  AND  JUDE. 

nating  as  its  aiithor  James,  the  president  of  the  church  at 
Jerusalem,  and  known  as  the  LorCPs  hi'otJier. 

"  No  doubt,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  if  we  look  at  James'  in- 
fluence and  authority  from  the  more  general  point  of  view, 
whether  of  the  whole  Jewish  Christian  world  or  of  the  whole 
Gentile  Christian  world,  it  sinks  into  nothing  before  the  majesty 
of  Peter  and  Paul ;  "  but  within  the  circle  of  the  purely  Pales- 
tinian Christians,  and  in  Jerusalem,  James  is  the  chief  repre- 
sentative of  the  Christian  society.  The  later  traditions  of  the 
Jewish  Christians  invest  him  with  a  priestly  sanctity.  His 
austerities  and  devotions  are  described  in  extravagant  terms. 
He  is  said  to  have  kneeled  until  his  knees  were  as  hard  as  the 
knees  of  camels,  and  to  have  been  constant  in  prayer  in  the 
temple.  He  went  barefoot,  and  practised  abstinence  from  wine, 
and  wore  the  long  hair,  the  linen  ephod,  and  the  unshorn  beard 
of  the  Nazarites,  and  even  abstained  from  washing.  He  was 
known  as  "The  Just."  The  people  vied  with  each  other  to 
touch  the  hem  of  his  garment ;  and  he  is  reputed  to  have  called 
down  rain  in  the  drought,  after  the  manner  of  Elijah.  His 
chair  was  preserved  as  a  relic  until  the  fourth  century,  and  a  pil- 
lar in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  marked  the  spot  where  he  fell. 

The  account  of  his  martyrdom  is  given  by  Eusebius  from  the 
lost  work  of  Hegesippus,  by  Josephus,  and  in  the  Clementine 
Kecognitions.  In  Hegesippus  and  the  Recognitions,  the  story 
is  dramatic  and  deeply  tinged  with  romance.  The  narrative 
of  the  former  '•  is,"  says  Dr.  Schaff,  "  an  overdrawn  picture 
of  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  colored  by  Judaizing 
traits,  which  may  have  been  derived  from  'the  Ascents  of 
James '  and  other  apocryphal  sources."  It  is,  substantially,  as 
follows :  Having  been  asked,  "  What  is  the  gate  of  Jesus  ? " 
he  replied  that  he  was  the  Saviour ;  from  which  some  be- 
lieved that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  The  Jews  and  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  becoming  alarmed,  came  to  James,  and  besought  him 
to  restrain  the  people  from  going  after  Jesus,  to  persuade 
against  him  all  that  came  to  the  Passover,  and,  with  this  view, 
to  stand  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  where  he  might  be  seen 
and  heard  by  all  the  people.  They  accordingly  placed  him 
there,  and  said,  "  O  Just  One,  to  whom  we  all  give  heed,  inas- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMBS,  PETER,  AND  JUDE.      617 

much  as  the  people  is  gone  astray  after  Jesus  who  is  crucified, 
tell  us  what  is  the  gate  of  Jesus  ?  "  He  answered,  with  a  loud 
voice,  "  "Why  ask  ye  me  concerning  Jesus,  the  Son  of  man  ? 
He  sits  in  heaven,  on  the  right  hand  of  the  mighty  power,  and 
he  is  also  about  to  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  Many  being 
convinced,  and  saying,  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  !  "  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  said,  "  We  have  done  ill  in  furnishing  so 
great  a  testimony  to  Jesus.  Let  us  go  and  cast  him  down." 
They  went  up  then  and  threw  him  down,  and  as  he  was  not 
killed  by  the  fall  they  began  to  stone  him.  And  he,  turning 
round,  knelt  and  said,  "  I  beseech  thee,  Lord  God  and  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  But  while 
they  were  thus  stoning  him,  one  of  the  priests,  of  the  sons  of 
Kechab,  cried,  saying,  "  Stop !  what  do  ye  ?  The  Just  One  prays 
for  you ; "  and  one  of  them,  one  of  the  fullers,  took  the  club 
with  which  he  used  to  press  the  cloths,  and  struck  it  on  the 
head  of  the  Just  One.  And  so  he  bore  witness,  and  they  buried 
him  on  the  place  by  the  temple. 

The  epistle  was  probably  written  from  Jerusalem,  where 
James  would  be  likely  to  become  acquainted  with  the  condition 
of  the  Jews,  through  those  who  came  up  at  the  feasts.  Certain 
allusions  in  the  epistle  go  to  confirm  this.  The  comparison  of 
the  double-minded  man  to  a  wave  of  the  sea  (i.  6),  and  the  pict- 
ure of  the  ships  (iii.  4),  might  well  be  written  by  one  dwelling 
near  the  sea  and  familiar  with  it.  The  illustrations  in  iii.  11, 
12 — the  figs,  the  oil,  the  wine,  the  salt  and  bitter  springs — are 
furnished  by  Palestine,  as  are  the  drought  (v.  17,  18),  the 
former  and  the  latter  rain  (v.  7),  and  the  hot,  parching  wind 
(i.  11),  for  which  the  name  Kava-av  was  specially  known  in 
Palestine. 

The  epistle  is  written  from  a  Jewish  stand-point.  "  Chris- 
tianity appears  in  it,  not  as  a  new  dispensation,  but  as  a  develop- 
ment and  perfection  of  the  old.  The  Christian's  highest  honor 
is  not  that  he  is  a  member  of  the  universal  church,  but  that  he 
is  the  genuine  type  of  the  ancient  Israelite.  It  reveals  no  new 
principle  of  spiritual  life,  such  as  those  which  were  to  turn  the 
world  upside  down  in  the  teaching  of  Paul  or  of  John,  but  only 
that  pure  and  perfect  morality  which  was  the  true  fulfilment  of 


618     INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMES,  PETEB,  AND  JUDE. 

the  law  "  (Stanley).  Twice  only  the  name  of  Christ  occurs  (i. 
1 ;  ii.  1) ;  the  word  "  gospel "  not  at  all ;  and  there  is  no  allusion 
to  Eedemption,  Incarnation,  Resurrection,  or  Ascension.  The 
rules  of  morality  which  he  lays  down  are  enforced  by  Jewish 
rather  than  by  Christian  motives  and  sanctions.  The  violation 
of  the  "  royal  law "  is  menaced  with  the  sentence  of  the  law 
(ii.  8,  13) ;  and  uncharitable  judgment  is  deprecated  on  the 
ground  of  the  law's  condemnation,  and  not  as  alien  to  the  spirit 
of  Christ. 

At  the  same  time,  the  very  legalism  of  the  epistle  is  the  out- 
growth of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the  language  of  which  it 
reflects  more  than  any  other  book  of  the  New  Testament.  It 
meets  the  formalism,  the  fatalism,  the  hypocrisy,  the  arrogance, 
insolence,  and  oppression  engendered  by  the  sharp  social  dis- 
tinctions of  the  age,  with  a  teaching  conceived  in  the  spirit,  and 
often  expressed  in  the  forms  of  the  Great  Teacher's  moral  code. 
"  The  epistle,"  says  Dr.  Scott,  "  strikes  the  ear  from  beginning 
to  end  as  an  echo  of  the  oral  teaching  of  our  Lord.  There  is 
scarcely  a  thought  in  it  which  cannot  be  traced  to  Christ's  per- 
sonal teaching.  If  John  has  lain  on  the  Saviour's  bosom,  James 
has  sat  at  his  feet." 

The  following  correspondences  may  be  noted : 


Matth  kw. 

James. 

V.  3. 

i.  9;  ii.  5. 

V.  4. 

iv.  9. 

V.  7,  9. 

ii.  13 ;  iii.  17. 

V.  8. 

•iv.  8. 

V.  9. 

iii.  18. 

V.  11,  12. 

i.  2 ;  V.  10,  11. 

v.  19. 

i.  19  seq.,  25;  ii.  10,11, 

V.  22. 

1.20. 

V.  27. 

ii.  10,  11. 

V.  34  seq. 

V.  12. 

V.  48. 

i.  4. 

vi.  15. 

ii.  13. 

vi.  19. 

V.  2  seq. 

vi.  24. 

iv.  4. 

vi.  25. 

iv.  13-16. 

vii.  1  seq. 

iii.  1 ;  iv.  11  seq. 

Matthew. 

via. 

2. 

vii. 

7,11. 

vii. 

8. 

vii. 

12. 

vii. 

16. 

vii. 

21-26. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMES,  PETER,  AND  JUDE.  619 

James. 

ii.  13. 

i.  5,  17. 

iv.  3. 

ii.  8. 

iii.  12. 

i.  22;  ii.  14;  v.  7-9. 

The  style  and  diction  of  the  epistle  are  strongly  marked. 
Links  connecting  them  with  the  historic  individuality  of  the 
writer,  which  are  so  numerous  in  the  case  of  Peter,  are  almost 
entirely  wanting.  The  expression,  "  Hearken,  my  beloved 
brethren  "  (ii.  5),  suggests  the  similar  phrase,  Acts  xv.  13 ;  and 
the  ordinary  Greek  greeting,  'x^aipecv,  hail  (Acts  xv.  23),  is  re- 
peated in  Jas.  i.  1 ;  the  only  two  places  where  it  occurs  in  a 
Christian  epistle.  The  purity  of  the  Greek,  and  its  comparative 
freedom  from  Hebraisms,  are  difficult  to  account  for  in  a  writer 
who  had  passed  his  life  in  Jerusalem.  The  style  is  sententious 
and  antithetic  ;  the  thoughts,  not  linked  in  logical  connection, 
but  massed  in  groups  of  short  sentences,  like  the  proverbial  say- 
ings of  the  Jews  ;  with  which  class  of  literature  the  writer  was 
evidently  familiar.  His  utterance  glows  with  the  fervor  of  his 
spirit ;  it  is  rapid,  exclamatory,  graphic,  abrupt,  sometimes 
poetical  in  form,  and  moving  with  a  rhythmical  cadence.  "  It 
combines  pure  and  eloquent  and  rhythmical  Greek  with  He- 
brew intensity  of  expression." 

THE   EPISTLES   OF   PETER. 

The  life  and  character  of  the  apostle  Peter  are  familiar  to  all 
readers  of  the  Gospels  and  Acts.  It  has  already  been  shown 
in  the  Introduction  to  the  Gospel  of  Mark  how  the  style  and 
diction  of  that  gospel  exhibit  the  influence  of  Peter,  and  how 
the  characteristics  which  appear  in  the  Acts,  in  those  scenes  in 
which  Peter  was  the  only  or  the  principal  actor,  reappear  in  the 
second  gospel.  If  these  epistles  are  from  his  pen,  we  may 
therefore  expect  to  find  in  them  traces  of  the  keen-sightedness, 
the  ready  application  of  what  is  observed,  and  the  impulsiveness 


620  mTEODUCTION  TO  JAMBS,  PETER,  AND  JUDB. 

and  promptness  which  appear  in  the  other  two  books,  always 
allowing  for  the  difference  between  a  narrative  and  a  hortatory 
style. 

It  has  been  observed  that  "  the  sight,  and  what  it  should  do 
and  reap,  fills  a  great  space  in  Peter's  letters."  Accordingly, 
we  read  that  God's  salvation  is  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 
time  (1,  i.  5) ;  the  angels  desire  to  looh  into  the  mysteries  of 
the  gospel  (1,  i.  12) ;  Christ  was  manifested  at  the  end  of  the 
times  (1,  i.  20) ;  the  Gentiles  shall  hehold  your  good  works 
(1,  ii.  12) ;  unbelieving  husbands  shall  be  convinced  by  hehold- 
ing  the  chaste  behavior  of  their  wives  (1,  iii.  2) ;  the  apostle 
was  a  witness  of  Christ's  sufferings  (1,  v.  1),  and  an  eye-witness 
of  his  majesty  (2,  i.  16) ;  the  elders  must  exercise  oversight  of 
the  flock  (1,  V.  2).  Similarly  he  speaks  of  the  day  of  visita- 
tion, or,  lit.,  overlooking  (1,  ii.  12) ;  Christ  is  the  'bishop,  lit., 
overseer,  of  souls  (1,  ii.  25) ;  he  who  lacks  Christian  graces 
is  hlind,  seeing  only  what  is  near  (2,  i.  9) ;  Lot  was  vexed  at 
seeing  the  wickedness  of  his  neighbors  (2,  ii.  8) ;  the  wicked 
have  eyes  full  of  adultery  (2,  ii.  14). 

Equally  apparent  is  his  readiness  to  apply  what  he  sees  and 
hears.  "Not  one  thought,"  says  Canon  Cook,  "  connected  with 
the  mystery  of  salvation  is  presented  without  an  instant  and 
emphatic  reference  to  what  a  Christian  ought  to  feel,  and  what 
he  ought  to  do.  No  place  in  the  spiritual  temple  is  so  humble 
that  he  who  holds  it  has  not  before  him  the  loftiest  sphere 
of  spiritual  action  and  thought.  Injunctions  which  touch  the 
heart  most  powerfully  are  impressed  upon  us  as  we  contemplate 
the  eternal  glory,  the  manifestations  of  Christ's  love."  Thus 
we  have  sanctification  of  the  spirit  unto  obedience  (1,  i.  2) ;  be 
holy  in  living  (1,  i.  15).  The  first  epistle  abounds  in  exhorta- 
tions to  personal  religion  (ii.  10-18  ;  iii.  1-16  ;  iv.  1-11 ;  v.  1-9). 
Christian  graces  shall  make  believers  to  be  neither  idle  nor  un- 
fruitful (2,  i.  8) ;  they  shall  not  fall  if  they  do  these  things 
(2,  i.  10) ;  he  exhorts  to  holy  living  and  godliness  (2,  iii.  11). 

It  is  in  such  pointed  and  practical  exhortations  as  these  that 
the  prompt  and  energetic  character  of  the  apostle  reappears. 
Dr.  Davidson  observes  that  the  writer  is  "  zealous,  but  mild, 
earnest,  but  not  fervid  ;  "  a  statement  which  is  adapted  to  pro- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMES,  PETER,  AND  JUDB.      621 

voke  a  smile  from  one  who  has  felt  the  nervous  grip  of  tlie  first 
epistle,  and  which  becomes  palpably  absurd  if  we  admit,  as  of 
course  Dr.  Davidson  does  not,  the  authenticity  of  the  second. 
The  "  mild  tone  "  assuredly  is  not  dominant  there ;  but,  in  any 
event,  it  would  be  strange  if  the  letters  did  not  show  traces  of 
the  mellowing  of  years,  and  of  the  ripening  of  the  spirit  of 
Christ  in  this  once  passionate  and  headstrong  disciple.  The 
second  chapter  of  the  second  epistle  is  no  feeble  reminder  of  the 
Peter  who  smote  off  the  ear  of  Malchus. 

The  graphic  and  picturesque  character  of  these  letters  is  nota- 
ble. In  the  two  epistles,  containing  eight  chapters,  the  longest 
of  which  consists  of  but  twenty-five  verses,  there  are  one  hun- 
dred and  nineteen  words  which  occur  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament.  Picture-words  abound,  such  as  wpuo/iej/o?,  roaring 
(1,  V.  8)  ;  oifKiaaa^,  arm  yoursehes  (1,  iv.  1) ;  eTriKoKv/jL/jLa, 
clohe  (1,  ii.  16) ;  (pifiovv,  jmt  to  silence,  lit.,  muzzle  (1,  ii.  15) ; 
crKo\i6<;,  frowwrd,  lit.,  awry  or  twisted  {1,  ii.  18);  eKTevw';,  fer- 
vently, lit.,  on  the  stretch  (1,  i.  22) ;  d7r65ea-i<;,  putting  off  (2,  i. 
14) ;  e'foSos,  decease  (2,  i.  15) ;  Biavyd^eiv,  dawn  (2,  i.  19) ; 
a{y)Qi'npo<s,  dark  or  dry  (2,  i.  19)  ;  eiriKvai'i,  interpretation,  lit., 
v/rdying  (2,  i.  20) ;  a-Tpe^ovauv,  wrest,  as  with  a  windlass  (2, 
iii.  16),  and  many  others. 

The  same  graphic  character  appears  in  what  may  be  styled 
reminiscent  words  or  phrases,  in  which  the  former  personal  ex- 
perience of  the  writer  is  mirrored.  Thus,  gird  yourselves  with 
humility  (1,  v.  5,  see  note  there)  recalls  the  picture  of  the  Lord 
girded  with  a  towel  and  washing  the  disciples'  feet.  To  look 
into  (1,  i.  12)  expresses  a  stooping  down  to  gaze  intently,  and 
carries  us  back  to  the  visit  of  Peter  and  John  to  the  sepulchre 
on  the  morning  of  the  resurrection,  when  they  stooped  down 
and  looked  into  the  tomb.  Ijufeed  the  flock  (Rev. ,  tend,  1,  v.  2) 
is  reflected  Christ's  charge  to  Peter  at  the  lake.  The  recurrence 
of  the  word  airpoaoi'iroKriiMTrTm'i,  without  respect  of  persons  (1,  i, 
17),  used  in  a  kindred  form  by  Peter,  Acts  x.  34,  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  the  scene  in  the  house  of  Cornelius  was  present  to 
his  mind  ;  and  he  watchful  (1,  v.  8)  may  have  been  suggested  by 
the  remembrance  of  his  own  drowsiness  in  Gethsemane,  and  of 
Christ's  exhortation  to  watch.     So,  too,  it  is  interesting  to  read 


622      INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMBS,  PETER,  AND  JUDB. 

the  words  buffeted  (1,  ii.  20),  the  tree  {to  ^likov,  an  unusual  word, 
used  by  him,  Acts  v.  30  ;  x.  39),  and  strvpe  or  weal  (1,  ii.  24),  in 
the  light  of  the  gospel  narratives  of  Christ's  sufferings.  Christ 
had  called  Simon  a  rock,  and  a  little  later  a  stumhling-hlocJc. 
Peter  combines  both  words  into  one  phrase,  a  rock  of  offence 
(1,  ii.  8).  A  very  striking  instance  appears  in  the  reference  to 
the  Transfiguration  (2,  i.  17,  18),  where  he  uses  the  peculiar 
word  IfoSo?,  decease ;  lit.,  going  out,  which  occurs  in  Luke  ix. 
31,  and  also  in  Heb.  xi.  22.  Compare,  also,  tabernacle,  in  2,  i. 
13,  14,  with  let  us  make  three  tabernacles. 

Both  epistles  are  pervaded  with  an  Old- Testament  atmos- 
phere. The  testimony  of  Old-Testament  prophecy,  teaching, 
and  history  is  emphasized  (1,  i.  10-12 ;  iii.  5,  6,  20  ;  2,  i.  19- 
21;  ii.  1,  4-8,  15,  16  ;  iii.  2,  5,  6).  Old-Testament  quotations 
and  references  are  brought  into  the  text,  though  the  intro- 
ductory formulas,  because  it  is  written,  and  wherefore  it  is  con- 
tained in  scripture,  do  not  occur  in  the  second  epistle ;  and  the 
interweaving,  as  of  familiar  expressions,  is  not  so  conspicuous 
there  as  in  the  first  epistle  (see  1,  i.  16,  24,  25 ;  ii.  6,  7,  9,  10, 
23,  24 ;  iii.  6,  10,  14  ;  iv.  8,  18 ;  v.  5,  7  ;  2,  i.  19-21 ;  ii.  5,  6, 
7,  15,  21 ;  iii.  5,  6,  8,  13).  The  church  of  Christ  is  repre- 
sented as  the  church  of  Israel  perfected  and  spiritualized  (1,  ii. 
■4-10) ;  the  exhortation  to  holiness  (1,  i.  15,  16)  is  given  in  the 
language  of  Lev.  xi.  44 ;  Christ  is  described  (1,  ii.  6)  in  the 
terms  of  Isaiah  xxviii.  16,  and  Ps.  cxviii.  22 ;  and  the  prophetic 
utterance  of  Isaiah  concerning  the  servant  of  Jehovah  (Hi.  13- 
liii.  12)  reappears  in  1,  ii.  23,  24. 

The  epistles  are  evidently  the  work  of  a  Jew.  We  find,  as 
we  might  expect,  the  writer  illustrating  his  positions  from  Jew- 
ish history  and  tradition,  as  in  his  refei'ences  to  Noah,  Sarah, 
Balaam,  and  his  use  of  the  word  pavriaixm,  sprinkling  (1,  i.  2), 
a  peculiarly  Levitical  term.  He  shows  how  the  spirit  of  Christ 
dwelt  in  the  Old-Testament  prophets,  and  how  Christians  are  a 
royal  priesthood. 

The  resemblance,  both  in  ideas  and  expressions,  to  pas- 
sages in  the  epistles  of  Paul  and  James  is  marked,  especially 
in  the  first  epistle.  It  will  be  instructive  to  compare  the  fol- 
lowing : 


rtTTEODUCTION  TO  JAMES,  PBTEB,  AKD  JUDE.  623 

1  Petee. 

i.  6,  7. 
i.  24 
i.  23. 
V.  5,  6. 

iv.  8. 

1  Petbb. 

i.  14. 
i.  21. 
ii.  5. 
ii.  6-8. 
ii.  10. 
ii.  13,  14. 
ii.  16. 
ii.  24. 
iii.  9. 
iv.  10,  11. 
V.  i. 
i.  7. 
iv.  13. 
iv.  9. 
iv.  3. 
iv.  1. 
v.  8. 
V.  14. 

Nor  are  such  resemblances  wanting  in  the  second  epistle, 
though  they  are  resemblances  in  tone,  subject,  and  spirit,  rather 
than  verbal.  It  is  in  this  epistle  that  Peter  designates  Paul's 
writings  as  scriptur,e  (iii.  16).     Compare 


James. 

i.  2,  3 

i.  10, 

11. 

i.  18. 

iv.  6, 

10. 

V.  20. 

Paul. 

Eom. 

xii. 

2. 

Eom. 

iv. 

24. 

Bom. 

xii. 

1. 

Eom. 

ix. 

33. 

Eom. 

ix. 

25,  26, 

Eom. 

xiii 

.  1-4. 

Gal.  V.  13 

Eom. 

vi. 

18. 

Eom. 

xii. 

17. 

Eom. 

xii. 

6,7. 

Eom. 

viii 

.  18. 

Eom. 

ii.  ' 

7,10. 

Eom. 

viii 

.17. 

Eom. 

xii. 

13. 

Eom. 

xiii 

.13. 

Eom. 

xiii 

:.  14. 

1  Thess.  ■ 

V.  6. 

ICor 

.  xvi.  20. 

Patiii. 

2  Peteb, 

Eom.  i.  28  ;  iii.  20. 

i.  2. 

1  Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7. 

i.  16. 

1  Tim.  vi.  5  ;  Tit.  i.  11. 

ii.3. 

1  Cor.  X.  29  ;  Gal.  v.  13. 

ii.  19. 

Eom.  ii.  4;  ix.  22. 

iii.  15. 

Gal.  ii.  4. 

ii.  1. 

Into  the  much-vexed  question  of  the  authenticity  of  the  sec- 
ond epistle  we  are  not  called  upon  to  enter.  The  point  of  dif- 
ferences of  style  between  the  two  epistles  is  a  fair  one.    There 


624  INTRODUCTION   TO  JAMES,  PETER,  AJSTD  JUDB. 

are  such  differences,  and  very  decided  ones,  though  perhaps 
they  are  no  more  and  no  greater  than  can  be  explained  by 
diversity  of  subject  and  circumstances,  and  the  difference  in  the 
author's  age.  Some  of  the  expressions  peculiar  to  the  second 
epistle  are — granting  things  which  pertain  unto  life  and  godli- 
ness (i.  3) ;  precious  and  exceeding  great  (i.  4) ;  adding  all  dili- 
gence, and  supply  virtue  (i.  5) ;  an  entrance  richly  supplied 
(i.  11) ;  receiving  forgetfulness  (i.  9) ;  sects  of  perdition  (ii.  1) ; 
cast  down  to  Tartarus  (ii.  4) ;  the  world  compacted  out  of  water 
and  iy  means  of  water  (iii.  5),  etc. 

But,  while  allowing  for  these  differences,  and  recognizing  the 
weakness  of  tlie  external  evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  the 
epistle,  the  internal  evidence  of  style  and  tone  seems  to  us  to 
outweigh  the  differences,  and  to  show  that  both  epistles  were 
from  the  same  hand.  There  is  the  same  picturesqueness  of 
diction,  and  a  similar  fertility  of  unusual  words.  Of  the  one 
hundred  and  twenty  words  which  occur  only  in  the  writings 
of  Peter,  fifty-seven  are  peculiar  to  the  second  epistle ;  and, 
what  is  still  more  noteworthy,  only  one  of  these  words,  aTroSeo-t?, 
puttiMg  off,  is  common  to  the  two  epistles' — a  fact  which  tells 
very  strongly  against  the  hypothesis  of  a  forgery.  That  hypoth- 
esis, it  may  be  observed,  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable. 
The  Christian  earnestness,  the  protest  against  deception,  the 
tender  and  adoring  reminiscence  of  Christ,  the  emphasis  upon 
the  person  and  doctrine  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  mark  this 
epistle,  imply  a  moral  standard  quite  inconsistent  with  the  per- 
petration of  a  deliberate  forgery. 

Comparisons  of  expressions  in  this  epistle  with  those  used  or 
inspired  by  Peter  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  exhibit  a  close 
correspondence ;  and  a  correspondence,  which,  however,  must 
not  be  too  strongly  pressed,  appears  on  a  comparison  with  cer- 
tain passages  in  the  gospels.  Thus  the  verb  Bapio/Mai,  to  give, 
occurs  only  in  Mark  xv.  45,  and  2  Pet.  i.  3,  4  (see  Introduction 
to  Mark,  on  the  relations  between  Mark  and  Peter) ;  and  the 
recurrence  of  the  words  exodus,  or  decease,  and  tabernacle  in 
the  same  connection  (2  Pet.  i.  13-15,  17,  18)  is  very  striking 
from  the  pen  of  one  who,  at  the  Transfiguration,  heard  the 
heavenly  visitants  conversing  of  Christ's  decease,  and  who  pro 


INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMES,  PETER,  AND  JUDE.      625 

posed  to  build  tabernacles  for  their  abode.  The  repeated  use 
of  the  word  aTr)pi^a),  stablish,  and  its  derivatives  (i.  12 ;  iii. 
17  ;  ii.  14  ;  iii.  16)  is  also  suggestive,  in  view  of  the  admonition 
of  Jesus  to  Peter  by  the  same  word — strengthen  thy  brethren 
(Luke  xxii.  32). 

There  iS'  the  same  retrospective  character  in  both  epistles. 
In  both  the  writer  teaches  that  prophecy  does  not  carry  its  own 
interpretation  ;  in  both  he  alludes  to  the  small  number  saved 
from  the  flood  ;  both  have  the  same  sentiments  on  the  nature 
and  right  use  of  Christian  liberty,  and  on  the  value  of  prophecy ; 
in  both  aperri,  virtue,  is  attributed  to  God,  a  use  of  the  word 
occurring  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament. 

The  style  of  both  epistles  is  vigorous  rather  than  elegant, 
strong,  and  sometimes  rough,  the  work  of  a  plain,  practical  man, 
and  of  an  observer  rather  than  a  reasoner,  whose  thoughts  do 
not  follow  each  other  in  logical  sequence.  The  fervid  spirit  of 
the  writer  appears  in  his  habit  of  massing  epithets,  and  repeating 
his  thoughts  in  nearly  the  same  words  and  forms  (see,  for  in- 
stance, 1  Pet.  i.  4  ;  ii.  4,  11 ;  i.  19 ;  ii.  9.  Also,  i.  7,  and  iv.  12 ; 
i.  13,  and  iv.  7,  v.  8 ;  i.  14,  and  ii.  11,  iv.  2 ;  ii.  16,  and  iii.  1, 16 ; 
ii.  19,  and  iii.  14,  iv.  14.  2  Pet.  i.  4,  8,  17 ;  ii.  10,  11,  12-15  ; 
iii.  loj.  Professor  Ezra  Abbot  has  brought  out  some  remark- 
able correspondences  between  this  epistle  and  the  writings  of 
Josephus,  and  maintains  that  the  author  of  the  letter  is  largely 
dependent  upon  the  Jewish  historian  {Expositor,  2d  series,  iii., 
49).    The  second  epistle  of  Peter  cannot  be  studied  apart  from 

THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE. 

This  brief  letter  is  assigned  to  the  Judas  of  Matt.  xiii.  55, 
one  of  the  brethren  of  Jesus,  and  of  James,  the  author  of  the 
catholic  epistle.  It  is  a  hotly  debated  question  whether  Peter's 
second  letter  or  Jude's  epistle  is  the  earlier,  and,  consequently, 
which  writer  drew  upon  the  other.  It  is  quite  evident,  either 
that  the  one  used  the  other's  epistle  or  that  both  drew  from  a 
common  source.  A  satisfactory  decision  is  impossible  in  the 
present  state  of  the  evidence.  The  matter  which  is  common  to 
40 


826      INTRODUCTION  TO  JAMBS,  PETEB,  AND  JUDB. 

the  two  epistles,  besides  various  scattered  resemblances,  is  prin- 
cipally in  Jude  3-18 ;  2  Pet.  1-5  ;  ii.  1-18  (see  Ezra  Abbot, 
Eaypositor,  2d  series,  iii.,  139). 

Besides  the  resemblance  to  Second  Peter,  the  epistle  is 
marked  by  its  apocryphal  references,  especially  to  the  Book  of 
Enoch  (see  notes  on  9, 14).  In  style  it  is  terse  and  picturesque. 
"  It  is  Greek  as  learned  by  a  foreigner,  and  partly  from  books, 
and  it  is  mixed  up  with  Hebrew  phrases."  It  contains  at  least 
fifteen  words  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament.  Dean 
Alford  says :  "It  is  an  impassioned  invective,  in  which  the 
writer  heaps  epithet  on  epithet,  and  image  on  image,  and  re- 
turns again  and  again  to  the  licentious  apostates  against  whom 
he  warns  the  church,  as  though  all  language  were  insufficient  to 
give  an  adequate  idea  of  their  profligacy,  and  of  his  own  abhor- 
rence of  their  perversion  of  the  grace  and  doctrines  of  the 
Gospel." 


THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  Peter  {neTpo<:).  See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18.  As  Paul  in  his 
letters  does  not  call  himself  by  his  original  name  of  Saul,  so 
Peter  calls  himself,  not  Simon,  but  Peter,  the  name  most  sig- 
nificant and  precious  both  to  himself  and  to  his  readers,  because 
bestowed  by  his  Lord.  In  the  opening  of  the  second  epistle  he 
uses  both  names. 

An  apostle.  Of  all  the  catholic  epistles,  Peter's  alone  puts 
forward  his  apostleship  in  the  introduction.  He  is  addressing 
churches  with  which  he  had  no  immediate  connection,  and  which 
were  distinctively  Pauline.  Hence  he  appeals  to  his  apostle- 
ship in  explanation  of  his  writing  to  them,  and  as  his  warrant 
for  taking  Paul's  place. 

To  the  strangers — elect  (ver.  2,  e/f\e«Tow  TrapeiriS'^fioii}). 
The  Eev.,  properly,  joins  the  two  words,  elect  who  cure  sojourners, 
instead  of  continuing  elect  with  according  to  the  foreknowledge, 
etc.,  as  A.  V. 

Elect.  Kegarding  all  whom  he  addressed  as  subjects  of  sav- 
ing grace.  The  term  corresponds  to  the  Old-Testament  title  of 
Jehovah's  people:  Isa.  Ixv.  9,  15,  22;  Ps.  cv.  43.  Compare 
Matt.  XX.  16  ;  xxii.  14 ;  Eom.  viii.  33. 

Sojourners  {7rape7nSi]fiot<;).  Persons  sojourning  for  a  brief 
season  in  a  foreign  country.    Though  applied   primarily  to 


628  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

Hebrews  scattered  throughout  the  world  (Gen.  xxiii.  4 ;  Ps. 
xxxix.  12),  it  has  here  a  wider,  spiritual  sense,  contemplating 
Christians  as  having  their  citizenship  in  heaven.  Compare 
Heb.  xi.  13.  The  preposition  Trapd,  in  composition,  implies  a 
sense  of  transitoriness,  as  of  one  who  passes  iy  to  something 
beyond. 

Scattered  {Bia(T7ropa<;).  Lit.,  of  the  dispersion ;  from  hua- 
aireCpoi,  to  scatter  or  spread  abroad ;  a-irelpw  meaning,  originally, 
to  sow.  The  term  was  a  familiar  one  for  the  whole  body  of 
Jews  outside  the  Holy  Land,  scattered  among  the  heathen. 

2.  According  to  {Kara).     In  virtue  of;  in  accordance  with. 

Foreknowledge  {-Trpoyveaenv).  Only  here  and  Acts  ii.  23, 
in  Peter's  sermon  at  Pentecost.  He  is  distinguishing  there  be- 
tween J^oreknowledge  and  determinate  counsel. 

The  Father.  Implying  that  the  relation  contemplated  by 
the  divine  foreknowledge  is  a  new  relation  of  sonship. 

In  sanctification  (eV  ofyiaa-fiai).  Compare  2  Thess.  ii.  13. 
The  spiritual  state  in  which  the  being  elected  to  salvation  is 
realized.  The  word  is  peculiarly  Pauline,  occurring  eight  times 
in  Paul's  epistles,  and  besides  only  here  and  Heb.  xii.  14. 

Unto  obedience  (ek).  Note  the  three  prepositions:  accord- 
ing to  [Kara)  the  foreknowledge ;  in  (ev)  sanctification  ;  unto 
(ek)  obedience.  The  ground,  sphere,  and  end  of  spiritual 
sanctification. 

Sprinkling  {pavTtcrpMv).  Here  in  a  passive  sense — the  being 
sprinMed.  Properly,  the  ritualistic  act  of  sprinkling  blood  or 
water.  See  Num.  xix.  19,  21.  Compare  Heb.  ix.  13 ;  xii.  24 ; 
Num.  xix.  9,  13,  where  the  water  in  which  were  the  ashes  of 
the  red  heifer  is  called  vBmp  pavria-p^ov,  water  of  sprinkling 
(Septuagint),  which  the  A.  V.  and  Eev.  Old  Testament  ren- 
der water  of  separation.  The  word  and  its  kindred  verb  occui 
only  in  Hebrews  and  Peter. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  629 

Jesus  Christ.  The  foreknowledge  of  the  Father,  the  sanc- 
tification  of  the  Spirit,  the  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son.  The  Father  foreTcnowvng,  the 
Son  atoning,  the  Spirit  applying  the  Son's  work  in  scunctifying. 
"  The  mystery  of  the  Trinity  and  the  economy  of  our  salvation 
are  intimated  in  this  verse  "  (Bengel). 

Grace  and  peace  (;y;apts — elprjvri).  Pauline  terms.  See  Rom. 
i.  7.  The  salutation  is  peculiar  by  the  addition  of  le  multi- 
plied,  which  occurs  2  Pet.  i.  2 ;  Jude  2,  and  nowhere  else  in 
the  salutations  of  the  epistles.  It  is  found,  however,  in  the 
Septuagint,  Dan.  iv.  1  (Sept.'  iii.  31),  and  vi.  25.  Professor 
Salmond  observes :  "  If  the  Babylon  from  which  Peter  writes 
can  be  taken  to  be  the  literal  Babylon  *  (see  on  v.  13),  it  might 
be  interesting  to  recall  the  epistles  introduced  by  salutations  so 
similar  to  Peter's,  which  vs^ere  written  from  the  same  capital  by 
two  kings,  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Darius,  of  two  great  dynasties, 
and  addressed  to  all  their  provinces." 

3.  Blessed  (euXoY^jro?).  ev,  well,  X6'yo<;,  a  word.  Well- 
spoken-qf,'  praised ;  honored.  Used  in  the  Hew  Testament 
of  God  only.  The  kindred  verb  is  applied  to  human  beings,  as 
to  Mary  (Luke  i.  28) :  "  Blessed  {evXoy7)/u,ev'ri)  art  thou."  Com- 
pare the  different  word  for  Messed  in  Matt.  v.  3,  etc.  (jiaKcipioi), 
and  see  notes  there.  The  style  of  this  doxological  phrase  is 
Pauline.     Compare  2  Cor.  i.  3 ;  Eph.  i.  3. 

Hath  begotten  us  again  {avajew^crai;  f]fia^).  The  verb  is 
used  by  Peter  only,  and  by  him  only  here  and  ver.  23.  It  is 
in  the  aorist  tense,  and  should  be  rendered,  as  Rev.,  hegat ;  be- 
cause regeneration  is  regarded  as  a  definite  historical  act  accom- 
plished once  for  all,  or  possibly  because  Peter  regards  the  his- 
torical act  of  Christ's  resurrection  as  virtually  effecting  the 
regeneration.  The  latter  sentiment  would  be  Pauline,  since 
Paul  is  wont  to  speak  of  Christians  as  dying  and  rising  with 
Christ.     Eom.  vii.  4 ;  vi.  8-11. 

Lively  (fwo-av).     Better,  as  Rev.,   literally  rendering  the 


630  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cb.  L 

participle,  living :  a  favorite  word  with  Peter.  See  i.  23 ;  ii. 
4,  5,  24;  iv.  5,  6  ;  and  compare  Acts  ix.  41,  where  Peter  is  the 
prominent  actor ;  and  x.  42,  where  he  is  the  speaker. 

Hope  (eXTTiiSa).  Peter  is  fond  of  this  word  also  (seei.  13,  21 ; 
iii.  5,  15),  which,  in  classical  Greek,  has  the  general  signification 
of  ewpectwncy,  relating  to  evil  as  well  as  to  good.  Thus  Plato 
speaks  of  living  in  evil  hojpe  ("  Republic,"  i.,  330) ;  i.e.,  in  the 
apprehension  of  evil ;  and  Thucvdides,  of  the  hojpe  of  evils  to 
come  ;  i.e.,  the  expectation  or  apprehension.  In  the  New  Tes- 
tament the  word  always  relates  to  a  future  good. 

4.  An  inheritance  {KKrjpovoiiiav).  A  Pauline  word,  from 
K\^po(;,  a  lot,  and  vefjuofiat,,  to  distribute  among  them^selves. 
Hence  an  inheritance  is  originally  a  portion  which  one  receives 
by  lot  in  a  general  distribution.  In  the  New  Testament  the 
idea  of  chance  attaching  to  the  lot  is  eliminated.  It  is  the 
portion  or  heritage  which  one  receives  by  virtue  of  birth  or  by 
special  gift.  So  of  the  vineyard  seized  by  the  wicked  husbaiid- 
men  :  "  Let  us  seize  on  his  inheritance "  (Matt.  xxi.  38) ;  of 
Abraham  in  Canaan  :  "  God  gave  him  none  inheritance " 
(Acts  vii.  5) ;  "  an  eternal  inheritcmce  "  (Heb.  ix.  16). 

Incorruptible,  undefiled,   and  that  fadeth    not  away. 

Note  Peter's  characteristic  multiplication  of  epithets.  Incor- 
ruptihle  {a^^ap-rov).  From  a,  not,  and  ^S^elpa,  to  destroy  or 
corrupt.  JJndefiled  (aiiiavrov).  From  a,  not,  and  /xialvQ),  to 
defile,  though  the  verb  means  especially  to  defile  by  staining, 
as  with  color ;  while  fioKvvas,  also  translated  defile  (1  Cor.  viii.  7) 
is  to  lesmirch,  as  with  mire.  We  might  render  unstained 
though  the  word  is  not  used  with  any  conscious  reference  to 
its  etymology.  That  fadeth  not  away  {afjidpavTov).  Used  by 
Peter  only,  and  but  once.  From  a,  not,  and  fiapaivo/iai,  to 
wither.  The  loveliness  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  described 
as  exempt  fi-om  the  blight  which  attaches  to  earthly  bloom. 
As  between  affiS^aprov,  incorruptible,  and  a/j,dpavTov,  unwiiher- 
ing,  the  former  emphasizes  the  indestructibility  of  substance, 
and  the  latter  of  grace  and  beauty.     The  latter  adjective  ap- 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  631 

pears  in  the  familiar  botanical  name  amaranth.  It  will  be 
observed  that  all  of  these  three  epithets  are  compounded  with 
the  negative  particle  a,  not.  Archbishop  Trench  aptly  remarks 
that  "  it  is  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the  reign  of  sin,  and 
therefore  of  imperfection,  of  decay,  of  death  throughout  this 
whole  fallen  world,  that  as  often  as  we  desire  to  set  forth  the 
glory,  purity,  and  perfection  of  that  other,  higher  world  toward 
which  we  strive,  we  are  almost  inevitably  compelled  to  do  this 
by  the  aid  of  negatives ;  by  the  denying  to  that  higher  order 
of  things  the  leading  features  and  characteristics  of  this."  Com- 
pare Apoc.  xxi.  1,  4,  22,  23,  27 ;  xxii.  3,  5. 

Reserved  (TeTrjfnjfiivrjv).  Lit.,  vjhich  has  heen  reserved,  a 
perfect  participle,  indicating  the  inheritance  as  one  reserved 
through  God's  care  for  his  own  from  the  beginning  down  to 
the  present.  Laid  up  and  Tcept  is  the  idea.  The  verb  signi- 
fies heeping  as  the  result  of  guarding.  Thus  in  John  xvii.  11, 
Christ  says,  "  Jceeja  (r-^pTjaov)  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me ; " 
in  ver.  12,  "  I  kept  them  "  {eTrjpovv) ;  i.e.,  preserved  by  guarding 
them.  "Those  whom  thou  gavest  me  I  gua/rded  {i<jiv\a^a)." 
So  Rev.,  which  preserves  the  distinction.  Similarly,  John 
xiv.  15,  "keep  {rrjp'^crare)  my  commandments  ;"^reser-ye  them 
unbroken  by  careful  watching.  So  Peter  was  delivered  to  the 
soldiers  to  guard  him  {^vXdcrcreiv),  but  he  was  kept  (eTrjpeiTo) 
in  prison  (Acts  xii.  4,  51).  Compare  Col.  i.  5,  where  a  different 
word  is  used ;  airoKet/iivriv,  lit.,  laid  away. 

For  you  (ets).  The  use  of  this  preposition,  instead  of  the 
simpler  dative,  is  graphic  :  with  reference  to  you  ;  with  you  as 
its  direct  object. 

5.  Kept  (^joowpou/ievou?).  A  military  term.  'L\t.,ga/rrisoned. 
Kev.,  guarded.  Compare  2  Cor.  xi.  32,  and  the  beautiful  met- 
aphorical use  of  the  word  at  Philip,  iv.  7,  "  shall  guard  your 
hearts."  The  present  participle  indicates  something  im, progress, 
a  continuous  process  of  protection.  Hence,  lit.,  who  are  heing 
guarded.  "  The  inheritance  is  kept  /  the  heirs  are  gua/rded  " 
(Bengel). 


632  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

By  (eV)  the  power;  through  (Sia)  faith;  unto  {ek)  salva- 
tion. By,  indicating  the  efficient  cause ;  through,  the  second- 
ary agency ;  unto,  the  result. 

Salvation.  Note  the  frequent  occurrence  of  this  word,  w. 
9,  10. 

Ready  {eToifiT/v).  Stronger  than  about  to  he,  or  destined  to 
he,  implying  a  state  of  waiting  or  preparedness,  and  thus  har- 
monizing with  reserved. 

6.  Ye  greatly  rejoice  {ayaXKiaff^e).  The  word  is  always 
employed  in  the  New  Testament  for  great  or  lively  joy.  See 
Matt.  V.  12  ;  Lnke  i.  47 ;  x.  21. 

For  a  season  {6\iyov).  More  literally  and  correctly,  as  Rev., 
for  a  little  while.  Compare  ch.  v.  10.  The  word  is  used  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament  in  this  sense. 

In  heaviness  (Xu7r7;3-ei'Te?).  JAi.,  hewing  heen grieved.  Rev., 
ye  have  heenjout  to  grief. 

Through  (eV).  But  Rev.,  better,  in;  the  preposition  not 
being  instrumental,  but  indicating  the  sjplhere  or  environment  in 
which  the  grief  operates. 

Manifold  (ttolkI'Kok).  Literally  the  word  means  variegated. 
It  is  used  to  describe  the  skin  of  a  leopard,  the  different-colored 
veinings  of  marble,  or  an  embroidgred  robe ;  and  thence  passes 
into  the  meaning  of  changeful,  diversified,  applied  to  the 
changing  months  or  the  variations  of  a  strain  of  music.  Peter 
employs  it  again,  cli.  iv.  10,  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  James  of 
temptations,  as  here  (i.  2).  Compare  7ro\v7rolKi\o<;,  manifold, 
in  Eph.  iii.  10,  applied  to  the  wisdom  of  God.  The  word  gives 
a  vivid  picture  of  the  dwersity  of  the  trials,  emphasizing  this 
idea  rather  than  that  of  their  number,  which  is  left  to  be  in- 
ferred. 

Temptations  {ireipaa-fiol'i).    Better,  trials,  as  in  margin  of 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  633 

Eev.,  since  the  word  includes  more  than  direct  solicitation  to 
evil.  It  embraces  all  that  goes  to  furnish  a  test  of  character. 
Compare  Jas.  i.  2. 

7.  Trial  {8oKi/iiov).  Only  here  and  Jas.  i.  3.  Kev.,  proof. 
The  word  means  a  test.  As  the  means  of  proof,  however,  is 
not  only  the  touchstone  itself,  but  the  trace  of  the  inetal  left 
upon  it,  the  sense  here  is  the  result  of  the  contact  of  faith  with 
trial,  and  hence  the  verification  of  faith.  The  expression  is 
equivalent  to  your  approved ^aith.     Compare  Eom.  ii.  7,  10. 

Than  of  gold.  Omit  the  of,  and  rea,d  than  gold.  The  com- 
parison is  between  the  approved  faith  and  the  gold ;  not  be- 
tween the  faith  and  the  proof  of  the  gold. 

Though  it  be  tried  {SoKifia^o/jiivov).  Kindred  with  BoKifiiov, 
proof,  and  better  rendered  by  Rev.,  proved.  The  verb  is  used 
in  classical  Greek  of  assaying  or  testing  metals,  and  means, 
generally,  to  approve  or  sanction  upon  test.  It  is  radically  akin 
to  Bej(e<r3-a(,,  to  receive,  and  hence  implies  a  proof  with  a  view  to 
determine  whether  a  thing  be  worthy  to  be  received.  Compare 
1  Cor.  iii.  13  ;  Gal.  vi.  4 ;  1  John  iv.  1.  It  thus  differs  from 
ireipd^eiv,  to  try  or  tempt  (see  on  iret.paaiJbol';,  ver.  6),  in  that 
that  verb  indicates  simply  a  putting  to  proof  to  discover  what 
good  or  evil  is  in  a  person  ;  and  from  the  fact  that  such  scrutiny 
so  often  develops  the  existence  and  energy  of  evil,  the  word 
acquired  a  predominant  sense  of  putting  to  the  proof  with  the 
design  or  hope  of  breaking  down  the  subject  under  the  proof — 
in  other  words,  of  temptation  in  the  ordinary  sense.  Hence 
Satan  is  called  6  ireipd^cov,  the  tempter,  Matt.  iv.  3 ;  1  Thess. 
iii.  5.  See  on  Matt.  vi.  13.  Archbishop  Trench  observes  that 
"  hoKifid^eiv  could  not  be  used  of  Satan,  since  he  never  proves 
that  he  may  approve,  nor  tests  that  he  may  accept." 

Might  be  found  (evpeSfj).  In  accord  with  the  preceding 
expressions,  and  indicating  discovery  as  the  result  of  scrutiny. 

Praise  and  glory  and  honor.  Such  is  the  order  of  the 
best  texts,  and  so  Kev.     Ghry  and  honor  often  occur  together 


634  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

in  the  New  Testament,  as  Rom.  ii.  7,  10 ;  1  Tim.  i.  17.     Only 
here  with  praise.     Compare  spirit  of  glory,  ch.  iv.  14. 

8.  Full  of  glory  {BeBo^aafievy).  Lit.,  glorified,  as  Eev.,  in 
margin. 

Receiving  {KOfii^o/ievoi).  The  verb  originally  means  to  take 
care  of  or  provide  for  ,•  thence  to  receive  hospitably  or  enter- 
tain ;  to  hring  home  with  a  view  to  entertaining  or  taking  care 
of.  Hence,  to  carry  awoay  so  as  to  preserve,  to  save,  rescue,  and 
so  to  carry  away  as  a  prize  or  hooty.  Generally,  to  receive  or 
acquire.  Paul  uses  it  of  receiving  the  awards  of  judgment 
(2  Cor.  V.  10  ;  Eph.  vi.  8  ;  Col.  iii.  25).  In  Hebrews  it  is  used 
of  receiving  the  promise  (x.  36 ;  xi.  39),  and  of  Abraham  re- 
ceiving back  Isaac  (xi.  19).  Peter  uses  it  thrice,  and  in  each 
case  of  receiving  the  rewards  of  righteousness  or  of  iniquity. 
See  ch.  v.  4  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

10.  Have  inquired  and  searched  diligently  {i^e^'^Tfjo-av — 
i^rjpevvTja-av).  He  v.,  properly,  renders  the  aorists  sought  and 
searched  diligently.  The  e'f  in  composition  has  the  force  of 
out,  searched  out,  and  is  rendered  by  diligently. 

Sought.  Used  of  Esau's  seeking  carefully  for  a  place  of 
repentance,  in  Heb.  xii.  17. 

Searched.  Used  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Com- 
pare Septuagint,  1  Sam.  xxiii.  23,  of  Saul's  searching  out  David. 

11.  Did  signify  (iB^Xov).  Imperfect  tense:  better,  was  de- 
claring, all  along  through  the  prophetic  age,  in  successive 
prophets.     See  the  same  verb  in  1  Cor.  iii.  13  ;  2  Pet.  i.  14. 

When  it  testified  beforehand  {Trpofiaprvpo/Mevov).  Only 
here  in  New  Testament. 

Of  Christ  {ek  Xpta-rbv).  Lit.,  unto  Christ.  So  Eev.,  in 
margin.     The  sufferings  destined  for  Christ,  as  in  ver.  10  he 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  635 

speaks  of  the  grace,  et's  v/ia?,  unto  you  y  i.e.,  destined  to  come 
unto  you.  Peter  was  especial  I3'  concerned  to  sliow  that  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  were  in  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  because  it 
was  a  subject  of  dispute  with  the  Jews  whether  the  Christ  was 
to  suffer  (Acts  iii.  18  ;  xxvi.  22,  23). 

The  glory  (t^?  h6^a<i).  Kev.,  correctly,  the  glories.  The 
plural  is  used  to  indicate  the  successive  steps  of  his  glorifica- 
tion ;  the  glory  of  his  resurrection  and  ascension,  of  the  last 
judgment,  and  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

12.  Did  minister  (8(7;k6i/owi').  Imperfect  tense,  were  OT^m's- 
termg.  See  on  Mark  ix.  35.  The  term  is  applicable  to  any 
kind  of  service,  official  or  not.     Compare  2  Cor.  iii.  3. 

Desire  {iiril^vfiovcnv).  The  word  commonly  denotes  intense 
desire.  It  is  used  by  Christ  in  expressing  his  wish  to  eat  the 
passover  (Luke  xxii.  15) ;  of  the  prodigal's  desire  to  satisfy  his 
hunger  with  the  husks  (Luke  xv.  16) ;  and  of  the  flesh  lasting 
against  the  spirit  (Gal.  v.  17). 

To  look  into  {irapaKV'^ai).  A  very  graphic  word,  meaning 
to  stocfp  sideways  {irapd).  Used  by  Aristophanes  to  picture  the 
attitude  of  a  bad  harp-player.  Here  it  portrays  one  stooping 
and  stretching  the  neck  to  gaze  on  some  wonderful  sight.  It 
occurs  in  Jas.  i.  25,  describing  him  who  looks  into  the  per- 
fect law  of  liberty  as  into  a  mirror ;  and  in  Luke  xxiv.  12 ; 
John  XX.  5,  11,  of  Peter  and  John  and  Mary  stooping  and  look- 
ing into  the  empty  tomb.  Possibly  the  memory  of  this  inci- 
dent unconsciously  suggested  the  word  to  Peter.  The  phrase 
illustrates  Peter's  habitual  emphasis  upon  the  testimony  of 
sight  (see  Introduction).  Bengel  acutely  notes  the  hint  in  irapa, 
ieside,  that  the  angels  contemplate  the  work  of  salvation /toot 
without,  as  spectators  and  not  as  participants.  Compare  Heb. 
ii.  16  ;  Eph.  iii.  10. 

13.  Gird  up  (aya^Mo-a/iewt).  JAi.,  hcuuing  girded  up.  Used 
here  only.     The  metaphor  is  suggested  by  the  girding  up  of 


636  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

the  loose  eastern  robes  preparatory  to  running  or  other  exertion. 
Perhaps  recalling  the  words  of  Christ,  Luke  xii.  35.  Christ's 
call  is  a  call  to  active  service.  There  is  a  fitness  in  the  figure 
as  addressed  to  sojourners  and  jnlgrims  (ch.  i.  1 ;  ii.  11),  who 
must  be  always  ready  to  move. 

Mind  {Siavola<;).     See  on  Mark  xii.  30. 

Be  sober  {vy<f3ovre^).  Lit.,  being  sober.  Primarily,  in  a  phys- 
ical sense,  as  opposed  to  excess  in  drink,  but  passing  into  the 
general  sense  of  self-control  and  equa/iiimity. 

Hope  to  the  end  (jeXeiag  iXiria-aTe).  Better,  as  Rev.,  set 
your  hope  perfectly :  wholly  and  unchangeably  ;  without  doubt 
or  despondency. 

That  is  to  be  brought  (t^z/  ^epoiihrfv).  Lit,  which  is  being 
brought,  as  Rev.,  in  margin.  The  object  of  hope  is  already  on 
the  way. 

14.  Obedient  children  (reKi/a  uTraKo?)?).  Literally,  and  more 
correctly,  as  Rev.,  children  of  obedience.  See  on  Mark  iii.  17. 
The  Christian  is  represented  as  related  to  the  motive  principle 
of  his  life  as  a  child  to  a  parent. 

Fashioning  yourselves  {a-va-xw^Ti^^ofievoi).  See  on  Matt, 
xvii.  2 ;  and  compare  Rom.  xii.  2,  the  only  other  passage  where 
the  word  occurs.  As  o'XV/^"'  is  the  outward,  ohangeahle  fashion, 
as  contrasted  with  what  is  intrinsic,  the  word  really  eariies  a 
warning  against  conformity  to  something  changeful,  and  there- 
fore illusory. 

15.  As  he  which  hath  called  you  is  holy  (/cara  rov  «a\e- 
a-avra  vfm<;  &/u)v).  As  of  the  A.  V.  is  according  to,  or  after  the 
pattern  of;  and  holy  is  to  be  taken  as  a  personal  name ;  the  which 
hath  called  being  added  for  definition,  and  in  order  to  strengthen 
the  exhortation.  Render,  therefore,  after  the  pattern  of  the 
Holy  One  who  calledyou.  So,  nearly.  Rev.,  in  margin.  A  sim- 
ilar construction  occurs  2  Pet.  ii.  1 :  the  Lord  that  bought  them. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE   OF  PETER.  637 

Conversation  (avaarpotfifi).  A  favorite  word  with  Peter; 
used  eight  times  in  the  two  epistles.  Fromava,  ■wp,  and  arpicjxio, 
to  turn.  The  process  of  development  in  the  meaning  of  the 
word  is  interesting.  1.  A  turning  upside  down.  2.  A  turning 
about  or  wheeling.  3.  Turning  about  in  a  place,  going  back 
and  forth  there  about  one's  business ;  and  so,  4,  one's  mode  of 
life  or  conduct.  This  is  precisely  the  idea  in  the  word  conversa- 
tion (Lat.,  conversare,  to  turn  round)  which  was  used  when  the 
A.  V.  was  made,  as  the  common  term  for  general  deportment  or 
behavior,  and  was,  therefore,  a  correct  rendering  of  dvaarpocp^. 
So  Latimer  ("Sermons"):  "We  are  not  bound  to  follow  the 
conversations  or  doings  of  the  saints."  And  Shakspeare,  2 
Hen.  lY.,  v.,  5  : 

"  But  all  are  banished  till  their  conversation 
Appear  more  wise  and  modest  to  the  world." 

Our  later  limitation  of  the  meaning  to  the  interchange  of  talk 
makes  it  expedient  to  change  the  rendering,  as  Eev.,  to  manner 
of  living. 

17.  If  ye  call  on  the  Father — ^judgeth.  More  correctly, 
Eev.,  If  ye  call  on  him  as  Father;  the  point  being  that  God  is 
to  be  invoked,  not  only  as  Father,  but  as  Judge. 

Without  respect  of  persons  [d'n-poa-wTroX'i^/j.'n-Tax;).  Here 
only.  Peter,  however,  uses  irpoa-wrroKrijM'irTr]';,  a  respecter  of 
persons.  Acts  x.  34,  which  whole  passage  should  be  compared 
with  this.  Paul  and  James  also  use  the  kindred  word  irpo- 
(TmTToXTiiJL'^la,  respect  of  persons.  See  Eom.  ii.  11 ;  Jas.  ii.  1. 
James  has  the  verb  irpoacoTroKrjfjLirriw,  to  have  respect  of  persons. 
The  constituents  of  the  compound  word,  -n-poa-coirov,  the  counte- 
nance, and  \afj,^dvai,  to  receive,  are  found  in  Gal.  ii.  6 ;  and  the 
word  is  the  Old-Testament  formula  to  accept  or  to  raise  the  face 
of  another ;  opposed  to  making  the  countenance  fall  (Job  xxix. 
24 ;  Gen.  iv.  5).  Hence,  to  receive  Jcindly,  or  looTc  favorably 
upon  one  (Gen.  xix.  21 ;  xxxii.  20,  etc.).  In  the  Old  Testament 
it  is,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  observes,  "  a  neutral  expression  in- 


638  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

Yolving  no  subsidiary  notion  of  partiality,  and  is  much  oftener 
found  in  a  good  than  in  a  bad  sense.  When  it  becomes  an  in- 
dependent Greek  phrase,  however,  the  bad  sense  attaches  to  it, 
owing  to  the  secondai'y  meaning  of  "Trpoamirov,  a  Tnask  ;  so  that 
irpbaa-nov  Xajx^dveuv  signifies  to  regard  the  external  circum- 
stances of  a  man,  his  rank,  wealth,  etc.,  as  opposed  to  his  real, 
intrinsic  character." 

Sojourning  {TrapoiKias:).     Conipare  sojourners,  ver.  1. 

18.  Ye  were  redeemed  (eXvr/jta^Te).  The  verb  occurs 
only  in  two  other  passages,  Luke  xxiv.  21 ;  Tit.  ii.  14.  It  car- 
ries the  idea  of  a  ransom-j9«ce  {Xvrpov,  from  Xvco,  to  loose). 

With  silver  or  gold  {apyvpia  rj  ^puo-i&j).  Lit.,  with  silver  or 
gold  money  /  the  words  meaning,  respectively,  a  small  coin  of 
silver  or  of  gold. 

Conversation.     'S^y.,  manner  of  lAfe.     See  on  ver.  15. 

Received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers  {irarpoirapa- 
SoTov).  A  clumsy  translation  ;  improved  by  Rev.,  handed  down 
from  your  fathers.     The  word  is  peculiar  to  Peter. 

19.  But  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  The  word 
XpttTTov,  of  Christ,  stands  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  and  is  em- 
phatic. Eender,  as  Rev.,  with  jfrecious  blood  as  of  a  lamb,  etc., 
even  the  blood  of  Christ. 

Lamb.  Peculiarly  appropriate  from  Peter.  See  John  i. 
36-42.     The  reference  is  to  a  sacrificial  lamb. 

Without  blemish  {ap,(oij,ov).  Representing  the  Old-Testa- 
ment phrase  for  absence  of  physical  defect  (Exod.  xii.  5 ; 
Lev.  xxii.  20.     Compare  Heb.  ix.  14). 

Without  spot  (atrrrlXov).  .  Compare  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  Jas.  i. 
27  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  14.     In  each  case  in  a  moral  sense. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  639 

20.  Foreordained  [irpoeyvoja-fiivov).  Lit.,  and  hettev,  fore- 
hnown,  as  Rev. 

Manifested  {(pavepaSevro^).  Observe  the  difference  in  tense. 
Foreknown  is  the  perfect  participle,  has  been  known  from  all 
eternity  down  to  thejyresent :  "  in  reference  to  the  place  held  and 
continuing  to  he  held  by  Christ  in  the  divine  mind  "  (Salmond). 
Manifested  is  the  aorist  participle,  pointing  to  a  definite  act  at 
a  given  time. 

In  these  last  times  (eV  icr-xarov  rSivxpovcov).  Lit.,  as Kev., 
at  the  end  of  the  times. 

21.  Which  raised.     Compare  Rom.  iv.  24. 

That  your  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God.  Some  ren- 
der, that  your  faith  should  also  he  hope  toward  God. 

22.  Purified  {rf/viic6re<i).  The  Septuagint  translation  of  the 
Old-Testament  technical  term  for  the  purification  of  the  people 
and  priests  (Josh.  iii.  5  ;  1  Chron.  xv.  3  2 ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  5).  Also, 
of  the  separation  from  wine  and  strong  drink  by  the  Nazarite 
(I^um.  vi.  2-6).  In  this  ceremonial  sense,  John  xi.  55 ;  Acts 
xxi.  24,  26  ;  xxiv.  18.  In  the  moral  sense,  as  here,  Jas.  iv.  8  ; 
1  John  iii.  3.     Compare  Ko^apiaa';,  jpurifying,  Acts  xv.  9. 

Obeying  {{nraicoy).  Rev.,  obedience.  A  peculiarly  New 
Testament  term  unknown  in  classical  Greek.  In  the  Septuagint 
only  2  Sam.  xxii.  36  ;  rendered  in  A.  V.  gentleness.  Rev.,  con- 
descension, in  margin. 

Unfeigned  (avvTroicptTov).  'A,  not,  inroKpir^^,  actor.  The 
latter  word  is  from  inroKpLvea^at,  to  answer  on  the  stage,  and 
hence  to  play  a  paH  or  to  act.  A  hypocrite  is,  therefore,  an 
actor. 

With  a  pure  heart  (eV  icaJ^apa<;  Kap8ia<;).  The  best  texts  re- 
ject KO^apa'i,  pure.    Render,  therefore,  as  Rev.,/TOm  the  heart. 


640  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

Fervently  {eKTevm).  Used  by  Peter  only,  and  only  in  this 
passage.  He  uses  the  kindred  adjective  eKxei/j;?,  without  ceas- 
ing, in  Acts  xii.  5,  where  the  narrative  probably  came  from 
him,  and  also  at  ch.  iv.  8  ;  '■'■  fervent  charity."  The  words  are 
compounded  with  the  verb  Tea/w,  to  stretch,  and  signify  in- 
tense strain  ;  feeling  on  the  rack. 

23.  Being  born  again  (az/a7676i/i/77/iei'ot).  'Rev.,  having heen 
begotten  again.     Compare  Jas.  i.  18. 

Of  (e'/t)  seed — by  (Sta)  the  word.  Note  the  difference  in  the 
prepositions ;  the  former  denoting  the  origin  or  source  of  life, 
the  latter  the  medium  through  which  it  imparts  itself  to  the 
nature. 

Word  of  God  {Xoyov  Qeov).  The  gospel  of  Christ.  Com- 
pare ver.  25,  and  Peter's  words.  Acts  x.  36.  Also,  Eph.  i.  13 ; 
Col.  i.  5 ;  Jas.  i.  18.  Not  the  _personal  Word,  as  the  term  is 
employed  by  John.  Nevertheless,  the  connection  and  relation 
of  the  personal  with  the  revealed  word  is  distinctly  recognized. 
"  In  the  New  Testament  we  trace  a  gradual  ascent  from  (a)  the 
concrete  message  as  conveyed  to  man  by  personal  agency  through 
Q))  the  Word,  the  revelation  of  God  to  man  which  the  message 
embodies,  forming,  as  it  were,  its  life  and  soul,  to  (c)  the  Woed, 
who,  being  God,  not  only  reveals  but  imparts  himself  to  us,  and 
is  formed  in  us  thereby "  (Scott,  on  Jas.  i.  18,  "  Speaker's 
Commentary  "). 

Seed  (o-TTopay).  Nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Pri- 
marily, the  sowing  of  seed. 

24.  Of  man.  Following  the  reading  dv^pwTrov,  in  the  Septu- 
agint,  Isa.  xl.  6,  which  Peter  quotes  here.  But  the  best  texts 
read  avrrj^,  of  it,  or,  as  Rev.,  thereof. 

Withereth  {i^r)pdvSr)).  Literally,  the  writer  puts  it  as  in  a 
narrative  of  some  quick  and  startling  event,  by  the  use  of  the 
aorist  tense  :  withered  was  the  grass.  Similarly,  the  flower  fdl 
{e^eTrecrev).     Lit.,  fell  off,  the  force  of  e«. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  641 

25.  Word  of  the  Lord  {pfjfia  Kvpiov).  Compare  ver.  23, 
and  note  that  pfffia  is  used  for  word,  instead  of  \6709 ;  and 
Kvpio<i,  Lord,  instead  of  ©eo?,  Qod,  which  is  the  reading  of  the 
Hebrew,  and  of  most  copies  of  the  Septuagint.  Tlie  substitu- 
tion indicates  that  Peter  identifies  Jesus  with  God.  No  very 
satisfactory  reason  can  be  given  for  the  change  from  \o'7o?  to 
pr\pja.  It  may  be  due  to  the  Greek  translation,  which  Peter 
follows. 

CHAPTER  II. 

1.  All  i^aaav — irmna).     Lit.,  every,  or  all  manner  of. 

Evil-speaking  {KaTaXaXi,d<;).  Lit.,  speakings  agamst.  A 
rare  word.     Only  here  and  2  Cor.  xii.  20. 

2.  Newborn  {apTir/ewqTa).  Peculiar  to  Peter,  and  only  in 
this  passage.     Lit.,  born  hw.%just  nov)  {dpri). 

Babes  (ySjoe^).  The  word  signifying  peculiarly  a  child  at 
birth,  or  of  tender  years.  See  Luke  xviii.  15  ;  Acts  vii.  19.  Of 
the  infant  Jesus,  Luke  ii.  12, 16.  Here  marking  the  recency 
of  Christian  life  in  the  converts  addressed. 

Desire  (inrnroS^ffaTe).  The  compound  is  intensive ;  ea/rnesily 
desire.     So  Rev.,  long  for.     Compare  Philip,  ii.  26. 

The  sincere  milk  of  the  word  {toXo^hcov  iihoKovrfaka). 
The  A.  V.  has  rendered  \o^i,kov,  of  the  word;  but  wrongly.  It 
describes  the  quality  of  the  milk  as  spiritual  or  rational,  as  op- 
posed to  literal  and  ceremonial.  In  the  only  other  place  where 
it  occurs  (Horn.  xii.  1)  it  is  rendered  reasonable  y  which  Rev. 
gives  here  in  margin. 

Sincere  (aSoXov)  is  another  epithet  of  the  milk.  'Lit.,  with- 
out guile,  unadulterated.  Compare  guile  in  ver.  1.  Laying 
aside  guile,  desire  the  guileless  milk,  etc.  Plence  Rev.  renders 
the  whole  passage.  Long  for  the  spiritual  milk  which  is  with- 
out guile. 

41 


642  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  II 

That  ye  may  grow  thereby.  The  best  texts  add,  unto  sal- 
vation. 

3.  Ye  have  tasted  {ijeva-aaSe).  Aorist  tense.  More  liters 
all}',  ye  tasted.  "  A  taste  excites  the  appetite  "  (Bengel).  Com. 
pare  long  for,  ver.  2,  and  Ps.  xxxiv.  8. 

Gracious  (^j^pi/o-To?).  Actively  benignant,  "  as  distinguished 
from  other  adjectives  whieli  describe  goodness  on  the  side  of 
its  sterling  worth  and  its  gentleness  "  (Salmond).  See  on  Matt, 
xi.  30. 

4.  Coming  (Trpoa-ep^^of^evoi).  Indicating  a  close  (Trpo?)  and 
an  habitual  (present  participle)  approach  and  an  intimate  asso- 
ciation. 

A  living  stone  (XiSoi/ faji/Ta).  Omitasunto.  So  Eev.  The 
words  are  in  apposition  with  whom  (Christ).  Compare  Peter's 
nse  of  the  same  word,  stone,  in  Acts  iv.  11,  and  Matt.  xxi.  42. 
It  is  not  the  word  which  Christ  uses  as  a  personal  name  for 
Peter  (IleTpo?)  ;  so  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  infer  that  Peter 
was  thinking  of  his  own  new  name. 

Disallowed  (anohehoKLiMWfievov).  Rev.,  rejected.  See  on 
the  simple  verb,  ch.  i.  7.  The  word  indicates  rejection  after 
trial. 

Of  God  {Trapa  ©em).  Of  in  the  A.  V.  is  equivalent  to  by  ; 
but  Trapd  has  a  stronger  sense,  implying  the  absolute  power 
of  decisive  choice  which  is  with  God.  Render,  as  Rev.,  with 
God;  i.e.,  God  being  judge  ;  and  compare  Matt.  xix.  26  ;  Rom. 
ii.  11. 

Precious  {evTifiov).  At  ch.  i.  19  {precious  blood)  another 
word  is  used  {Ti/iLo<;),  denoting  essential  preciousness.  The  word 
here  indicates  the  preciousness  as  recognized  or  held  in  honor. 

5.  Living  stones— built  up— a  spiritual  house.  It  seems 
as  though  Peter  must  have  had  in  mind  the  conception  em- 


Ch.  II.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  643 

bodied  in  Christ's,  commission  to  him,  of  a  building  erected 
upon  a  rock.  The  metaphor  of  a  house  built  of  living  stones 
is  violent,  and  sufficiently  characteristic  of  Peter ;  yet  it  pict- 
ures, in  a  very  striking  way,  the  union  of  stability,  growth,  and 
activity  in  the  ideal  church.  Kote  the  transition  from  habes 
growing  (ver.  2)  to  stones  huilt  up.  But,  as  Salmond  remarks, 
"  In  Paul  we  have  even  bolder  instances  of  apparent  confusion 
of  metaphors,  as  when,  in  one  breath,  he  represents  believers 
as  at  once  walking,  rooted,  and  built  v/p  in  Christ  (Col.  ii.  6,  7). 

To  offer  up  {avever^KaC).  The  usual  Old-Testament  (Septua- 
gint)  term  for  offering  of  sacrifice.  Lit.,  to  bring  wp  to  the  altar. 
Compare  Heb.  xiii.  15.  The  force  of  ava,  up,  appears  in  the 
fact  of  the  altar  being  raised.  The  word  is  often  used  of  carry- 
ing from  a  lower  to  a  higher  place.  Thus  Matt.  xvii.  1 ;  Luke 
xxiv.  51.  In  this  sense  ver.  24  of  this  chapter  is  suggestive, 
where  it  is  said  that  Christ  hare  (dpijve'yKev)  our  sins :  carried 
them  up  to  the  cross.     See  note  there. 

6.  It  is  contained  (vrepte^^et).  From  irepl,  roundabout,  and 
ep^Q),  to  hold.     Hence,  to  contain  or  comprehend.     So  Luke  v. 

9,  he  was  astonished  (5a/x/3o?  avrbv  irepiea'^ev) ;  lit.,  astonish- 
ment held  him,  encompassed.  Also,  Acts  xxiii.  25,  "  He  wrote  a 
letter  after  this  ma/nner  {'irepd')(pvcrav  rov  tvttov  tovtov)  ;  lit., 
containing  thisforrn.  The  verb  here  is  impersonal.  The  kin- 
dred word  "jrepifyyfi  occurs  only  in  Acts  viii.  32,  rendered  j?Zace  ," 
i.e.,  the  passage  of  scripture  :  either  the  contents  of  the  passage 
or  the  section  of  the  book  circumscribed  or  marked  off. 

In  the  scripture  {iv  <ypa(^).  The  best  texts  reject  the  ar- 
ticle.    Fpaxfyij  means  a.  passage  of  scripture.     See  on  Mark  xii. 

10.  Hence  Rev.,  in  scripture  /  margin,  in  a  scripture. 

Behold  I  lay,  etc.     See  Eom.  ix.  33. 
Precious.     See  on  ver.  4. 

7.  He  is  precious  (^  rtfirj).  Wrong.  Render,  as  Rev.,  For 
you  therefore  which  ieUeve  is  the predousness  {honor,  in  margin). 


644  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  II. 

Is  made  the  head  of  the  corner  {iyevrjSi]  ek  /ce^aX^p 
yavia^).  Eev.,  correctly,  '^was  made."  The  preposition  ek, 
-unto,  carrying  the  idea  of  coming  unto  the  place  of  honor,  is 
not  rendered  in  A.  V.  or  Kev.  Lit.,  it  would  be,  was  made 
or  became  unto  the  head,  etc. 

9.  Generation  {yevo<;).  Better,  Eev.,  race :  a  body  with  a 
common  life  and  descent. 

Nation  (e^i/o?).  People  {\a6<;).  The  distinction  between 
these  three  words  cannot  be  closely  pressed.  jRace  emphasizes 
the  idea  of  descent  j  nation,  of  comrmMiity.  Aa6<i,  ^people,  oc- 
curring very  often  in  the  Septuagint,  is  used  there  mostly  of 
the  Israelites,  the  chosen  people.  The  same  use  is  also  fre- 
quent in  the  New  Testament ;  but  it  is  employed  in  a  more 
general  sense,  as  by  Luke  ii.  10.  It  would  seem  that  this  idea, 
however,  in  its  metaphorical  and  Christian  application,  the 
chosen  Israel  of  God,  directed  Peter's  choice  of  the  word,  since 
he  adds,  a  people  for  Gods  own  possession. 

Peculiar  (ei?  Trepiiroirja-iv).  Lit.,  a  people  for  acquisition. 
Eev.,  a  people  for  God's  own  possession.  Wye,  a  people  of 
purchasing.  Cranmer,  a  people  which  are  won.  The  word 
occurs  1  Thess.  v.  9,  rendered  obtaining  (Kev.) ;  Eph.  i.  14, 
Gods  own  possession  (Eev.).  See  Isa.  xliii.  21  (Sept.),  where 
the  kindred  verb  occurs :  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  my- 
self {TrepieTToirja-d/irjp). 

Shew  forth  (i^ayyelXijTe).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Proclaim,  tell  abroad. 

The  praises  (ra?  dperhi).  Lit.,  the  virtues.  So  Eev.,  eaj- 
cellencies.  The  word  occurs  Isa.  xliii.  21  (Sept.,  see  above),  and 
is  rendered  praise.  See,  also,  Isa.  xlii.  12  (Sept.),  "  Declare  his 
praise  (ajoera?)  in  the  islands." 

10.  People  (Xab'i).  See  on  ver.  9,  and  note  the  choice  of  the 
term  here.     A  people  of  God.     Compare  Eom.  ix.  25,  26. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  645 

11.  Beloved  {ar/airrjToi).  A  favorite  term  with  Peter,  oc- 
curring eight  times  in  the  epistles.  See  the  phrase,  our  heloved 
Ba/rnahas  and  Paul,  Acts  xv.  25,  in  the  letter  sent  by  the 
council  at  Jerusalem  to  the  Gentile  Christians,  the  account  of 
which,  doubtless,  came  from  Peter.  Compare  our  heloved 
irother  Paul,  2  Pet.  iii.  15. 

Strangers  {irapolKovi).  Rev.,  sojourners.  Compare  ch.  i. 
17,  "  the  time  of  your  sojourning  {irapoiKla'iy' 

Which  (ami'69).  The  compound  pronoun  denotes  a  class, 
of  that  kind  which,  classifying  all  fleshly  desires  in  one  category. 

12.  Conversation.     Rev.,  behavior.     See  on  ch.  i.  15. 

Whereas  (eV  eS).  Rev.,  correctly,  wherein;  in  the  matter  in 
which. 

They  speak  against  {KaraXaXova-iv).  Compare  evil-speaJo- 
ings,  ver.  1,  and  Acts  xxviii.  22. 

Which  they  shall  behold  (eVo'n-TevoyTes).  Rev.,  'beholding. 
Used  by  Peter  only,  here  and  ch.  iii.  2.  The  kindred  noun 
eiroiTTr]'},  an  eye-witness,  occurs  only  at  2  Pet.  i.  16.  It  is  a 
technical  word,  meaning  one  who  was  admitted  to  the  highest 
degree  of  initiation  in  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.  Here  it  con- 
veys the  idea  oi.  personal  witness  ;  behold  with  their  own  eyes. 

Evil-doers  {KUKO'Kot.&v).  The  word  occurs  four  times  in 
Peter,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament  except  John 
xviii.  30,  where  it  is  applied  by  the  priests  to  Christ  himself. 

Visitation  (eVicr/coTrTjs).  The  radical  idea  of  the  word  is  that 
of  observing  or  insj>ecting.  Hence  eTrtWoTro?,  an  overseer  or 
hishop.  Visiting  grows  naturally  out  of  this,  as  visitare  from 
visere,  to  looTc  at  attentively.  See  Introduction,  on  Peter's  em- 
phasis upon  sight ;  and  compare  behold^  in  this  verse.  The 
"  day  of  visitation  "  is  the  day  of  looking  upon :  "  When  God 


646  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAJIBNT.  [Ch.  IL 

shall  look  upon  these  wanderers,  as  a  pastor  over  his  flock,  and 
shall  become  the  overlooJcer  or  hishqp  of  their  souls  "  (ver.  26, 
Lumby). 

13.  Submit  yourselves  (vTTOToyijTe).  'Re.Y.^besu'bject.  See 
Kom.  xiii.  1  sq. 

Ordinance  of  man  {av^pmirivrj  ktLctgi).  Lit,  to  every  huma/n 
creation  or  institution.     Rev.,  creation,  in  margin. 

King.     The  emperor,  styled  king  by  Greek  writers. 

14.  Sent  ('Trefnrofiivoi';).  The  present  participle.  In  the 
habit  of  being  sent :  sent  from  time  to  time. 

By  him.     The  king  ;  not  the  Lord. 

Punishment  {iKBiKTjaiv).  ITot  strong  enough,  better,  ven- 
geance, as  Rev.     Compare  Luke  xviii.  7 ;  Rom.  xii.  19. 

Them  that  do  well  {wya3o7roia)v).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. 

15.  Put  to  silence  {jtinovv).  A  very  graphic  word,  meaning 
to  muzzle  or  gag.  Compare  1  Cor.  ix.  9  ;  1  Tim.  v.  18.  See  on 
Matt.  xxii.  12. 

Ignorance  {dyvma-iav).  In  classical  Greek  it  is  an  ignorance 
arising  from  not  coming  into  contact  with  the  person  or  thing 
to  be  known.  It  occurs  only  once  again  in  the  New  Testament, 
1  Cor.  XV.  34.  Here  it  signifies  not  want  of  acquaintance,  but 
of  understanding/  a  state  of  ignorance. 

Of  foolish  men  (t&v  a^povmv  dvBpmTrtov).  Of  the  foolish 
men  ;  the  article  referring  to  those  just  mentioned,  who  speak 
against  them  as  evil-doers. 

16.  Using  (ejj;oi'Te5).    Lit,  having  or  holding. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  647 

Cloke  (iinKdKvfifia).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit., 
a  veil.  The  idea  is  that  of  using  Christian  freedom  as  a  mask 
for  ungodly  license.  Pa'ul  uses  the  kindred  verb  (Rom.  iv.  7) 
of  the  covering  of  sins.     On  the  sentiment,  compare  Gal.  v.  13. 

18.  Servants  {oiKerat).  Household  servants.  So  Rev.,  in 
margin.  !N^ot  a  common  term  in  the  New  Testament,  occur- 
ring only  in  three  other  passages :  Luke  xvi.  13  ;  Acts  x.  7 ; 
Rom.  xiv.  4.  Some  suppose  that  Peter  intended  to  cover  by  it 
freedmen  and  other  dependants  in  the  household,  or  that  he 
uses  it  with  a  conciliatory  purpose,  as  presenting  the  slave  in 
closer  relation  with  the  family. 

Gentle  (i-TneiKeaiv).  A  common  derivation  of  this  word  is 
from  eiKco,  to  yield:  Hence  the  meaning,  mild,  yielding,  in- 
dulgent.  But  the  true  derivation  is  from  et/eo?,  reasonable; 
and  the  word  implies  rather  the  not  ieing  unduly  rigorous ; 
"Wherein  not  strictness  of  legal  right,  but  consideration  for 
one  another,  is  the  rule  of  practice  "  (Alford).  Compare  Philip, 
iv.  5,  where,  for  moderation  {to  iirieiKh).  Rev.  gives  forbear- 
anoe,  with  gentleness  in  margin.  According  to  Aristotle,  the 
word  stands  in  contrast  with  aKpi^oB(Kaio<;,  one  who  is  exact- 
ingly  just,  as  one  who  is  satisfied  with  less  than  his  due. 

Froward  (o-koKiok).  Lit.,  crooked.  See  Luke  iii.  5.  Peter 
uses  the  word  in  Acts  ii.  40  (untoward) ;  and  Paul,  in  Philip, 
ii.  15  (crooked).  The  word  froward  is  Anglo-Sa,xonfream-ward 
or firom-ward,the  opposite  of  to-ward.  (See  untoward,  above.) 
Thus  Ben  Jon  son  : 

"  Those  tliat  are  froward  to  an  appetite ;  " 

i.e.,  averse.     Compare  the  phrases  to- God-ward  (2  Cor.  iii.  4); 
to-us-ward. 

19.  Conscience  toward  God  ((TvvelZrjaiv  &eov).  Rev.,  in 
margin,  conscience  of  God.  The  idea  is  not  conscientiousness 
in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  the  conscious  sense  of  one's  relation  to 
God ;    his  consciousness  of  God.    Thus  one  suffers  patiently, 


648  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  II 

not  from  a  conscientious  sense  of  duty,  but  from  an  inner  con- 
sciousness of  his  relation  to  God  as  a  son,  and  to  Christ  as  a 
joint-heir,  which  involves  his  suffering' with  him  no  less  than 
his  being  glorified  with  him. 

20.  What  glory  {-n-otov  KXeosi).  Lit.,  what  kind  of  glory. 
This  word  for  glory  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament. 

Buffeted  {K6\ae}>i^6fievoi).  See  Matt.  xxvi.  67  :  struck  with 
the  fist.  This  whole  passage,  vv.  19-24,  bears  the  mark  of 
Peter's  memories  of  the  scene  of  Christ's  last  sufferings  (see 
Introduction) — the  blows  of  the  servants,  the  scorn  of  the  high- 
priest,  the  silent  submission  of  Jesus,  the  cross,  the  stripes. 

21.  Leaving  {viroXL/xTrdvav).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

An  example  {v-n-oypafi^bv).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. A  graphic  word,  meaning  a  copy  set  by  writing-masters 
for  their  pupils.  Some  explain  it  as  a  copy  of  characters  over 
which  the  student  is  to  trace  the  lines. 

Follow  (iiraKoXovS^crrjTe).  Lit.,  follow  upon.  The  com- 
pound verb  implies  close  following.  From  writers  and  j>ainters, 
the  metaphor  changes  now  to  a  guide. 

22.  Found  (evpe^).  Stronger  than  the  simple  was,  and  in- 
dicating a  guilelessness  which  had  stood  the  test  of  scrutiny. 
Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  60 ;  John  xviii.  38 ;  xix.  4,  6.  Christ's 
sinlessness  had  also  stood  the  test  of  Peter's  intimacy. 

23.  Reviled — again  {avTekoiBopet).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament. 

Committed  himself  {-n-apeSlSov).  But  this  gives  a  reflexive 
force  to  the  verb  which  has  no  parallel.  Commentators  are 
divided,  some  supplying  Ms  cause,  as  Eev.,  in  margin  ;  others, 
his  judgment ;  others,  his  revilers.     Better,  the  subject  of 'the 


Ch.  m.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  649 

contest — his  msults  and  injuries.     Salmond  renders,  hut  left  it 
to  him,  etc. 

Judgeth  righteously.  ComT^are  without  respect  of  persons, 
ch.  i.  17. 

24.  Bare  (dv^veyKev).  See  on  ver.  5.  Bare  wp  to  the  cross, 
as  to  an  altar,  and  offered  himself  thereon. 

The  tree  {J^vKov).  Lit.,  wood.  Peter  uses  the  same  pecu- 
liar term  for  the  cross.  Acts  v.  30 ;  x.  39. 

Being  dead  {aTroyevo/jievoi,).  Rev.,  more  strictly,  having  died. 
Used  here  only  in  the  New  Testament.  The  rendering  of  the 
verb  can  be  given  only  in  a  clumsy  way,  homing  iecome  off  unto 
sins  ;  not  hemming  separate  from  sins,  but  having  ceased  to  exist 
as  regards  them.     Compare  Eom.  vi.  18. 

Stripes  (/xcoXwTTt).  'L\\,.,hruise.  So  Rev.,  in  margin.  Only 
here  in  N^ew  Testament ;  meaning  a  hloody  wale  which  arises 
under  a  blow.  "  Such  a  sight  we  feel  sure,  as  we  read  this 
descriptive  passage,  St.  Peter's  eyes  beheld  on  the  body  of  his 
Master,  and  the  flesh  so  dreadfully  mangled  made  the  disfigured 
form  appear  in  his  eyes  like  one  single  bruise  "  (Lumby). 

25.  For  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray  (^re  yap  &<; 
irpo^ara  7r\avco/j,evoi,) ;  i.e.,  as  commonly  understood,  ye  were 
like  straying  sheep.  But  the  ye  were  should  be  construed  with 
the  participle  going  astray,  the  verb  and  the  participle  together 
denoting  habitual  action  or  condition.  Render,  as  Rev.,  ye 
were  going  ast/ray  like  sheep.     See  on  Mark  xii.  24. 

Bishop.     See  on  ver.  12. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Likewise  (6ytio/«5).  'Rqy.,  in  like  manner;  better,  because 
likewise  in  popular  speech  has,  wrongly,  the  sense  of  also. 
Peter  means  in  like  manner  with  servants  (ch.  ii.  18). 


650  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Ill 

Be  in  subjection  (ytroraffffbixevaC).  Lit.,beingin  suijection, 
or  submitting  yourselves;  the  same  word  which  is  used  of  the 
submission  of  servants  (ch.  ii.  18). 

Be  won  (KepSrjI^^a-ovTai).  Rev.,  he  gained.  The  word  used 
by  Christ,  Matt,  xviii.  15  :  "  gained  thy  brother." 

2.  Wfiile  they  behold   (eVoTrrevcrai'Te?).     See  on  ch-  ii.  12. 
Conversation.     See  on  ch.  i.  15.     Kev.,  heha/uior. 
Coupled  with  fear  (eV  4>6^(p).     Lit.,  in  fear. 

3.  Of  plaiting  {kfimKoK'qti).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Compare  1  Tim.  ii.  9.  The  Roman  women  of  the  day  were 
addicted  to  ridiculous  extravagance  in  the  adornment  of  the 
hair.  Juvenal  ("Satire,"  vi.)  satirizes  these  customs.  He  says: 
"  The  attendants  will  vote  on  the  dressing  of  the  hair  as  if  a 
question  of  reputation  or  of  life  were  at  stake,  so  great  is  the 
trouble  she  takes  in  quest  of  beauty  ;  with  so  many  tiers  does 
she  load,  with  so  many  continuous  stories  does  she  build  up  on 
high  her  head.  She  is  tall  as  Andromache  in  front,  behind  she 
is  shorter.  You  would  think  her  another  person."  The  hair 
was  dyed,  and  secured  with  costly  pins  and  with  nets  of  gold 
thread.     False  hair  and  blond  wigs  were  worn. 

Putting  on  (eVSuo-eeD?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Female  extravagance  in  dress  in  the  days  of  the  empire  reached 
an  alarming  pitch. 

4.  Meek  (Trpaeo?).     See  on  Matt.  v.  5. 

Of  great  price  (TroXureXe?).  The  word  used  to  describe 
costly  raiment,  1  Tim.  ii.  9. 

5.  Adorned  (e«oo-/*owj;).  Imperfect  tense.  Were  accustomed 
to  adorn. 


Ch.  III.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  Gol 

6.  Amazement  (ttto^o-h').  ^ev.,  terror.  Compare  the  kin- 
dred verb  "TTTOTfSrjre,  le  terrified,  Luke  xxi.  9 ;  xxiv.  37 ;  on 
which,  see  note.  The  word  means  a  scare,  or  nervous  excite- 
ment. 

7.  According  to  knowledge.  With  an  intelligent  recog- 
nition of  the  nature  of  the  marriage  relation. 

The  woman  (to3  jwaiicela)).  Not  a  noun,  however,  as  would 
appear  from  the  ordinary  rendering,  but  an  adjective,  agreeing 
with  (TKevei,  vessel,  as  does  also  dcrBevecrrepm,  weaker.  Both  are 
attributes  of  vessel  /  the  female  vessel  as  weaker.  So  Rev.,  in 
margin. 

Vessel  (ff/eeuet).  Compare  1  Thess.  iv.  4.  The  primary  idea 
of  vessel,  which  is  formed  from  the  Latin  vasellum,  the  diminu- 
tive of  vas,  a  vase,  is  that  of  the  receptacle  which  covers  and 
contains ;  the  case  or  protecting  cover.  Hence  it  is  allied,  ety- 
mologically,  with  vest,  vestment,  and  wear.  It  is  used  in  the 
ISTew  Testament  (1)  in  the  sense  of  a  cup  or  dish  (Luke  viii. 
16 ;  John  xix.  29 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  20  ;  Apoc.  ii.  27 ;  xviii.  12).  (2) 
Of  the  man,  as  containing  the  divine  energy,  or  as  a  subject  of 
divine  mercy  or  wrath,  and  hence  becoming  a  divine  instrument. 
Thus  Paul  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  God's  name  (Acts  ix.  15). 
Yessels  of  wrath  (Rom.  ix.  22) ;  of  mercy  (Rom.  ix.  23).  So  of 
the  woman,  as  God's  instrument,  along  with  man,  for  his  service 
in  the  family  and  in  society.  (3)  Collectively,  in  the  plural, 
of  all  the  implements  of  any  particular  economy,  as  a  house,  or 
a  ship.  Matt.  xii.  29,  goods  ;  Acts  xxvii.  17,  the  tachliiig  or 
gear  of  a  ship. 

Giving  (aTTove/itovTe?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
word  means,  literally,  to  portion  out,  and  is  appropriate  to  the 
husband  as  controlling  what  is  to  be  meted  out  to  the  wife. 

Hindered  {iyKOTTTea-^ai).  So  A.  V.  and  Rev.,  and  the  best 
texts,  and  the  majority  of  commentators.  The  word  means, 
literally,  to  knock  in;  make  an  incision  into ;  and  hence,  gen- 


652  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  ItL 

erally,  to  hmder  or  thwart  (Gal.  v.  7  ;  1  These,  ii.  18).     Some, 
however,  read  iKKoirrecrS-ai,,  to  cut  off  or  destroy. 

8.  Of  one  mind  (6/i6</)/3oi'es).  ^ev.,  like-minded.  Only  here 
in  New  Testament.  Compare  Kom.  xii.  16  ;  xv.  5  ;  Philip,  ii. 
2,  etc.  Indicating  unity  of  thought  and  feeling.  From  6/m}<;, 
one  and  the  same,  and  ^p'jJ',  the  mind. 

Having  compassion  one  of  another  (avfji.-n-a^€i.<i).  Only 
here  in  New  Testament,  though  the  kindred  verb  is  found  Heb. 
iv.  15  ;  X.  34.  The  rendering  is  needlessly  diffuse.  Rev.,  much 
better,  compassionate;  sympathetic,  in  margin.  Interchange  of 
fellow-feeling  in  joy  or  sorrow.  Our  popular  usage  errs  in  lim- 
iting sympathy  to  sorrow. 

Love  as  brethren  {(f>iXdBe\(f>oi).  Rev.,  more  strictly,  loving 
as  brethren.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Pitiful  {eva-'ir\ar/)(i'oi).  Only  here  and  Eph.  iv.  32.  Eev., 
better,  tender-hearted.  From  ev,  well,  and  aTrXdyxya,  the  nailer 
entrails,  which  are  regarded  as  the  seat  of  the  affections,  and 
hence  equivalent  to  our  popular  use  of  heart.  The  original 
sense  has  given  rise  to  the  unfortunate  translation  bowels  in  the 
A.  y.,  which  occurs  in  its  literal  meaning  only  at  Acts  i.  18. 

Courteous.  The  A.  Y.  has  here  followed  the  reading  of 
the  Tex.  Rec,  (j)i,\6cf>pove^.  But  the  best  texts  read  Taireivo- 
<^pove<;,  humble-minded.  So  Rev.  This  occurs  nowhere  else  in 
the  New  Testament,  though  the  kindred  noun  raireivocjipoa-vvT), 
humility,  is  found  often.  See  on  ra-rreivo';,  lowly,  notes  on 
Matt.  xi.  29. 

9.  Rendering  evil,  etc.     See  Rom.  xii.  17. 

Blessing  {evXayovvre^).  Not  a  noun  governed  by  rendering, 
but  a  participle.     Be  not  rendering  evil,  but  be  blessing. 

10.  Will  love  {BeXwv  ayuTrav).    Not  the  future  tense  of  love, 


Ch.  iil]        the  pibst  general  epistle  of  peter.  653 

but  the  verb  to  will,  with  the  infinitive :  he  that  desires  or 
mecms  to  love.    K.ev.,  would  love. 

11.  Eschew  {iKKXivaTco).  The  old  word  eschew  is  from  the 
Norman  eschever,  to  shun  or  avoid.  It  reappears  in  the  Ger- 
man scheuen,  to  be  startled  or  afraid,  and  in  the  English  shy, 
and  to  shy  (as  a  horse).  The  Greek  word  here  occurs  only 
twice  elsewhere  (Kom.  iii.  12 ;  xvi.  17),  where  Kev.  renders 
turn  aside  and  turn  away.  It  is  compounded  of  e'/e,  out  of, 
and  kXivio,  to  cause  to  hend  or  slope  /  so  that  the  picture  in  the 
word  is  of  one  bending  aside  from  his  course  at  the  approach  of 
evil.     Rev.,  tu,rn  away  from. 

13.  Followers  (fii/j/rjTal).  Lit.,  imitators.  But  the  best 
texts  read  ^rfKaral,  zealots.     So  Rev.,  zealous. 

14.  Blessed.     See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

Be  troubled  {rapax^re).  The  word  used  of  Herod's  trouble 
(Matt.  ii.  3) ;  of  the  agitation  of  the  pool  of  Bethesda  (John  v. 
4)  ;  of  Christ's  troubled  spirit  (John  xii.  27). 

15.  Sanctify  the  Lord  God.  The  A.  Y.  follows  the  Tex. 
Rec,  reading  tov  Qeov,  God,  instead  of  rov  Xpurrov,  Christ, 
which  is  the  reading  of  the  best  texts.  The  article  with  Christ 
shows  that  icvpiov,  Lord,  is  to  be  taken  predicatively.  Render, 
therefore,  as  Rev.,  sanctify  Christ  {the  Christ)  as  Lord. 

Ready  to  give  an  answer  {eTOi/j,oo  irp6<;  diroKoylav).  Lit., 
ready  for  an  answer.  Answer  is  our  word  apology,  not  in  the 
popular  sense  of  excuse,  but  in  the  more  radical  sense  of  de- 
fence. So  it  is  translated  Acts  xxii.  1 ;  Philip,  i.  7, 16.  Olear- 
mg  of  yourselves,  2  Cor.  vii.  11. 

Meekness.    See  on  Matt.  v.  5. 

16.  Having  a  good  conscience  {a-w'eiBija-ive'xpvTeiiarfaSi^v). 
The  position  of  the  adjective  shows  that  it  is  used  predica- 


654  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IH. 

tively  :  having  a  conscience  good  or  unim/paired.  Compare 
Ileb.  xiii.  18,  "  We  have  a  good  conscience  {koXtjv  crvveiBrjcriv)." 
SweiS7]a-K,  conscience,  does  not  occur  in  the  gospels,  unless 
John  viii.  1-11  be  admitted  into  the  text.  K^or  is  it  a  word 
familiar  to  classical  Greek.  It  is  compounded  of  crvv,  together 
with,  and  elSevai,  to  know /  and  its  fundamental  idea  is  know- 
ing together  with  one^s  self.  Hence  it  denotes  the  conscious- 
ness which  one  has  within  himself  of  his  own  conduct  as 
I'elated  to  moral  obligation  ;  which  consciousness  exercises  a 
judicial  function,  determining  what  is  riglit  or  wrong,  approv- 
ing or  condemning,  urging  to  performance  or  abstinence.  Hence 
it  is  not  merely  intellectual  consciousness  directed  at  conduct, 
but  moi'al  consciousness  contemplating  duty,  testifying  to  moral 
obligation,  even  where  God  is  not  known  ;  and,  where  there  is 
knowledge  of  God  and  acquaintance  with  him,  inspired  and 
directed  by  that  fact.  A  man  cannot  be  conscious  of  himself 
without  knowing  himself  as  a  moral  creature.  Cremer  accord- 
ingly defines  the  word  as  "  the  consciousness  man  has  of  him- 
self in  his  relation  to  God,  manifesting  itself  in  the  form  of  a 
self-testimony,  the  result  of  the  action  of  the  spirit  in  the  heart." 
And  further,  "  conscience  is,  essentially,  determining  of  the 
self-consciousness  by  the  spirit  as  the  essential  principle  of  life. 
In  conscience  man  stands  face  to  face  with  himself."  Con- 
science is,  therefore,  a  law.  Thus  Bishop  Butler  :  "  Conscience 
does  not  only  offer  itself  to  show  us  the  way  we  should  walk 
in,  but  it  likewise  carries  its  own  authority  with  it,  that  it  is 
our  natural  guide,  the  guide  assigned  us  by  the  Author  of  our 
nature ;  it  therefore  belongs  to  our  condition  of  being  ;  it  is  our 
duty  to  walk  in  that  path  and  follow  this  guide."  And  again, 
"  That  principle  by  which  we  survey,  and  either  approve  or 
disapprove  our  own  heart,  temper,  and  actions,  is  not  only  to 
be  considered  as  what  is,  in  its  turn,  to  have  some  influence, 
which  may  be  said  of  every  passion,  of  the  lowest  appetites ; 
but  likewise  as  being  superior  ;  as  from  its  very  nature  claim- 
ing superiority  over  all  others ;  insomuch  that  you  cannot  form 
a  notion  of  this  faculty,  conscience,  without  taking  'va.  judgment, 
direction,  svperintendeoicy.  This  is  a  constituent  part  of  the 
idea,  that  is,  of  the  faculty  itself  ;  and  to  preside  and  govern, 


Ch.  in.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE   OF  PETER.  655 

from  the  very  economy  and  constitution  of  man,  belongs  to  it. 
Had  it  strength  as  it  had  right ;  had  it  power  as  it  had  mani- 
fest authority,  it  would  absolutely  govern  the  world  "  (Sermons 
II.  and  III,  "  On  Human  Nature  "). 

Conscience  is  2,  faculty.  The  mind  may  "possess  reason  and 
distinguish  between  tlie  true  and  the  false,  and  yet  be  inca- 
pable of  distinguishing  between  virtue  and  vice.  We  are  en- 
titled, therefore,  to  hold  that  the  drawing  of  moral  distinctions 
is  not  comprehended  in  the  simple  exercise  of  the  i-eason.  The 
conscience,  in  short,  is  a  different  faculty  of  the  mind  from  the 
mere  understanding.  We  must  hold  it  to  be  simple  and  un- 
resolvable  till  we  fall  in  with  a  successful  decomposition  of  it 
into  its  elements.  In  the  absence  of  any  such  decomposition 
we  hold  that  thei-e  are  no  simpler  elements  in  the  human  mind 
which  will  yield  us  the  ideas  of  the  morally  good  and  evil,  of 
moral  obligation  and  guilt,  of  merit  and  demerit.  Compound 
and  decompound  all  other  ideas  as  you  please,  associate  them 
together  as  you  may,  they  will  never  give  us  the  ideas  referred 
to,  so  peculiar  and  full  of  meaning,  without  a  faculty  implanted 
in  the  mind  for  this  very  purpose  "  (McCosh,  "  Divine  Govern- 
ment, Physical  and  Moral "). 

Conscience  is  a  sentiment:  i.e.,  it  contains  and  implies  con- 
scious emotions  which  arise  on  the  discernment  of  an  object  as 
good  or  bad.  The  judgment  formed  by  conscience  awakens 
sensibility.  When  the  judicial  faculty  pronounces  a  thing  to  be 
lovable,  it  awakens  love.  When  it  pronounces  it  to  be  noble 
or  honorable,  it  awakens  respect  and  admiration.  When  it  pro- 
nounces it  to  be  cruel  or  vile,  it  awakens  disgust  and  abhorrence. 

In  scripture  we  are  to  view  conscience,  as  Bishop  Ellicott  re- 
marks, not  in  its  abstract  nature,  but  in  its  practical  manifesta- 
tions. Hence  it  may  be  weah  (1  Cor.  viii.  7, 12),  unauthoritative, 
and  awakening  only  the  feeblest  emotion.  It  may  be  evil  or 
defiled  (Heb.  x.  22 ;  Tit.  i.  15),  through  consciousness  of  evil 
practice.  It  may  be  sea/red  (1  Tim.  iv.  2),  branded  by  its  own 
testimony  to  evil  practice,  hardened  and  insensible  to  the  appeal 
of  good.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  hejpure  (2  Tim.  i.  3),  un- 
veiled, and  giving  honest  and  clear  moral  testimony.  It  may  be 
void  of  offence  (Acts  xxiv.  16),  unconscious  of  evil  intent  or  act ; 


656  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ca  IH- 

good,  as  here,  or  honoraUe  (Ileb.  xiii.  18).  The  expreBsion  and 
the  idea,  in  the  full  Christian  sense,  are  foreign  to  the  Old  Tes- 
tament, where  the  testimony  to  the  character  of  moral  action 
and  character  is  borne  by  external  revelation  rather  than  by  the 
inward  moral  consciousness. 

Falsely  accuse  {eirriped^ovTe'i).  Compare  Luke  vi.  28;  the 
only  other  passage  where  the  word  occurs.  Matt.  v.  44,  being  re- 
jected from  the  best  texts.  The  word  means  to  ihreaUn  abu- 
swely ;  to  act  despitefully.     'Re'v.,  revile. 

17.  If  the  will  of  God  be  so  (et  ^eXot  to  ^eXrjfia  rov  Qeov). 
More  literally,  as  Kev.,  preserving  the  play  upon  the  word  wUl, 
if  the  will  of  Ood  should  so  will. 

18.  The  just  for  the  unjust.  But  the  Greek  without  the 
article  is  more  graphic  :  just  for  unjust. 

In  the  flesh.  The  Greek  omits  the  article.  Kead  *n^A, 
the  material  form  assumed  in  his  incarnation. 

In  the  spirit.  Also  without  the  article,  in  spirit ;  not  as  A. 
v.,  hy  the  Spirit,  meaning  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  referring  to 
his  spiritual,  incorporeal  life.  The  words  connect  themselves 
with  the  death-cry  on  the  cross :  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  com- 
mend my  spirit."  Huther  observes,  "  Flesh  is  that  side  of  the 
man's  being  by  which  he  belongs  to  earth,  is  therefore  a  creature 
of  earth,  and  accordingly  perishable  like  everything  earthy. 
Spirit,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  side  of  his  being  according  to 
which  he  belongs  to  a  supernal  sphere  of  being,  and  is  there- 
fore not  merely  a  creature  of  earth,  and  is  destined  to  an  im- 
mortal existence." 

Thus  we  must  be  careful  and  not  understand  spirit  here  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  as  distinguished  from  the  flesh  of  Christ, 
but  of  the  spiritual  nature  of  Christ ;  "  the  higher  spiritual  nat- 
ure which  belonged  to  the  integrity  of  his  humanity  "  (Cook). 

19.  By  which  (eV  c5).  Wrong.  Rev.,  correctly,  in  which: 
in  the  spiritual  form  of  life ;  in  the  disembodied  spirit. 


Ch.  III.]         THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  657 

Went  and  preached  (Tropevl^eU  eKrfpv^ev).  The  word  went, 
employed  as  usual  of  a,  personal  act ;  and  jpreaohed,  in  its  ordi- 
nary New-Testament  sense  of  proclaiming  the  Gospel. 

To  the  spirits  {irvevfiaaiv).  As  in  Heb.  xii.  23,  of  disem- 
bodied spirits,  though  the  word  ■^vxal,  souls,  is  used  elsewhere 
(Apoc.  vi.  9 ;  xx.  4). 

In  prison  {iv  (pvXaKfj).  Authorities  differ,  some  explaining 
by  2  Pet.  ii.  4 ;  Jude  6  ;  Apoc.  xx.  7,  as  the  final  abode  of  the 
lost.  Excepting  in  the  last  passage,  the  word  occurs  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament  in  a  metaphorical  sense.  It  is  often 
translated  watck  (Matt  xiv.  25 ;  Luke  ii.  8) ;  hold  and  cage 
(Apoc.  xviii.  2).  Others  explain  as  Hades,  the  kingdom  of  the 
dead  generally. 

'  20.  In  which  (et?  rjv).  Lit.,  into  which.  A  pregnant  con- 
struction ;  into  which  they  were  gathered,  and  in  which  they 
were  saved. 

By  water  (SiA).  'Rev.,  through.  Some  take  this  as  instru- 
mental, iy  means  of  water  /  others  as  local,  hy  passing  through 
the  water,  or  being  brought  safely  through  the  water  into  the 
ark.     Kev.,  in  margin,  were  hr ought  safely  through  water. 

21.  The  like  figure  whereunto.  Following  a  rejected 
reading,  m,  to  which,'  so  that  the  literal  rendering  would  be  the 
antitype  to  which.  E,ead  o  avrvrvnov,  which,  the  antitype  or  as 
an  antitype  •  i.e.,  which  water,  being  the  antitype  of  that  water 
of  the  flood,  doth  now  save  you,  even  baptism.  Kev.,  which, 
after  a  true  likeness  doth  now,  etc.  ' AvtItvjtov,  figure,  or  anti- 
type, is  from  avTi,  over  against,  and  tvito<s,  a  Mow.  Hence, 
originally,  repelling  a  Mow :  a  blow  against  a  blow ;  a  counter- 
blow. So  of  an  echo  or  of  the  I'eflection  of  light ;  then  a  cor- 
7-6spondence,  as  of  a  stamp  to  the  die,  as  here.  The  word  oc- 
curs only  once  elsewhere,  Heb.  ix.  24 :  "  the  figures  of  the  true." 

Putting  away  {cnr63-ea-t<s).  Peculiar  to  Peter.  Here  and  2 
Pet.  i.  14. 

43 


658  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

Filth  (pvirov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  In  classical 
Greek  signifying  especially  dry  dirt,  as  on  the  person. 

Answer  {iirepcoTtjiMa).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  In 
classical  Greek  the  word  means  a  question  and  nothing  else. 
The  meaning  here  is  much  disputed,  and  can  hardly  be  settled 
satisfactorily.  The  rendering  answer  has  no  warrant.  The 
meaning  seems  to  be  (as  Alford),  "  the  seeking  after  God  of  a 
good  and  pure  conscience,  which  is  the  aim  and  end  of  the 
Christian  baptismal  life."  So  Lange:  "  The  thing  asked  may 
be  conceived  as  follows :  '  How  shall  I  rid  myself  of  an  evil  con- 
science ?  Wilt  thou,  most  holy  God,  again  accept  me,  a  sin- 
ner ?  Wilt  thou,  Lord  Jesus,  grant  me  the  communion  of  thy 
death  and  life  ?  Wilt  thou,  O  Holy  Spirit,  assure  me  of  grace 
and  adoption,  and  dwell  in  my  heart  ? '  To  these  questions  the 
triune  Jehovah  answers  in  baptism,  '  Tea  ! '  Now  is  laid  the 
solid  foundation  for  a  good  conscience.  The  conscience  is  not 
only  purified  from  its  guilt,  but  it  receives  new  vital  power  by 
means  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ." 

This  is  the  sense  of  iirepmr&v  eh,  in  the  only  place  where  it 
occurs  in  scripture,  2  Sam.  xi.  1  (Sept.) :  "  David  ashed  of 
hwn  how  Joab  did  {i-TrepuTrjcrev  et?  elpijvrjv'Iayd^)."  Lit.,  with 
reference  to  the  peace  of  Joab.  Rev.  renders,  the  interrogation, 
and  puts  inquiry,  appeal,  in  margin. 

22.  Gone  into  heaven.  Perhaps  with  the  scene  of  the 
ascension  in  Peter's  mind. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Arm  yourselves  (oTrXto-atrSe).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. The  thought  is  Pauline.  See  Rom.  xiii.  12  •  2  Cor  vi 
7 ;  Eph.  vi.  10,  lY ;  1  Thess.  v.  8  ;  Col.  iii.  12.  ' 

Mind  (evvoiav).  Only  here  and  Heb.  iv.  12.  Literally  the 
word  means  thought,  and  so  some  render  it  here.  Rev.  puts  it 
in  margin.     The  rendering  intent,  resolution,  is  very  doubtful 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  659 

It  seems  rather  to  be  the  thought  as  determining  the  resolution. 
Since  Christ  has  suffered  in  the  flesh,  be  ye  also  willing  to  suffer 
in  the  flesh. 

2.  Live  (/Steocrat).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

The  rest  of  the  time  {iirCKoi/irov).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

3.  For  the  time  past,  etc.     Compare  Eom.  xiii.  13. 
Us  {riiuv).     The  best  texts  omit. 

Of  our  life  {tov ^lov).     The  best  texts  omit. 

Will  {^ovXrjfia,  the  better  reading  for  MXrjfia).  Desire,  vncli- 
nation.     See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

When  we  walked  {'7r6Tropevfiivov<;).  Eev.,.rightly, ye  walked. 
Construe  with  to  have  wrought.  The  time  past  may  suffice  for 
you  to  have  wrought  the  desire,  etc.,  walking  as  ye  home  done; 
the  pei'f eet  participle  having  an  inferential  reference  to  a  course 
of  life  now  done  with. 

Lasciviousness  (aff-eXyetats).  The  following  enumeration 
of  vices  is  charactei'istic  of  Peter's  style  in  its  fulness  and  con- 
densation. He  enumerates  six  forms  of  sensuality,  three  per- 
sonal and  three  social:  (1)  'Aa-e^r/eiafi,  wantonness.  See  on 
Mark  vii.  22.  Excesses  of  all  kinds,  with  possibly  an  emphasis 
on  sins  of  tincleanness.  (2)  'Eiri^viiiai.';,  lusts.  See  on  Mark  iv. 
19.  Pointing  especially  to  fleshly  lusts,  "the  inner  principles 
of  licentiousness "  (Cook).  (3)  Olvo(f)\vyiaK,  excess  of  wine. 
Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  kindred  verb  occurs  in  the 
Septuagint,  Deut.  xxi.  20 ;  Isa.  Ivi.  12.  From  otw?,  wvne,  and 
<^\e«B  or  (jiXva,  to  teem  with  abundance/  thence  to  ioil  over  or 
iubhle  up,  overflow.  It  is  the  excessive,  insatiate  desire  for  drink, 
from  which  comes  the  use  of  the  word  for  the  indulgence  of 
the  desire — debauch.  So  Rev.,  wine-Mhbings.  The  remaining 
three  are  revellings,  hanquetings,  and  idolat/ries. 


660  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

Revellings  {k(o/j,oi,<;).  The  word  originally  signifies  merely 
a  merry-makmg  ;  most  probably  a  milage  festival,  from  /cw/xi?, 
a  village.  In  the  cities  such  entertainments  grew  into  carouses, 
in  which  the  party  of  revellers  paraded  the  streets  with  torches, 
singing,  dancing,  and  all  kinds  of  frolics.  These  revels  also 
entered  into  religious  observances,  especially  in  the  worship  of 
Bacchus,  Demeter,  and  the  Idaean  Zeus  in  Crete.  The  fanatic 
and  orgiastic  rites  of  Egypt,  Asia  Minor,  and  Thrace  became 
engrafted  on  the  old  religion.  Socrates,  in  the  introduction  to 
"  The  Republic,"  pictures  himself  as  having  gone  down  to  the 
Piraeus  to  see  the  celebration  of  the  festival  of  Bendis,  the 
Thracian  Artemis  (Diana) ;  and  as  being  told  by  one  of  his 
companions  that,  in  the  evening,  there  is  to  be  a  torch-race  with 
horses  in  honor  of  the  goddess.  The  rites  grew  furious  and 
ecstatic.  "  Crowds  of  women,  clothed  with  fawns'  skins,  and 
bearing  the  sanctified  thyrsus  (a  staff  wreathed  with  vine-leaves) 
flocked  to  the  solitudes  of  Parnassus,  Kithaeron,  or  Taygetus 
during  the  consecrated  triennial  period,  and  abandoned  them- 
selves to  demonstrations  of  frantic  excitement,  with  dancing 
and  clamorous  invocation  of  the  god.  They  were  said  to  tear 
animals  limb  from  limb,  to  devour  tlie  raw  flesh,  and  to  cut 
themselves  without  feeling  the  wound.  The  men  jdelded  to  a 
similar  impulse  by  noisy  revels  in  the  streets,  sounding  the 
cymbals  and  tambourine,  and  carrying  the  image  of  the  god 
in  procession"  (Grote,  "History  of  Greece").  Peter,  in  his 
introduction,  addresses  the  sojourners  in  Galatia,  where  the 
Phrygian  worship  of  Cybele,  the  great  mother  of  the  gods,  pre- 
vailed, with  its  wild  orgies  and  hideous  mutilations.  Lucretius 
thus  describes  the  rites  : 

"  With  vigorous  hand  the  clamorous  drum  they  rouse, 
And  wake  the  sounding  cymbal ;  the  hoarse  horn 
Pours  forth  its  threatening  music,  and  the  pipe, 
With  Phrygian  airs  distracts  the  maddening  mind, 
While  arms  of  blood  the  fierce  enthusiasts  wield 
To  fright  the  unrighteous  crowds,  and  bend  profound 
Their  impious  souls  before  the  power  divine. 
Thus  moves  the  pompous  idol  through  the  streets 
Scattering  mute  blessings,  while  the  throngs  devout 
Strew,  in  return,  their  silver  and  their  brass, 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  661 

Loading  the  paths  with  presents,  and  o'ershade 
The  heavenly  form  ;  and  all  th'  attending  train, 
With  dulcet  sprays  of  roses,  pluckt  profuse, 
A  band  select  before  them,  by  the  Greeks 
Curetes  called,  from  Phrygian  parents  sprung, 
Sport  with  fantastic  chains,  the  measured  dance 
Weaving  infuriate,  charmed  with  human  blood. 
And  madly  shaking  their  tremendous  crests." 

Be  Rerum  Natura,  ii.,  618-631. 

Banquetings  (ttotoi?).  \JA.,  drmJiing-houts.  ~Rev.,  carous- 
mgs. 

Abominable  {a3e/iiToi,<;).  Only  here,  and  by  Peter  in  Acts 
X.  28.  More  literally,  unlawful,  emphasizing  the  idolatries  as 
violations  of  divine  law. 

4.  Run  not  with  them.  "In  a  troop"  (Bengel) ;  like  a 
band  of  revellers.  See  above.  Compare  Ovid's  description  of 
the  Bacchic  rites : 

"  Lo,  Bacchus  comes!  and  with  the  festive  cries 
Resound  the  fields  ;  and  mixed  in  headlong  rout. 
Men,  matrons,  maids,  paupers,  and  nobles  proud, 
To  the  mysterious  rites  are  borne  along." 

Metamorphoses,  iii. ,  538-530. 

Excess  {avdxva^iv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit., 
pouring  forth.  Eev.  has  flood  in  margin.  The  word  is  used 
in  classical  Greek  of  the  tides  which  fill  the  hollows. 

Riot  {da-coTia'}).  From  a,  not,  and  aco^o),  to  sa/ve.  Lit.,  zm- 
savingness,  prodigality,  wastefulness ;  and  thence  of  squander- 
ing on  one's  own  debased  appetites,  whence  it  takes  the  sense 
of  dissohoteness  on  jprofiigacy.  In  Luke  xv.  13,  the  kindred  ad- 
verb aaarroi^  is  used.  The  prodigal  is  described  as  scattering 
his  substance,  to  which  is  added,  living  wastefully  {^&v  ao-wTw?). 
Compare  Eph.  v.  18 ;  Tit.  i.  6. 

5.  That  is  ready  {eTolfKot  ej^ovrt).  Lit.,  having  himself  in 
readiness/  there  at  God's  right  hand  in  heaven,  whither  he  has 


662  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

gone  (ch.  iii.  22).    Implying,  also,  a  near  judgment.     Compare 
ver.  7. 

7.  Is  at  hand  (ri'y^iKev).  Lit.,  has  come  nea/r.  The  word 
constantly  used  of  the  coming  of  Christ  and  his  kingdom.  See 
Matt.  iii.  2  ;  Mark  i.  15  ;  Luke  x.  9 ;  Heb.  x.  25. 

Be  ye  sober  (a-to^povija-aTe).  The  word  is  from  a-m,  souiid, 
and  (pp'^v,  the  mmd.  Therefore,  as  Kev.,  ie  ye  of  sound  mind. 
Compare  Mark  v.  15. 

Watch  {yrf^aTi).  See  on  ch.  i.  13.  The  A.  Y.  has  followed 
the  Yulgate,  vigilate  {watch).     Rev.  is  better :  he  sober. 

Unto  prayer  (et?  7rpoo-6u^a9).  \!A.., prayers.  The  plural  is 
used  designedly  :  prayers  of  all  kinds,  private  or  public.  Tynd. 
renders.  Be  ye  discreet  amd  soher,  that  ye  may  ie  apt  to  prayers. 
Compare  Eph.  vi.  18,  "  with  e'oery  kind  of  prayer,  and  watch- 
ing therev/nto." 

8.  Fervent  (e/erej^*)).  See,  on  the  kindred  adverb y^e/-«ew%, 
notes  on  ch.  i.  22. 

Love  covereth,  etc.     Compare  Jas.  v.  20  ;  Prov.  x.  12. 

9.  Using  hospitality.    Compare  Rom.  xiii.  13. 

10.  A  gift  {')(apiafia).  Originally,  something  freely  given  : 
a  gift  of  grace  {x"'pt<;).  Used  in  New  Testament  (a)  of  a  bless- 
ing of  God  gracioiisly  bestowed,  as  upon  sinners  (Rom.  v.  15, 
16  ;  xi.  29) ;  {i)  of  a  gt'acious  divine  endowment :  an  extraor- 
dinary gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  and  working  in  a  special 
manner  in  the  individual  (1  Tim.  iv.  14  ;  2  Tim.  i.  6  ;  Eom.  xii. 
6,  8).     So  here. 

Manifold.    See  on  ch.  i.  6. 

11.  Oracles  (\67ta).     In  classical  Greek,  of  the  oracular  re- 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  66S 

sponses  of  heathen  deities.     Here,  divine  utterances  or  revela- 
tions.    Compare  Acts  vii.  38  ;  Kom.  iii.  2 ;  Heb.  v.  12. 

Giveth  {■xpprjyet).  Only  here  and  2  Cor.  ix.  10.  Peter  uses 
the  compound  iinxoprjjict),  furnish,  in  2  Pet.  i.  5;  which  see. 

12.  Think  it  not  strange  (fir)  ^evi^ea^e).  I.e.,  alien  from 
you  and  your  condition  as  Christians.     Compare  v.  4. 

Fiery  trial  (TTupoioet).  The  word  means  Jwrwrnp'.  In  Prov. 
xxvii.  21  (Sept.),  it  is  rendered  furnaee.  In  Ps.  Ixv.  (Sept.), 
Ixvi.  (A.  Y.),  we  read,  "Thou,  O  God,  hast  proved  us:  thou 
hast  smelted  us,  as  silver  is  smelted.''^     Compaie  Zech.  xiii.  9. 

Which  is  to  try  you  {vjuv  <yi,vofj,evrj).  The  A.  V.  thus  makes 
the  trial  a  thing  of  the  future;  mistranslating  the  Greek  present 
participle,  ivhich  is  talcing  place.  This  participle,  therefore, 
represents  the  trial  as  actually  in  progress.  The  Rev.  does  not 
give  this  force  by  its  which  corneth  upon  you. 

To  try  you  (tt/jo?  ireipaa-fibv).     Lit.,  for  trial  or  probation. 

Strange  thing  {^ivov).    Compare  think  it  not  strange,  above. 

Happened  {avfi^aivovro^).  Again  the  present  participle. 
Better,  perhaps,  were  happening ;  by  chance,  instead  of  with 
the  definite  purpose  indicated  by  "  taking  place  with  a  view  to 
probation.''^     See  above. 

13.  Inasmuch  as  ye  are  partakers.  Compare  Pom.  viii.  17. 

Be  glad  with  exceeding  joy  (^a/oijre  ar/aXKuifievoi).  Lit., 
ye  may  rejoice  exulting.     See  on  ch.  i.  6. 

14.  The  spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  (to  t%  ^o^t\<i  koX  to  tov 
Qeov  TTvevfia).  Lit.,  the  spirit  of  glory  and  that  of  God.  The 
repetition  of  the  article  identifies  the  spirit  of  God  M'ith  the 
spirit  of  glory  :  the  spirit  of  glory,  and  therefore  the  spirit  of 


664  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

God  :  who  is  none  other  than  the  spirit  of  God  himself.     Hence 
Kev.,  better,  the  sj>int  of  glory  and  the  spirit  of  Ood. 

Resteth  {avatraveTav)..  Compare  Isa.  xi.  2 ;  Luke  x.  6  ;  Num. 
xi.  26,  26 ;  Mark  vi.  31 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  45  ;  Apoc.  xiv.  13.  Also, 
Matt.  xi.  28,  where  the  word  is  used  in  the  active  voice,  to  give 
rest  or  refreshment. 

15.  A  busybody  in  other  men's  matters  {oKXoTpioeTricr- 
KOTTo^).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit.,  the  overseer  of 
another's  matters.  One  who  usurps  authoritv  in  matters  not 
within  his  province.  Kev.,  meddler.  Compare  Luke  xii.  13, 
14;  1  Thess.  iv.  11 ;  2  Tliess.  iii.  11.  It  may  i-efer  to  the  offi- 
cious interference  of  Christians  in  the  affairs  of  their  Gen- 
tile neighbors,  through  excess  of  zeal  to  conform  them  to  the 
Christian  standard. 

16.  A  Christian.  Only  three  times  in  the  l^ew  Testament, 
and  never  as  a  name  used  by  Christians  themselves,  but  as  a 
nickname  or  a  term  of  reproach.  See  on  Acts  xi.  26.  Hence 
Peter's  idea  is,  if  any  man  suffer  from  the  contumely  of  those 
who  contemptuously  style  him  Christian. 

19.  Commit  {irapaTi^ka^aaav).  Give  in  charge  as  a  de- 
posit. Compare  Luke  xii.  48  ;  Acts  xx.  32  ;  1  Tim.  i.  18.  The 
word  is  used  by  Christ  in  commending  his  soul  to  God  (Luke 
xxiii.  46). 

Well-doing  (aryaSoTroiia).  Only  here  in  ISTew  Testament. 
Compare  ch.  ii.  14.  The  surrender  to  God  is  to  be  coupled 
with  the  active  practice  of  good. 


CHAPTER  V. 

1.  Also  an  elder  {a-vfiirpea-^vTepoi;).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Better,  as  Eev.,  fellow-elder.  The  expression  is 
decisive  against  the  primacy  of  Peter. 


Ch.  v.]         the  first  general  epistle  of  peter.  665 

Witness  {jidpTVi).  The  word  is  used  in  the  New  Testament 
to  denote  {a)  a  spectator  or  eye-witness  (Acts  x.  39  ;  vi.  13).  (5) 
One  who  testifies  to  what  he  has  seen  (Acts  i.  8 ;  v.  32).  (c) 
In  the  forensic  sense,  a  witness  in  court  (Matt.  xxvi.  65  ;  Mark 
xiv.  63).  {d)  One  who  vindicates  his  testimony  by  suffering :  a 
martyr  (Acts  xxii.  20  ;  Ileb.  xii.  1  ;  Apoc.  ii.  13  ;  xvii.  6).  The 
first  three  meanings  run  into  each  other.  Tlie  eye-witness,  as 
a  spectator,  is  always  such  with  a  view  to  giving  testimony. 
Hence  this  expression  of  Peter  cannot  be  limited  to  the  mere 
fact  of  his  having  seen  what  he  preached ;  especially  since, 
when  he  wishes  to  emphasize  this  fact,  he  employs  another 
word,  eTro'TTTi??  (2  Pet.  i.  16).  Therefore  he  speaks  of  himself 
as  a  witness,  especially  in  the  sense  of  being  called  to  testifj'^  of 
what  he  has  seen. 

Partaker  {Koivrnvoi).  This  use  of  the  word,  expressing  a 
present  realization  of  something  not  yet  attained,  occurs  in  no 
other  writer  in  the  New  Testament.     See  on  2  Pet.  i.  4. 

2.  Feed  {iroifidvare).  Better,  Eev.,  tend,  since  the  verb  de- 
notes all  that  is  included  in  the  office  of  a  shepherd — guiding, 
guarding,  folding,  no  less  than  feeding,  which  latter  is  expressed 
by  ^ocTKco.  There  is,  doubtless,  a  reminiscence  in  the  word  of 
Christ's  charge  to  Peter  (John  xxi.  15-17).  Both  words  are  used 
there:  "  JPeed  {fioaice)  my  lambs"  (ver.  15);  ^Hend  {voifiaive) 
my  sheep  "  (ver.  16) ;  ^^feed  {^6<TKe)  my  sheep  "  (ver.  17).  The 
A.  V.  obliterates  the  distinction  by  rendering  all  three  ^eed. 
Bengel  rightly  remarks,  "  Feeding  is  part  of  tending."  See 
on  Matt.  ii.  6. 

Taking  the  oversight.    The  best  texts  omit.     Eev.  retains. 

By  constraint  {dvaryKoa-rm).    Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Willingly  (e/Bouo-iw?).     Only  here  and  Heb.  x.  26. 

For  filthy  lucre  (aia-'xpoKepS&s:).  From  ala'xpd^,  disgrace- 
ful, and  KepSoi,  gain.     Only  here  in  New  Testament.     The 


666  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

viOvA.  filthy  is  intended  to  convey  the  idea  which  lies  in  alcrxpo^, 
base  or  dishonorable  ;  becoming  such  if  it  is  made  the  motive 
of  the  minister's  service.     Compare  2  Cor.  xii.  14. 

Willingly  (Trpo^v/xw?).  Not  strong  enough.  The  word  is 
compounded  of  irpo,  forward,  and  ^vii6<},  heart  or  spirit.  Hence 
Eev.,  with  a  ready  mind ;  a  forward  spirit ;  denoting  not  mere 
willingness,  but  seal.  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Compare 
the  kindred  adjective  irpoS^vfio';,  ready  (Rom.  i.  15  ;  Matt.  xxvi. 
41 ;  Mark  xiv.  38),  and  the  kindred  noun  7rpoSv/j,ui,  readiness 
(2  Cor.  viii.  11,  12,  19 ;  ix.  2). 

3.  As  lording  it  {KaraKvpievovTes:).  See  Matt.  xx.  25  ;  Acts 
xix.  16.  Other  words  are  used  for  the  exercise  of  legitimate 
authority  in  the  church:  7rpoi'a-Tafiai,to  he  over  (1  Thess.  v.  12  ; 
1  Tim.  V.  17)  ;  Troifialvm,  as  ver.  2,  tend.  But  this  carries  the 
idea  of  high-handed  rule. 

Heritage  {KXypmv).  Plural.  KXr]po<;  means  a  lot.  See  on 
inheritance,  ch.  i.  4.  From  the  kindred  adjective  KXrjpiKo^ 
comes  tlie  English  cleric,  contracted  into  clerk,  which  in  eccle- 
siastical writings  originally  signified  a  minister ;  either  as  being 
chosen  by  lot  like  Matthias,  or  as  being  the  lot  or  inheritance  of 
God.  Hence  Wycliffe  translates  tiie  passage,  "  neither  as  hav- 
ing lordship  in  the  clergie."  As  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  clergy 
were  almost  the  only  persons  who  could  write,  the  word  clerk 
came  to  have  one  of  its  common  modern  meanings.  The  word 
here,  though  its  interpretation  is  somewhat  disputed,  seems  to 
refer  to  the  several  congregations — the  lots  or  charges  assigned 
to  the  elders.  Compare  irpoaeKXripdil^crav,  were  added  as  dis- 
ciples;  A.  v.,  consorted  with  (Acts  xvii.  4).  Rev.  renders 
charge.     Why  not  charges  ? 

Examples  {Tinroi).  Peter  uses  three  different  terms  for  a 
pattern  or  model :  viroypa/jL/jio^,  a  writing-copy  (ch.  ii.  21) ; 
i'TroBetr/fia,  for  which  classical  writers  prefer  irapdBeiyfia,  an 
architect's  plan  or  a  sculptor's  or  painter's  model  (2  Pet.  ii.  6) ; 
Tinrof  (see  on  ch.  iii.  21),  of  which  our  word  type  is  nearly  a 


Ch.  v.]         the  first  general  epistle  of  peter.  667 

transcript.  The  word  primarily  means  the  impression  left  by 
a  stroke  (tvttto),  to  strike).  Thus  John  xx.  25,' "  the  print  of 
the  nails."  Used  of  the  stamp  on  coin  ;  the  impression  of  any 
engraving  or  hewn  work  of  art ;  a  monument  or  statue ;  the 
figures  of  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch  and  of  the  star  Remphan 
(Acts  vii.  43).  Generally,  an  image  or  form,  always  with  a 
statement  of  the  object ;  and  hence  the  kindred  meaning  of  a 
pattern  or  model.  See  Acts  xxiii.  25 ;  Rom.  v.  14 ;  Philip, 
iii.  17  ;  Heb.  viii.  5. 

4.  The  chief  Shepherd  (ap;y;t7rot/iez/o?).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  In  harmony  with  ver.  2.  ''  The  last  thing  Peter 
could  have  dreamed  of  as  possible  would  be  its  misapplication 
to  himself  or  his  so-called  successors  "  (Cook).  Compare  Heb. 
xiii.  20,  great  Shepherd ;  and  John  x.  11,  14,  good  Shepherd. 
Also,  Ezek.  xxxiv.  15,  16,  23. 

Ye  shall  receive.     See  on  recewing,  1  Pet.  i.  9. 

Crown  {(TTejtavov).  From  aTe<f>m,  to  put  round,  encircle. 
It  is  the  crown  of  victory  in  the  games ;  of  military  valor ;  the 
marriage  wreath,  or  the  festal  garland,  woven  of  leaves  or  made 
of  gold  in  imitation  of  leaves.  Thus  it  is  distinguished  from 
the  royal  crown,  which  is  SidBrj/^a,  of  which  diadem  is  a  tran- 
script. In  Paul,  crTe<j>avo'i  is  always  used  of  the  conqueror'' s 
crown,  not  of  the  Tcvng's  (1  Cor.  ix.  24-26 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  5). 
Though  it  is  urged  that  Peter  would  not  have  employed  a 
reference  to  the  crown  of  the  victors  in  the  games,  because  of 
the  abhorrence  of  the  Palestinian  Jews  for  heathen  spectacles, 
yet  the  reference  to  the  crown  of  leaves  seems  to  be  determined 
by  the  epithet  unfading,  as  compared  with  garlands  of  earthly 
leaves.  The  crown  of  thorns  woven  for  Jesus  is  called  ajk^a- 
vo<i,  with  reference  rather  to  its  being  twined  than  to  its  being 
a  caricature  of  a  kingly  crown. 

6.  Be  clothed  with  humility  (t^i»  Tartrt.ivQ^poGvv'^v  k^Koii,- 
^axraa-S^).  The  last  word  is  a  very  peculiar  one,  occurring 
only  here.     It  is  derived  from  KOfi^os,  a  roll,  band,  or  girth : 


668  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

a  knot  or  roll  of  cloth,  made  in  tying  or  tucking  up  any  part  of 
the  dress.  The  kindred  word  e'YKo/i/So/ta,  from  which  the  verb 
is  directly  formed,  means  a  slaveys  apron,  under  which  the  loose 
garments  were  girt  up.  Compare  Horace's  "  puer  alte  cinctus," 
a  slave  girt  high.  Hence  the  figure  carries  an  exhortation  to 
put  on  humility  as  a  working  virtue  employed  in  ministry. 
Tliis  is  apparent  from  the  evident  reminiscence  of  that  scene 
in  which  Peter  figured  so  prominently — the  washing  of  the  dis- 
ciples' feet  by  the  Lord,  when  he  girded  himself  with  a  towel 
as  a  servant,  and  gave  them  the  lesson  of  ministry  both  by  word 
and  act.  Bengel  paraphrases,  "  Put  on  and  wrap  yourselves 
about  with  humility,  so  that  the  covering  of  humility  cannot 
possibly  be  stripped  from  you." 

R esisteth  (ai/TtTacrcreTat).  A  strong  and  graphic  word.  Lit., 
setteth  himself  in  array  against,  as  one  draws  out  a  host  for 
battle.  Pride  calls  out  God's  armies.  No  wonder,  therefore, 
that  it  "  goeth  before  destruction." 

The  proud  {v-rreprjipdvoi'i).  See  on  pride,  Mark  vii.  22. 
Compare  Jas.  iv.  6. 

To  the  humble.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  29. 

6.  Mighty  hand  {icpwraiav  %6tpa).  A  phrase  found  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament,  but  occurring  in  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  Ex.  iii.  19  ;  Deut.  iii.  24 ;  Job  xxx.  21.  The  adjective 
Kparaiav,  mighty,  is,  moreover,  used  only  here.  Compare  Luke 
i.  51,  52. 

7.  Casting  {i'iri,ppiyfravre<;).  The  aorist  participle  denoting 
an  act  once  for  all ;  throwing  the  whole  life  with  its  care  on 
him. 

All  your  care  {vaa-av  ttjv  fiepi/j,vav).  The  whole  of  your 
care.  "  Not  every  anxiety  as  it  arises,  for  none  will  arise  if 
this  transferrence  has  been  effectually  made."  Care.  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  25,  take  no  thought.    Eev.,  rightly,  anadety. 


Ch.  v.]         the  first  general  epistle  of  peter.  669 

He  careth  (jiiXei).  Meaning  the  watchful  care  of  interest 
and  affection.  The  sixth  and  seventh  verses  should  be  taken 
together  :  Humble  yourselves  and  cast  all  your  anxiety.  Pride 
is  at  the  root  of  most  of  our  anxiety.  To  human  pride  it  is 
humiliating  to  cast  everything  upon  another  and  be  cared  for. 
See  Jas.  iv.  6,  7. 

8.  Be  sober  (vijyjraTe).     See  on  ch.  iv.  7. 

Be  vigilant  (7p7;7op77o-aTe).  'Rev.,  ie  watchful.  See  on  Mark 
xiii.  35  ;  and  1  Thess.  v.  6,  where  both  verbs  occur :  watch  and 
ie  sober.  A  reminiscence  of  the  scene  in  Gethsemane  :  Could 
ye  not  watch  with  me  ?  (Matt.  xxvi.  40,  41). 

Adversary  (6  ayrtStKo?).  The  article  points  to  a  well-known 
adversary.  From  avTi,  against,  and  hUri,  a  lawsuit.  Strictly, 
an  adversary  in  a  lawsuit.  Here  an  adversary  in  general.  Com- 
pare Zecli.  iii.  1-5.     Only  here,  in  New  Testament,  of  Satan. 

The  devil.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  1. 

Roaring  (to/auo/tiei/o?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
word  conveys  somewhat  of  the  sense  b}'  the  sound  (oruomenos). 
It  denotes  especially  the  howl  of  a  beast  in  fierce  hunger. 

Lion.  Augustine  says,  "Christ  is  called  'a lion'  (Apoe.  v. 
5)  because  of  his  courage :  the  devil,  because  of  his  ferocity. 
The  one  lion  comes  to  conquer,  the  other  to  hurt."  Seven 
Hebrew  words  are  used  for  this  animal ;  six  to  describe  his 
movements  and  four  to  describe  his  roar.  He  is  mentioned  in 
the  Bible  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  times.  In  Job  iv.  10, 
11,  five  different  words  are  used  for  him.  In  Judges  xiv.  5 ; 
Ps.  xxi.  13  ;  ciii.  21  (Sept.),  the  same  word  as  here  is  used  for 
the  roaring  of  the  lion  as  a  translation  of  the  Hebrew  word  for 
the  thunder  in  Job  xxxvii.  4. 

Walketh  about  (Tre/stTraTeZ).  Compare  Job  i.  7  ;  ii.  2.  This 
word  gave  name  to  that  sect  of  Greek  philosophers  known  as 
Peripatetics,  because  they  walked  about  while  teaching  or  dis- 


670  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

puting.  "  St.  Peter  calls  Satan  the  Peripatetic  "  (Cox,  on  Job). 
The  Arabs  call  him  the  Busy  One.  It  was  to  Peter  that  Christ 
said,  "  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,"  etc.  (Luke  xxii.  31). 

Devour  {Karatrlri).  Lit.,  swallow  down.  See  on  Matt,  xxiii. 
24. 

9.  Resist  {avTia-rriTe).  The  Eev.,  very  judiciously,  substi- 
tutes withstamd ;  resist  having  been  already  used  in  ver.  5  for 
avTiTaa-a-erai.  Withstand  is,  moreover,  the  more  accurate  ren- 
dering; as  the  verb  means  rather  to  he  firm  agai/nst  onset  than 
to  strwe  against  it.  With  in  withstand  is  the  Saxon  wid, 
against,  which  appears  in  the  German  wider. 

Steadfast  (o-repeot).  Compare  2  Tim.  ii.  19 ;  and  the  kindred 
verb  cTTepeom,  to  strengthen  (Acts  iii.  7,  16  ;  xvi.  5).  Paul,  in 
Col.  ii.  5,  uses  a  cognate  noun,  arepemfia,  evidently  as  a  military 
metaphor :  "  Beholding  your  order  {rd^iv,  compare  avrirda-a-erai, 
ver.  5)  and  your  solid  front  or  close  phalanx  "  (crrepecofia).  It 
might  be  difficult  to  find,  on  the  whole,  a  better  rendering  than 
steadfast,  yet  it  falls  a  little  short  of  the  meaning.  Steadfast 
is  Anglo-Saxon,  stede,  a^lace,  and  faest,  fast  /  and  hence  means 
firm  in  its  place;  but  a-repeol  conveys  also  the  sense  of  com/pact- 
ness,  compact  solidity,  and  is  appropriate,  since  a  number  of  in- 
dividuals are  addressed  and  exhorted  to  withstand  the  onset  of 
Satan  as  one  compacted  body.  "Ziepeo^  implies  solidity  in  the 
very  mass  and  hody  of  the  thing  itself;  steadfastness,  mere  hold- 
ing of  place.  A  rock  is  (TTepeoi;,  firm,  solid;  but  a  flexible  weed 
with  its  tough  roots  resisting  all  eiforts  to  pull  it  up,  may  be 
steadfast.    The  exhortation  is  appropriate  from  Peter,  the  Kock. 

The  same  afflictions  (ra  avTo,  t&v  TraSrjfLdrcov) .  Eev.,  bet- 
ter, sufferings.  A  very  peculiar  construction,  occurring  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament.  Lit.,  the  same  things  of  sufferings, 
emphasizing  the  idea  of  identity. 

Are  accomplished  {iiriTeXeiaSat).  More  correctly,  are  be- 
ing accomplished.  The  present  infinitive  denotes  something  in 
jyrocess  of  accomplishment. 


Ch.  v.]  THE  FIRST  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  671 

Brethren  {dBeX^oTTjTi).  Lit.,  irotherhood.  Only  here  and 
ch.  ii.  17. 

10.  Who  hath  called  us  (6  KoKeaa'i  rifia<i).  But  the  tense  is 
the  aorist,  and  the  true  reading  is  w/^as,  you,  instead  of  us.  Ren- 
der, therefore,  as  'Rev.,  who  called  you  /  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  See  Rom.  viii.  29,  30,  and  compare  imto  his 
eternal  glory  and  them  he  also  glorified. 

By  Christ  Jesus  {ev  Xpia-rS  'Irjaov).  The  best  texts  omit 
Jesus.  So  Rev.,  which  also  renders,  better,  in  Christ,  denoting 
the  sphere  or  element  in  which  the  calling  and  its  results  take 
place :  "  Christ  as  the  life,  head,  and  very  principle  of  all  exist- 
ence to  the  Christian  "  (Cook). 

Awhile  {oKtjov).  Rev.,  more  literally,  a  little  while.  See 
on  ch.  i.  6. 

Make  you  perfect,  etc.  The  Tex.  Rec.  makes  this  and  the 
three  following  verbs  in  the  optative  mood,  expressing  a  wish. 
So  the  A.  Y.  But  the  best  texts  make  them  all  indicative 
future,  and  thus  convert  the  wish  or  prayer  into  an  assurance. 
Thus,  then. 

Shall  himself  perfect  {avTo<s  KarapTia-et).  The  A.  Y.  over- 
looks the  avTO'i,  himself,  which  is  very  significant  as  indicating 
God^s^ersonal  interest  and  energy  in  the  work  of  confirming 
his  children. 

Shall  perfect.  Rev.  reads  restore,  in  margin.  The  root  of 
this  word  appears  in  dpo)  or  apapla-Kco,  to  fit  or  Join  together. 
So  ap^pov  means  a  joint.  The  radical  notion  of  the  verb  is, 
therefore,  adjustment— the  putting  of  all  the  parts  into  right 
relation  and  connection.  We  find  it  used  of  mending  the  nets 
(Matt.  iv.  21),  and  of  restoring  an  erring  brother  (Gal.  vi.  1) ; 
of  framing  the  body  and  the  worlds  (Heb.  x.  5  ;  xi.  3)  ;  of  the 
union  of  members  in  the  church  (1  Cor.  i.  10 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11). 
Out  of  this  comes  the  general  sense  of  perfecting  (Matt.  xxi. 
16 ;  Luke  vi.  40  ;  1  Thess.  iii.  10). 


672  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

Shall  stablish  {(nripl^ei).  The  word  is  akin  at  the  root  to 
tnepeo'i,  steadfast  (ver.  9),  and  is  the  very  word  used  by  Christ 
in  his  exhortation  to  Peter,  "  st/rengthen  thy  brethren  "  (Luke 
xxii.  32).  Possibly  there  is  a  reminiscence  of  this  in  Peter's 
use  of  the  word  here.  Compare  1  Thess.  iii.  13 ;  2  Thess.  ii. 
17 ;  Jas.  V.  8  ;  Apoc.  iii.  2. 

Shall  strengthen  {aSevcoa-et).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment.    Compare  Eph.  iii.  16. 

Shall  settle  (^e/ieXttuo-et).  Omitted  by  some  texts,  and  by 
Kev.  From  Se/MeXio^,  2^  foundation.  The  radical  notion  of  the 
word  is,  therefore,  to  ground  securely.  It  occurs  in  Matt.  vii.  25, 
of  the  \io\)ii,%  founded  on  a  rock  ;  in  Heb.  i.  10,  of  laying  the 
foundations  of  the  earth.  In  Eph.  iii.  18,  it  is  joined  with 
rooted.  The  massing  of  these  expressions,  unconnected  by  con- 
junctions, indicates  strong  feeling.  Bengel  thus  sums  up  the 
whole  :  "  Shall  ferfect,  that  no  defect  remain  in  you  :  shall  stah- 
lish,  that  nothing  may  shake  you :  shall  strengthen,  that  j'ou 
may  overcome  every  adverse  force.  A  saying  worthy  of  Peter. 
He  is  strengthening  his  brethren." 

12.  Silvanus.  Probably  the  companion  of  Paul  known  in 
the  Acts  as  Silas  (xv.  22,  27,  32,  34,  40,  etc.),  and  called  Sil- 
vanus by  Paul  in  2  Cor.  i.  19  ;  1  Thess.  i.  1 ;  2  Thess.  i.  1. 

A  faithful  brother.  Brother  has  the  definite  article,  the 
faithful  brother,  designating  him  as  one  well  known  for  his 
fidelity.     Eev.  renders  our,  with  the  in  margin. 

Unto  you.  Construe,  not  as  A.  V.,  a  Irother  unto  you,  but 
I  have  written  unto  you.     So  Rev. 

As  I  suppose  {tSoii 'Koyi^ofiai).  Too  feeble,  since  the  verb  de- 
notes a  settled  persuasion  or  assurance.  See  Rom.  iii.  28,  "  we 
conclude  "  or  reckon,  as  the  result  of  our  reasoning.  Compare 
Rom.  viii.  18  ;  Heb.  xi.  19.     Rev.,  as  /account  him. 


Ch.  v.]         the  first  general  epistle  of  pbtkr.  673 

I  have  written  (Jeypafa).  Lit.,  I  wrote.  An  example  of 
what  is  known  as  the  ej^istolary  aarisL  The  writer  regards  the 
time  of  writing  as  his  correspondent  will  do  when  he  shall  have 
received  the  letter.  We  say  in  a  letter,  I  write.  Paul,  writing 
to  Philemon,  says  aviire/ju-i^a,  I  sent ;  since  to  Philemon  the  act 
of  sending  would  be  already  past.  Therefore  in  using  this  form 
of  expression  Peter  does  not  refer  to  the  second  epistle,  nor  to 
another  now  lost,  but  to  the  present  epistle. 

Briefly  (St' oXtV*"")'  I'it.,  through  few  (words).  Compare 
Heb.  xiii.  22,  where  the  expression  is  Sta  ^paxewv,  through 
irief  words. 

Testifying  {iTrifiaprvprnv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
See  on  ver.  1. 

Wherein  ye  stand  {ek  ^v  ea-T'^Kare).  The  best  texts  read 
arfiTe,  imperative.  So  Kev.,  stand  ye  fast  therein.  Lit.,  "wito 
which  stand,"  the  preposition  with  the  verb  having  the  preg- 
nant force  of  entering  into  and  standing  fast  in. 

13.  The  church.  The  word  is  not  in  the  Greek,  but  is  sup- 
plied with  the  feminine  definite  article  r).  There  is,  however, 
a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  feminine  ar- 
ticle. Some  suppose  a  reference  to  Peter's  own  wife;  others, 
to  some  prominent  Christian  woman  in  the  church.  Compare 
2  John  1.  The  majority  of  interpreters,  however,  refer  it  to 
the  church. 

Babylon.  Some  understand  in  a  figurative  sense,  as  mean- 
ing Kome ;  others,  literally,  of  Babylon  on  the  Euphrates.  In 
favor  of  the  former  view  are  the  drift  of  ancient  opinion  and 
the  Eoman  Catholic  interpreters,  with  Luther  and  several  noted 
modern  expositors,  as  Ewald  and  Hoffmaim.  This,  too,  is  the 
view  of  Canon  Cook  in  the  "  Speaker's  Commentary."  In  favor 
of  the  literal  interpretation  are  the  weighty  names  of  Alford, 
Huther,  Calvin,  Neander,  Weiss,  and  Reuss.  Professor  Sal- 
mond,  in  his  admirable  commentary  on  this  epistle,  has  so  forcibly 
summed  up  the  testimony  that  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  give 
43 


674  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

his  comment  entire :  "  In  favor  of  this  allegorical  interpreta- 
tion it  is  urged  that  there  are  other  occurrences  of  Babylon  in 
the  ISTew  Testament  as  a  mystical  name  for  Eome  (Apoc.  xiv. 
8 ;  xviii.  2,  10) ;  that  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  unlikely  that 
Peter  should  have  made  the  Assyrian  Babylon  his  residence  or 
missionary  centre,  especially  in  view  of  a  statement  by  Josephus 
indicating  that  the  Emperor  Claudius  had  expelled  the  Jews 
from  that  city  and  neighborhood  ;  and  that  tradition  connects 
Peter  with  Eome,  but  not  with  Babylon.  The  fact,  however, 
that  the  word  is  mystically  used  in  a  mystical  book  like  the 
Apocalypse — a  book,  too,  which  is  steeped  in  the  spirit  and  ter- 
minology of  the  Old  Testament — is  no  argument  for  the  mysti- 
cal use  of  the  word  in  writings  of  a  different  type.  The  alle- 
gorical interpretation  becomes  still  lesslikelywhenitis  observed 
that  other  geographical  designations  in  this  ej^istle  (ch.  i.  1)  have 
undoubtedly  the  literal  meaning.  The  tradition  itself,  too,  is 
uncertain.  The  statement  in  Josephus  does  not  bear  all  that  it 
is  made  to  bear.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that,  at  the 
time  when  this  epistle  was  written,  the  city  of  Rome  was  cur- 
rently known  among  Christians  as  Babylon.  On  the  contrary, 
wherever  it  is  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,  with  the  sin- 
gle exception  of  the  Apocalypse  (and  even  there  it  is  distin- 
guished as  '  Babylon,  the  great''),  it  gets  its  usual  name,  Rome. 
So  far,  too,  from  the  Assyrian  Babylon  being  practically  in  a 
deserted  state  at  this  date,  there  is  very  good  ground  for  believ- 
ing that  the  Jewish  population  (not  to  speak  of  the  heathen)  of 
the  city  and  vicinity  was  very  considerable.  For  these  and 
other  reasons  a  succession  of  distinguished  interpreters  and  his- 
torians, from  Erasmus  and  Calvin,  on  to  Neander,  Weiss,  Reuss, 
Huther,  etc.,  have  rightly  held  by  the  literal  sense." 

Marcus.     Rev.,  Marie.     John  Mark,  the  author  of  the  gos- 
pel.    See  Introduction  to  Mark,  on  his  relations  to  Peter. 

My  son.     Probably  in  a  spiritual  sense,  though  some,  as 
Bengel,  think  that  Peter's  own  son  is  referred  to. 

14.  Kiss  of  charity.    Compare  1  Cor.  xvi.  20. 


THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF 
PETER. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  Simon  Peter.  ISTote  the  addition  of  Svmon,  and  see  on 
1  Pet.  i.  1.  The  best-attested  orthography  is  Symeon,  which 
is  the  form  of  his  name  in  Acts  xv.  14,  where  the  account 
probably  came  from  him.  This  also  is  the  Hebraic  form  of  the 
name  found  in  the  Septuagint,  Gen.  xxix.  33,  and  elsewhere. 
Compare  Apoc.  vii.  T ;  Luke  ii.  25,  34 ;  iii.  30 ;  Acts  xiii.  1. 
The  combined  name,  Simon  Peter,  is  found  Luke  v.  8 ;  John 
xiii.  6 ;  xx.  2  ;  xxi.  15,  and  elsewhere,  though  in  these  instances 
it  is  given  as  Simon'  Symeon  occurring  only  in  Acts  xv.  14. 
While  his  name  is  given  with  greater  familiarity  than  in  the 
first  epistle,  his  official  title,  servcmt  cmd  apostle,  is  fuller.  This 
combination,  servant  and  apostle,  occurs  in  no  other  apostolic 
salutation.     The  nearest  approach  to  it  is  Tit.  i.  1. 

Of  Jesus  Christ.  The  word  Christ  never  occurs  in  the 
second  epistle  without  Jesvs  ;  and  only  in  this  instance  without 
some  predicate,  such  as  Lord,  Samour. 

To  them  that  have  obtained  (roh  Xaxowiv).  Lit.,  ob- 
tained hy  lot.  So  Luke  i.  9  ;  John  xix.  24.  In  the  sense  which 
it  has  here  it  is  used  by  Peter  (Acts  i.  17)  of  Judas,  who  had 
obtamed  part  of  this  ministry.  In  this  sense  it  occurs  only  in 
that  passage  and  here. 


676  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

Like  precious  (Ifforifiov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  should  be  written  Uke^eciom.  Compare  precious 
in  1  Pet.  i.  7,  19 ;  ii.  4,  6,  7.  Not  the  same  in  measure  to  all, 
but  having  an  equal  value  and  honor  to  those  who  receive  it,  as 
admitting  them  to  the  same  Christian  privileges. 

With  us.  Most  probably  the  Jewish  Christians,  of  whom 
Peter  was  one.  Professor  Salmond  remarks,  "  There  is  much 
to  show  how  alien  it  was  to  primitive  Christian  thought  to  re- 
gard Gentile  Christians  as  occupying  in  grace  the  self -same 
platform  with  Christians  gathered  out  of  the  ancient  church  of 
God."     See  Acts  xi.  17;  xv.  9-11. 

Saviour.  Frequently  applied  to  Christ  in  this  epistle,  but 
never  in  the  first. 

2.  In  the  knowledge  {ev  iirir/vtoaei).  The  compound  ex- 
pressing full  knowledge,  and  so  common  in  Paul's  writings. 

Our  Lord  {icvpiov  ■^fjL&v).  The  word  Zord  in  the  second 
epistle  is  always  used  of  God,  unless  Christ  or  Saviour  is  added. 

3.  Hath  granted  (SeSw/oij/itei'T??).  This  is  the  only  word 
which  Peter  and  Mark  alone  have  in  common  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament; a  somewhat  singular  fact  in  view  of  their  intimate 
relations,  and  of  the  impress  of  Peter  upon  Mark's  gospel :  yet 
it  tells  very  strongly  against  the  theory  of  a  forgery  of  this 
epistle.  The  word  is  stronger  than  the  simple  B^Sw/jll,  to  gi/ve, 
meaning  to  grant  or  bestow  as  a  gift.     Compare  Mark  xv.  45. 

Godliness  {eva-e^eiav).  Used  only  by  Peter  (Acts  iii.  12), 
and  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  It  is  from  ev,  well,  and  ai^ofiaif 
to  worship,  so  that  the  radical  idea  is  worship  rightly  directed. 
"Worship,  however,  is^to  be  understood  in  its  etymological  sense, 
worth-ship,  or  reverence  paid  to  worth,  whether  in  God  or 
man.  So  "Wycliffe's  rendering  of  Matt.  vi.  2,  "  that  they  be  wor- 
shipjped  of  men ;  "  and  "  worship  thy  father  and  thy  mother," 
Matt.  xix.  19.     In  classical  Greek  the  word  is  not  confined  to 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETBB.  677 

religion,  but  means  also  jnety  in  the  fulfilment  of  human  rela- 
tions, like  the  Latin  pietas.  Even  in  classical  Greek,  however, 
it  is  a  standing  word  for  piety  in  the  religious  sense,  showing 
itself  in  right  reverence ;  and  is  opposed  to  Bvavi^eia,  un- 
godliness, and  avoaioTT]'},  profaneness.  "  The  recognition  of 
dependence  upon  the  gods,  the  confession  of  human  depend- 
ence, the  tribute  of  homage  which  man  renders  in  the  certainty 
that  he  needs  their  favor — all  this  is  evai^eia,  manifest  in  con- 
duct and  conversation,  in  sacrifice  and  prayer"  (Nagelsbach, 
cited  by  Cremer).  This  definition  may  be  almost  literally  trans- 
ferred to  the  Christian  word.  It  embraces  the  confession  of 
the  one  living  and  true  God,  and  life  corresponding  to  this 
knowledge.     See  on  ver.  2. 

Called  (/caXecroi'To?).  Also  used  of  the  divine  invitation, 
1  Pet.  ii.  9,  21 ;  iii.  9  ;  v.  10. 

To  glory  and  virtue  (ISca  Sofj;  Kot  aperfj).  Lit.,  and  prop- 
erly, iy  his  own  glory  and  virtue,  though  some  read  Si^  B6^<s 
KoX  aperrj^,  through  glory  and  virtue.  Rev.  adopts  the  former. 
The  meaning  is  much  the  same  in  either  case. 

His  own  {Ihia).  Of  frequent  occurrence  in  Peter,  and  not 
necessarily  with  an  emphatic  force,  since  the  adjective  is  some- 
times used  merely  as  a  possessive  pronoun,  and  mostly  so  in 
Peter  (1  Pet.  iii.  1,  5  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  16,  22,  etc.). 

Virtue.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9.  Used  by  Peter  only,  with  the 
exception  of  Philip,  iv.  8.  The  original  classical  sense  of  the 
word  had  no  special  moral  import,  but  denoted  excellence  of 
any  kind — bravery,  rank,  nobility ;  also,  excellence  of  land,  ani- 
mals, things,  classes  of  persons.  Paul  seems  to  avoid  the  term, 
using  it  only  once. 

On  glory  and  virtue  Bengel  says,  "  the  former  indicates  his 
natural,  the  latter  his  moral,  attributes." 

4.  Whereby  (St'  mv).     Lit.,  through  which;  viz.,  his  glory 


678  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch-  I- 

and  virtue.     Note  the  three  occurrences  of  Sid,  through,  in  vv. 
3,4. 

Are  given  {SeSa)pr]Tai,).  Middle  voice  ;  not  passive,  as  A.  V. 
Hence  Kev.,  correctly,  he  hath,  granted.     See  on  ver.  3. 

Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  Kev.,  his  ex- 
ceeding great,  etc.,  by  way  of  rendering  the  definite  article,  to,. 

Precious  (Tifiia).  The  word  occurs  fourteen  times  in  the 
New  Testament.  In  eight  instances  it  is  used  of  material  things, 
as  stones,  fruit,  wood.  In  Peter  it  occurs  three  times :  1  Pet.  i. 
7,  of  tried  faith ;  1  Pet.  i.  19,  of  the  blood  of  Christ ;  and  here, 
of  God's  promises. 

Promises  {iirtvyyeK/jLaTa).  Only  in  this  epistle.  In  classical 
Greek  the  distinction  is  made  between  eTrar/yeX/iara,  promises 
voluntarily  or  sjpontaneousl/y  made,  and  viro<r')(ea-eL';,  promiBes 
made  in  response  to  apetition. 

Might  be  partakers  {yevqaSe  kocvcovoI).  Kev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, may  'become,  conveying  the  idea  of  a  growth.  See  note 
on  KOiva)vo<;,  pa/rtaher,  1  Pet.  v.  1 ;  and  compare  Heb.  xii.  10. 

Having  escaped  {a,'iro<^vy6vre<i).  Only  in  this  epistle.  To 
escape  hy  flight. 

Through  lust  (eV  iiri^v/jiia).  Kev.  renders  by  lust,  as  the 
instrument  of  the  corruption.  Others,  in  lust,  as  the  sphere  of 
the  corruption,  or  as  that  in  which  it  is  grounded. 

5.  Beside  this  (auTo  TovTo).  Wrong.  'Render,  for  this  very 
cause,  as  Kev.  Lit.,  this  very  thing.  Just  as  r'l,  what ?  has 
come  to  mea.i\why?  So  the  strengthened  demonstrative  ac- 
quires the  meaning  of  wherefore,  for  this  very  cause. 

Giving  ail  diligence  {a-irovSrjp  Traaav  TrapeicreviyKavTei}). 
The  verb  occurs  only  here  in  New  Testament,  and  means,  liter- 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  679 

ally,  to  iring  m  by  the  side  of:  adding  your  diligence  to  the 
divine  promises.     So  Rev.,  adding  on  your  jpart. 

Add  to  your  faith,  etc.  The  A.  V.  is  entirely  wrong.  The 
verb  rendered  add  {eiri,j(pprf/riaare)  is  derived  from  %op6s,  a 
chorus,  such  as  was  employed  in  the  representation  of  the  Greek 
tragedies.  The  verb  originally  means  to  hear  the  expense  of  a 
chorus,  which  was  done  by  a  person  selected  by  the  state,  who 
was  obliged  to  defray  all  the  expenses  of  training  and  mainten- 
ance. In  the  New  Testament  the  word  has  lost  this  technical 
>  sense,  and  is  used  in  the  general  sense  of  supplyiMg  or  jprovid- 
vng.  The  verb  is  used  by  Paul  (2  Cor.  ix.  10  ;  Gal.  iii.  5  ;  Col. 
ii.  19),  and  is  rendered  Tninister  (A.  Y.),  supply  (Rev.) ;  and 
the  simple  verb  ^(ppiy^ea},  minister,  occurs  1  Pet.  iv.  11 ;  2  Cor. 
ix.  10.     Here  the  Rev.,  properly,  renders  supply. 

To  your  faith  (eV  ry  •n-la-rei).  The  A.  V.  exhorts  to  addoue 
virtue  to  another ;  but  the  Greek,  to  develop  one  virtue  in  the 
exercise  of  another :  "an  increase  by  growth,  not  by  external 
junction ;  each  new  grace  springing  out  of,  attempting,  and 
perfecting  the  other."  Render,  therefore,  as  Rev.  In  your 
faith  supply  virtue,  and  in  your  virtue  knowledge,  etc. 

Virtue.  See  on  ver.  3,  and  1  Pet.  ii.  9.  ISTot  in  the  sense 
of  moral  excellence,  but  of  the  energy  which  Christians  are  to 
exhibit,  as  God  exerts  his  energy  upon  them.  As  God  calls  us 
by  his  own  virtue  (ver.  3),  so  Christians  are  to  exhibit  virtue  or 
energy  in  the  exercise  of  their  faith,  translating  it  into  vigorous 
action. 

6.  Temperance  (ey/c/sareia).  Self-control ;  holding  the  pas- 
sions and  desires  in  hand.     See  1  Cor.  ix.  25. 

Patience  (vTrofiov^v).  Lit.,  remaining  behind  or  staying, 
from  fievm,  to  wait.  Not  merely  endurance  of  the  inevitable, 
for  Christ  could  have  relieved  himself  of  his  sufferings  (Heb. 
xii.  2,  3 ;  compare  Matt.  xxvi.  53) ;  but  the  heroic,  brave 
patience  with  which  a  Christian  not  only  bears  but  contends. 


680  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

Speaking  of  Christ's  patience,  Barrow  remarks,  "Neither  was  it 
out  of  a  stupid  insensibility  or  stubborn  resolution  that  he  did 
thus  behave  himself ;  for  he  had  a  most  vigorous  sense  of  all 
those  grievances,  and  a  strong  (natural)  aversation  from  under- 
going them ;  .  .  .  but  from  a  perfect  submission  to  the 
divine  will,  and  entire  command  over  his  passions,  an  excessive 
charity  toward  mankind,  this  patient  and  meek  behavior  did 
spring."  The  same  writer  defines  patience  as  follows :  "  That 
virtue  which  qualifieth  us  to  bear  all  conditions  and  all  events, 
by  God's  disposal  incident  to  us,  with  such  apprehensions  and 
persuasions  of  mind,  such  dispositions  and  affections  of  heart, 
such  external  deportment  and  practices  of  life  as  God  requireth 
and  good  reason  directeth  (Sermon  XLII.,  "  On  Patience  "). 

Godliness.  See  on  ver.  3.  The  quality  is  never  ascribed  to 
God. 

Brotherly  kindness  {(j>i\aSe\^iav).  Rev. renders,  literally, 
love  of  the  hrethren. 

Charity  {dyaTnjv).  There  seems  at  first  an  infelicity  in 
the  rendering  of  the  Rev.,  in  your  love  of  the  hrethren  love. 
But  this  is  only  apparent.  In  the  former  word  Peter  contem- 
plates Christian  fellow-believers  as  naturally  and  properly  hold- 
ing the  first  place  in  our  affections  (compare  Gal.  vi.  10, 
"Specially  unto  them  which  cn-e  of  the  household  of  faith'''''). 
But  he  follows  this  with  the  broader  affection  which  should 
characterize  Christians,  and  which  Paul  lauds  in  1  Cor.  xiii.,  the 
love  of  men  as  men.  It  may  be  remarked  here  that  the  entire 
rejection  by  the  Rev.  of  charity  as  the  rendering  of  ar/diri]  is 
wholesome  and  defensible.  Charity  has  acquired  two  peculiar 
meanings,  both  of  M-hicli  are  indeed  included  or  implied  in  love, 
but  neither  of  which  expresses  more  than  a  single  phase  of  love 
— tolerance  and  beneficence.  The  A.  Y.  in  the  great  majority 
of  cases  translates  love;  always  in  the  Gospels,  and  mostly  else- 
where. There  is  no  more  reason  for  saying  "  charity  suffereth 
long,"  than  for  sayhig,  "  the  charity  of  God  is  shed  abroad  iu 
our  hearts,"  or  "  God  is  charity." 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF   PETER.  681 

8.  Be  in  you  (iiTrapj^ovTa).  Rev.,  are  yours;  following  the 
sense  oi  jpossession  which  legitimately  belongs  to  the  verb ;  as 
Matt.  xix.  21,  that  thou  hast;  1  Cor.  xiii.  3,  goods.  In  the 
sense  of  being  the  verb  is  stronger  than  the  simple  elvai,  to  he  ; 
denoting  being  which  is  from  th^  ieginning,  and  therefore 
attaching  to  a  person  as  a  proper  characteristic ;  something  be- 
longing to  him,  and  so  running  into  the  idea  of  rightful  posses- 
sion as  above. 

Barren  (apyotis).  From  d,  not,  and  epyop,  work.  Hence, 
more  correctly,  as  Rev.,  idle.  Compare  "  idle  word  "  (Matt.  xii. 
36) ;  "standing  idle"  (Matt.  xx.  3,  6);  also,  1  Tim.  v.  13.  The 
tautology,  barren  and  unfruitful,  is  thus  avoided. 

In  the  knowledge  (et?).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  unto.  The 
idea  is  not  idleness  in  the  knowledge,  but  idleness  in  pressing 
on  and  developing  toward  and  finally  reaching  the  knowledge. 
With  this  agrees  the  compound  eiri'^vwaiv,  the  constantly  in- 
creasing and  &na.l\y  full  knowledge. 

9.  But  (yap).     Wrong.     Render  as  Rev., yb/". 

He  that  lacketh  these  things  {mfirjirdpea-nvTavTa).  Lit., 
to  whom  these  things  are  not  present.  Note  that  a  different 
word  is  used  here  from  that  in  ver.  8,  are  yours,  to  convey  the 
idea  of  possession.  Instead  of  speaking  of  the  gifts  as  belong- 
ing to  the  Christian  by  habitual,  settled  possession,  he  denotes 
them  now  as  meielj  j)resent  with  him. 

Blind  (tu^Xo?).  Illustrating  Peter's  emphasis  on  sight  as  a 
medium  of  instruction.     See  Introduction. 

And  cannot  see  afar  off  {iJbva>frdi,a>v).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  From  fivco,  to  close,  and  w'>^,  the  eye.  Closing  or 
contracting  the  eyes  like  short-sighted  people.  Hence,  to  be 
short-bighted.  The  participle  being  short-sighted  is  added  to  the 
adjective  blind,  defining  it ;  as  if  he  had  said,  is  blind,  that  is, 
short-sighted  spiritually  ;  seeing  only  things  present  and  not 


682  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

heavenly  things.     Compare  John  ix.  41.     Eev.  renders,  seeing 
only  what  is  near. 

And  hath  forgotten  (\i]3i]v  Xa/Swi').  Lit.,  having  taken 
forgetfuVness.  A  unique  expression,  the  noun  occurring  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  a  similar  phrase,  2  Tim. 
i.  5,  vTTo/ivrja-iv'Ka^tov,  ha/oing  taken  remembrance:  A.  V.,  wh^n 
I  call  to  reme7nbrance :  Rev.,  hawing  been  reminded  of.  Some 
expositors  find  in  the  expression  a  suggestion  of  a  voluntary 
acceptance  of  a  darkened  condition.  This  is  doubtful,  however. 
Lumby  thinks  that  it  marks  the  advanced  years  of  the  writer, 
since  he  adds  to  failure  of  sight  the  failure  of  meinory,  that  fac- 
ulty on  which  the  aged  dwell  more  than  on  sight. 

That  he  was  purged  (jov  KoJ^apiafioO).  Rev.,  more  liter- 
ally, the  cleansing. 

10.  The  rather  {/j,d\\ov).  The  adverb  belongs  rather  with 
the  verb  give  diligence.  Render,  as  Rev.,  give  the  more  diligence. 

Brethren  (dSeXc^ot).  The  only  instance  of  this  form  of  ad- 
dress in  Peter,  who  commonly  uses  beloved. 

* 

Fall  (TTTaia-rjTe).  Lit.,  stumble,  and  so  Rev.  Compare  Jas. 
iii.  2. 

11.  Shall  be  ministered  abundantly  {-TrXovaico'; iirixopvyrj- 
^rja-erai,).  On  the  verb  see  ver.  5.  Rev.,  shall  be  richly  sujp- 
pUed.  We  are  to  furnish  in  our  faith :  the  reward  shall  be 
furnished  unto  us.  Richly,  indicating  the  fulness  of  future 
blessedness.  Professor  Salmond  observes  that  it  is  the  reverse 
of  •'  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  15). 

Everlasting  kingdom  {aldtvLov  ^aaiXeiav).  In  the  first  epis- 
tle, Peter  designated  the  believer's  future  as  an  inheritance; 
here  he  calls  it  a  kingdom.  Eternal,  as  Rev.,  is  better  than 
evei-lasting,  since  the  word  includes  more  than  duration  of  time. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  683 

12.  I  will  not  be  negligent.  The  A.  Y.  follows  the  read- 
ing ovK  afJiekrj<T(i),  which  it  renders  correctly.  The  better  read- 
ing, however,  is  /ieWTjo-w,  I  intend,  or,  as  often  in  classical 
Greek,  with  a  sense  of  certainty — I  shall  he  sure,  which  Kev. 
adopts,  rendering  T shall  be  ready.  The  formula  occurs  in  but 
one  other  passage.  Matt.  xxiv.  6,  where  it  is  translated  by  the 
simple  future,  ye  shall  hear,  with  an  implied  sense,  as  ye  surely 
wUl  hear. 

Ye  know  (et'Sora?).     Lit.,  knowing.      Compare  1  Pet.  i.  18. 

Established  {ia-TtipvyfjLevov;).  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  10.  Perhaps 
the  exhortation,  "  strengthen  thj  hrethven,"  may  account  for  his 
repeated  use  of  this  \yord  and  its  derivatives.  Thus,  unstable 
{ocTTriptKTOi) ;  steadfastness  {a-Trjpiy/jLov),  2  Pet.  iii.  16,  17. 

in  the  present  truth  {iv  ry  irapovarj  oKrf^eia).  I.e.,  the 
truth  which  is  present  with  you  through  the  instruction  of  your 
teachers ;  not  the  truth  at  present  under  consideration.  See  on 
ver.  9  ;  and  compare  the  same  phrase  in  Col.  i.  6,  rendered,  is 
come  unto  you. 

13.  Tabernacle  {o-KrjvoofiaTi).  A  figurative  expression  for 
the  body,  used  also  by  Paul,  2  Cor.  v.  1,  4,  though  lie  employs 
the  shorter  kindred  word  <TKrivo<i.  Peter  also  has  the  same 
mixture  of  metaphors  which  Paul  employs  in  that  passage,  viz., 
building  and  clothing.  See  next  verse.  Peter's  use  of  taber- 
nacle is  significant  in  connection  with  his  words  at  the  trans- 
figuration, "Let  us  make  three  tabernacles  (Matt.  xvii.  4). 
The  word,  as  well  as  the  entire  phrase,  carries  the  idea  of  brief 
duration — a  frail  tent,  erected  for  a  night.     Compare  ver.  14. 

To  stir  you  up  by  putting  you  in  remembrance  (8te- 
yeipeiv  vfia<!  iv  virofiv^a-ei).  Lit.,  to  stir  you  v/p  in  reminding. 
See  the  same  phrase  in  ch.  iii.  1. 

14.  Shortly  I  must  put  off  this  my  tabernacle  {tuxiv^ 
i<7Tiv  rj  oTTO^eo-*?  tov  crKr]vcofiaT6<i  fiov).     Lit. ,  quick  is  the  put- 


684  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

ting  off  of  my  tdbernade.  Eev.,  the  ^putting  off  of  my  taber- 
nacle cometh  swiftly.  Possibly  in  allusion  to  his  advanced  age. 
Putting  off  is  a  metaphor,  from  putting  off  a  garment.  So 
Paul,  2  Cor.  v.  3, 4,  being  clothed,  unclothed,  clothed  upon.  The 
word  occurs,  also,  1  Pet.  iii.  21,  and  is  used  by  Peter  only. 
Cometh  swiftly,  implying  the  speedy  approach  of  death  ;  though 
others  understand  it  of  the  quick,  violent  death  which  Christ 
prophesied  he  should  die.  "Even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
hath  showed  me."  See  John  xxi.  18, 19.  Compare,  also,  John 
xiii.  36,  and  note  the  word  follow  in  both  passages.  "  Peter 
had  now  learnt  the  full  force  of  Christ's  sayings,  and  to  what 
end  the  following  of  Jesus  was  to  bring  him  "  (Lumby). 

Hath  shewed  (eSj^Xwo-ez/).  But  the  tense  is  the  aorist,  point- 
ing back  to  a  definite  act  at  a  past  time  (John  xxi.  18).  Hence, 
shewed  me,  or,  as  Kev.,  signified.  Compare  1  Pet.  i.  11,  did 
signify. 

15.  Ye  may  be  able  (e^^etv  vfiaf).  Lit.,  that  you  may  have 
it.  A  similar  use  of  have,  in  the  sense  of  to  he  able,  occurs 
Mark  xiv.  8.  The  same  meaning  is  also  foreshadowed  in  Matt, 
xviii.  25,  had  not  to  pay  ;  and  John  viii.  6,  have  to  acause. 

Decease  {e^oZov).  Exodus  is  a  literal  transcript  of  the  word, 
and  is  the  term  used  by  Luke  in  his  account  of  the  transfigura- 
tion. "  They  spake  of  his  decease.''''  It  occurs  only  once  else- 
where, Ileb.  xi.  22,  in  the  literal  sense,  the  departing  or  exodus 
of  the  children  of  Israel.  "It  is  at  least  remarkable,"  says 
Dean  Alford,  "  that,  with  the  recollection  of  the  scene  on  the 
mount  of  transfiguration  floating  in  his  mind,  the  apostle  should 
use  so  close  together  the  words  which  were  there  also  associated, 
tabernacle  and  decease.  The  coincidence  should  not  be  for- 
gotten in  treating  of  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  the 
epistle." 

Call  to  remembrance  {p,vriiJi/i}v  •jroiela-^ai).  The  phrase  oc- 
curs nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  In  classical  Greek,  to 
make  mention  of     An  analogous  expression  is  found,  Eom.  i, 


Oh.  I.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  685 

9,  /Mvelav  iroioviiai,  I  make  mention.  See,  also,  Eph.  i.  16 ;  1 
Thess.  i.  2 ;  Philem.  4.  Some  render  it  thus  here,  as  express- 
ing Peter's  desire  to  make  it  possible  for  bis  readers  to  report 
these  things  to  others.  Kev.,  to  call  these  things  to  remem- 
brance. 

16.  We  have  not  followed  (ow  6'fa«o\ou.^o-ai/T6?).  A  strong 
compound,  used  only  here  and  ch.  ii.  2, 15.  The  i^  gives  the 
force  of  following  out ;  inpursraa/nce  of ;  closely. 

Cunningly  devised  {a-ea-o(f>i,a-fievoi,<;).  Only  here  and  2  Tim. 
iii.  15,  in  which  latter  passage  it  has  a  good  sense,  to  make  thee 
wise.  Here,  in  a  bad  sense,  artfully  framed  by  human  clever- 
ness (a-o^ia).     Coimpare  feigned  words,  ch.  ii.  3. 

Fables  (/iv^ot?).  This  word,  which  occurs  only  here  and  in 
the  Pastoral  Epistles,  is  transcribed  in  the  woi'd  myth.  The 
reference  here  may  be  to  the  Jewish  myths,  rabbinical  embel- 
lishments of  Old-Testament  history ;  or  to  the  heathen  myths 
about  the  descent  of  the  gods  to  earth,  which  might  be  sug- 
gested by  his  remembrance  of  the  transfiguration ;  or  to  the 
Gnostic  speculations  about  aeons  or  emanations,  which  rose  from 
the  eternal  abyss,  the  source  of  all  spiritual  existence,  and  were 
named  Mind,  Wisdom,  Power,  Truth,  etc. 

Coming  {irapova-lav).  Or  presence.  Compare  ch.  iii.  4. 
Another  word,  airoKoKxrifi.'i,  revelation,  is  used  in  1  Pet.  i.  7, 
13  ;  iv.  13,  to  describe  the  appearing  of  Christ. 

Eye-witnesses  (eVoTTTat).  See  on  behold,  IPet.  ii.  12.  Only 
here  in  New  Testament.  Compare  the  different  word  in  Luke 
i.  2,  avT&irrai,,  eye-witnesses. 

Majesty  (jj.eyaXeioTriTO';).  Used  in  only  two  passages  besides 
this :  Luke  ix.  43,  of  the  mighty  power  (Eev.,  majesty)  of  God, 
as  manifested  in  the  healing  of  the  epileptic  child ;  and  Acts 
xix.  27,  of  the  magnificence  of  Diana. 


686  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  1 

17.  When  there  came  (eVex^et'o-i??).  Lit.,  hming  heen 
home.  Compare  come  (Eev.,  ver.  18) ;  moved  (ver.  21) ;  and 
rushing  wind,  lit.,  a  wind  home  along  (Acts  ii.  2). 

From  (uTTo).     Lit.,  hy. 

Excellent  {jjuerfaXoirpeirow).  Or  sublime.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  In  Septuagint  (Deut.  xxxiii.  26),  as  an  epithet 
of  God,  excellency.  Tlie  phrase  excellent  glory  refers  to  the 
bright  clond  which  oversiiadowed  the  companj'  on  the  transfig- 
uration mount,  like  the  shekinali  above  the  mercy-seat. 

18.  Voice  {<jiQ)vr)v).  Note  the  same  word  in  the  account  of 
Pentecost  (Acts.  ii.  6),  where  the  A.  V.  obscures  the  meaning  by 
rendering,  w/ieti  this  was  noised  ahroad;  whereas  it  should  be 
when  this  voice  was  heard. 

Which  came  (eVe^^^^eto-ai/).  JAt.,  having  heen  home.  See  on 
ver.  17.  Rev.,  This  voice  we  ourselves  {rifiei<;,  we,  emphatic) 
heard  come  (better,  home)  out  of  heaven. 

Holy  mount.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  notice  Davidson's 
remark  that  this  expression  points  to  a  time  when  superstitious 
reverence  for  places  had  sprung  up  in  Palestine.  "  Of  all  places 
to  which  special  sanctity  would  be  ascribed  by  Christ's  follow- 
ers, surely  that  would  be  the  first  to  be  so  marked  where  the 
most  solemn  testimony  \Afas  given  to  the  divinity  of  Jesus.  To 
the  Jewish  Christian  this  would  rank  with  Sinai,  and  no  name 
would  be  more  fitly  applied  to  it  than  that  which  had  so  con- 
stantly been  given  to  a  place  on  which  God  first  revealed  him- 
self in  his  glory.  The  '  holy  mount  of  God  '  (Ezek.  xxviii.  14) 
would  now  receive  another  application,  and  he  would  see  little 
of  the  true  continuity  of  God's  revelation  who  did  not  connect 
readily  the  old  and  the  new  covenants,  and  give  to  the  place 
where  the  glory  of  Christ  was  most  eminently  shown  forth  the 
same  name  which  was  applied  so  oft  to  Sinai "  (Lumby). 

19.  We  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy  (koi 
exofiev  ^e^aiorepov  tov  irpo^riKov  \6yov).     The  A.  V  is  wrong 


Ch.  I.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  687 

since  rnore  sure  is  used  predicatively,  and  word  has  the  definite 
article.  We  may  explain  either  (a)  as  Rev.,  we  have  the  word 
of  prophecy  made  more  sure,  i.e.,  we  are  better  certified  than 
before  as  to  the  prophetic  word  by  reason  of  this  voice ;  or  (&) 
we  have  the  word  of  prophecy  as  a  surer  confirmation  of  God's 
truth  than  what  we  ourselves  saw,  i.e.,  Old-Testament  testi- 
mony is  more  convincing  than  even  the  voice  heard  at  the 
transfiguration.  The  latter  seems  to  accord  better  with  the 
words  which  follow.  "  To  appreciate  this  we  must  put  our- 
selves somewhat  in  the  place  of  those  for  whom  St.  Peter  wrote. 
The  New  Testament,  as  we  have  it,  was  to  them  non-exist- 
ent. Therefore  we  can  readily  understand  how  the  long  line 
of  prophetic  scriptures,  fulfilled  in  so  many  ways  in  the  life  of 
Jesus,  would  be  a  mightier  form  of  evidence  than  the  narrative 
of  one  single  event  in  Peter's  life  "  (Lnmby).  "  Peter  knew  a 
sounder  basis  for  faith  than  that  of  signs  and  wonders.  He 
had  seen  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  receive  honor  and  glory  from 
God  the  Father  in  the  holy  mount ;  he  had  been  dazzled  and 
carried  out  of  himself  by  visions  and  voices  from  heaven  ;  but, 
nevertheless,  even  when  his  memory  and  heart  are  throbbing 
with  recollections  of  that  sublime  scene,  he  says,  '  we  have 
something  surer  still  in  the  prophetic  M'ord.'  ...  It  was 
not  the  miracles  of  Christ  by  which  he  came  to  know  Jesus,  but 
the  word  of  Christ  as  interpreted  by  the  spirit  of  Christ"  (Sam- 
uel Cox). 

Unto  a  light  (^vyya).     More  correctly,  as  Eev.,  a  lamp. 

In  a  dark  place  {iv  av^Tjpm  tottm).  A  peculiar  expression. 
Lit.,  a  dry  place.  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Eev.  gives 
squalid,  in  margin.  Aristotle  opposes  it  to  bright  or  glistering. 
It  is  a  subtle  association  of  the  idea  of  darkness  with  squalor, 
dryness,  and  general  neglect. 

Dav/n  {Siavydaji).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Compare 
the  different  word  in  Matt,  xxviii.  1,  and  Luke  xxiii.  54,  im- 
(jmaica.  The  verb  is  compounded  of  hid,  through,  and  av<yri, 
sunlight,  thus  carrying  the  picture  of  light  hreakmg  through  the 
gloom. 


688  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

The  day-star  ((/kuo-^o/jo?).  Of  which  our  word  phosjjkorus 
is  a  transcript.  Lit.,  light-hearer,  like  Lucifer,  from  lux,  light, 
a,ndifero,  to  hear.     See  Aeschylus,  "  Agamemnon,"  245. 

20.  Is  {r^lverat).     More  literally,  arises  or  originates. 

Private  {IBia's).  See  on  ver.  3.  Sis  own.  Rev.,  special,  in 
margin. 

Interpretation  (eVtXuo-ea)?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament 
Compare  the  cognate  verb  expounded  (Mark  iv.  34)  and  deter- 
mined (Acts  xix.  39).  The  usual  word  is  ep/irjveia  (1  Cor.  xii. 
10 ;  xiv.  26).  Literally,  it  means  loosening,  untyimg,  as  of  hard 
knots  of  scripture. 

21.  Came  {^vi^^).  Lit.,  was  home  or  hrought.  See  on  vv. 
17, 18. 

Holy  men  of  God  {ajioi  Seov  avSpm-n-oi,).  The  best  texts 
omit  holy,  and  read  utto  Seov,  from  God.  Render,  as  Rev., 
men  spake  from  Ood. 

IVIoved  {(f>ep6nevot).  The  same  verb  as  came.  Lit.,  heing 
home  along.  It  seems  to  be  a  favorite  word  with  Peter,  occur- 
ring six  times  in  the  two  epistles. 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  But.     Introducing  a  contrast  with  those  who  spake  by  the 
Holy  Ohost  (ch.  i.  21). 

There  were  (er^kvovro).     Rev.,  better,  there  arose. 

There  shall  be.     Note  that  Peter  speaks  of  them  zs,  future, 
and  Jude  (ver.  4)  as  present. 

False  teachers  (i/rewSoStSao-yeoXot).     Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. 


Ch.  II.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  689 

Who  (oiTti/e?).     Of  that  kind  or  class  which,  etc. 

Privily  shall  bring  in  {irapuad^ovtyiv).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  kindred  adjective  occurs  Gal.  ii.  4,  "false 
hxeXhxen privily  hroicght  in"  {TrapeiaaKTov;).  The  metaphor 
is  of  spies  or  traitors  introducing  themselves  into  an  enemy's 
camp.  Compare  Jude  4,  crept  in  unawares.  The  verb  means, 
literally,  to  bring  {ayeiv)  into  (et?)  iy  the  side  of  {irapd). 

Damnable  heresies  {alpia-eK  diraJX.ela';).  Lit.,  heresies  of 
destruction.  Rev.,  destructive  heresies.  Heresy  is  a  transcript 
of  aJpeo-t?,  the  primary  meaning  of  which  is  choice ;  so  that 
a  heresy  is,  strictly,  the  choice  of  an  opinion  contrary  to  that 
usually  received ;  thence  transferred  to  the  body  of  those  who ' 
profess  such  opinions,  and  therefore  a  sect.  So  Rev.,  in  margin, 
sects  of  perdition.  Commonly  in  this  sense  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment (Acts  V.  17 ;  XV.  5 ;  xxviii.  22),  though  the  Rev.  has  an  odd 
variety  in  its  marginal  renderings.  See  Acts.  xxiv.  14 ;  1  Cor. 
xi.  19  ;  Gal.  v.  20.  The  rendering  heretical  doctrines  seems  to 
agree  better  with  the  context ;  false  teachers  bringing  in  sects  is 
awkward. 

Denying.     A  significant  word  from  Peter. 

The  Lord  {SeaTrorrjv).  In  most  eases  in  the  New  Testament 
the  word  is  rendered  master,  the  Rev.  changing  lord  to  master 
in  every  case  but  two — Luke  ii.  29 ;  Acts  iv.  24 ;  and  in  both  in- 
stances putting  master  in  margin,  and  reserving  lord  for  the 
rendering  of  Kvpto^.  In  three  of  these  instances  the  word  is 
used  in  direct  address  to  God ;  and  it  may  be  asked  why  the 
Rev.  changes  Lord  to  Master  in  the  text  of  Apoc.  vi.  10,  and  re- 
tains Zord  in  Luke  ii.  29 ;  Acts  iv.  24.  In  five  out  of  the  ten 
occurrences  of  the  word  in  the  New  Testament  it  means  master 
of  the  household.  Originally,  it  indicates  absolute,  unrestricted 
authority,  so  that  the  Greeks  refused  the  title  to  any  but  the 
gods.  In  the  New  Testament  Seo-Trori;?  and  Kvpio<i  are  used  in- 
terchangeably of  God,  and  of  masters  of  servants. 
44 


690  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

Swift  (raxivvv).    Used  by  Peter  only.     See  on  ch.  i.  14. 

2.  Shall  follow.     See  on  ch.  i.  16. 

Pernicious  ways  {cnrmXeiaK).  The  true  reading  is  da-e\- 
yeiaK,  lascivious  doings.  So  Eev.  See  on  1  Pet.  iv.  3.  The 
use  of  the  plural  is  rare.     Compare  Jude  i. 

3.  Through  covetousness  (eV  irXeove^ia).  Lit.,  in  covet- 
ousness ;  denoting  the  element  or  sphere  in  which  the  evil  is 
■wrought. 

Feigned  (TrXao-rot?).     Only  here  in  New  Testament.     From 
'  irXdaa-w,  to  mould,  as  in  clay  or  wax.     The  idea  is,  therefore,  of 
words  moulded  at  will  to  suit  their  vain  imaginations. 

Make  merchandise  {ifiiropevaovTai).  Only  here  and  Jas. 
iv.  13.  Compare  Jude  16,  for  the  sake  of  advantage;  their  glory 
being  in  having  a  multitude  of  followers. 

Judgment  (Kpi/ui).  Kev.,  sentence.  So,  commonly,  in  New 
Testament ;  the  process  or  act  of  judging  being  expressed  by 

KplcTK. 

Of  a  long  time  (eKTraXat).  Rev.,  hetter,  from  of  old,  bring- 
ing out  thus  more  sharply  the  force  of  ew.  Only  here  and  ch. 
iii.  5.     Construe  with  lingereth. 

Lingereth  (apyet).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Compare 
on  the  kindred  adjective  idle,  ch.  i.  8.  There  is  a  graphic  pict- 
ure in  the  sentence.  The  judgment  is  not  idle.  It  is  "repre- 
sented as  a  living  thing,  awake  and  expectant.  Long  ago  that 
judgment  started  on  its  destroying  path,  and  the  fate  of  sinning 
angels,  and  the  deluge,  and  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomor- 
rah were  but  incidental  illustrations  of  its  power;  nor  has  it 
ever  since  lingered.  ...  It  advances  still,  strong  and  vig- 
ilant as  when  first  it  sprang  from  the  bosom  of  God,  and  will 


Ch.  n.]     THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETEB.      691 

not  fail  to  reach  the  mark  to  which  it  was  pointed  from  of  old  " 
(Salmond  and  Lillie). 

Damnation  (a7rw\«a).  More  literally,  Rev.,  destruction. 
The  word  occurs  three  times  in  vv.  1-3. 

Slumbereth  (wo-rafet).  See  on  Matt.  xxv.  5,  the  only 
other  passage  where  it  occurs. 

4.  The  angels.  No  article.  Angels.  So  Rev.  Compare 
Jude  6. 

Cast  them  down  to  hell  (TapTapdxra^).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  From  Tdprapo';,  Tartarus.  It  is  strange  to  find 
Peter  using  this  Pagan  term,  which  represents  the  Greek  hell, 
though  treated  here  not  as  equivalent  to  Gehenna,  but  as  the 
place  of  detention  until  the  judgment. 

Chains  of  darkness  {a-eipah  ^64>ov).  Setpd  is  a  cord  or 
iand,  sometimes  of  metal.  Compare  Septuagint,  Prov.  v.  22 ; 
Wisd.  of  Sol.  xvii.  2,  18.  The  best  texts,  however,  substitute 
o-ipoK  or  a-eipoi^,  pits  or  caverns.  Xip6<!  originally  is  a  place 
for  storing  corn.     Rev.,  pits  of  darkness. 

Of  darkness  {]^6<^ov).  Peculiar  to  Peter  and  Jude.  Origi- 
nally of  the  gloom  of  the  nether  world.     So  Homer  : 

"  These  tails  are  full 
Of  shadows  hastening  down  to  Erebus 
Amid  the  gloom  {fiith  (6(poy)." 

y,  XX.,  355. 


When  Ulysses  meets  his  mother  in  the  shades,  she  says  to  him: 

"  How  didst  thou  come,  ray  child,  a  living  man, 
Into  this  place  of  darkness  ?  (Jmh  Qibov)." 

Odyssey,  xi.,  155. 
Compare  Jude  13.     So  Milton : 

"  Here  their  prison  ordained 
In  utter  darkness,  and  their  portion  set 
As  far  removed  from  God  and  light  of  heaven 
As  from  the  centre  thrice  to  the  utmost  pole." 

Paradise  Lost,  i.,  71-74. 


693  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

And  Dante : 

"  That  air  forever  black." 

Inferno,  iii.,  329. 

"  Upon  the  verge  I  found  me 
Of  the  ahysmal  valley  dolorous 
That  gathers  thunder  of  infinite  ululations. 
Obscure,  profound  it  was,  and  nebulous, 
So  that  by  fixing  on  its  depths  my  sight 
Nothing  whatever  I  discerned  therein." 

Inferno,  iv. ,  7, 13. 

"  I  came  unto  a  place  mute  of  all  light." 

Inferno,  v. ,  38. 

To  be  reserved  {rripoviJ.ivov';).  Lit.,  being  reserved.  See 
on  1  Pet.  i.  4,  "  reserved  in  heaven." 

5.  Saved  {e<^v\a^ev).  Rqy., preserved.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4, 
and  compare  "the  Lord  shut  him  in"  (Gen.  vii.  16). 

Noah  the  eighth  person.  So  the  A.  Y.,  literally.  Kev.  is 
more  perspicuous  however :  Noah  with  seven  others.  Compare 
1  Pet.  iii.  20. 

A  preacher  {icr)pvKa).  Lit.,  a  herald.  Compare  the  kin- 
dred verb  KTjpva-croa,  to  preach,  everywhere  in  New  Testament. 
The  word  herald  is  beautifully  suggestive,  at  many  points,  of 
the  office  of  a  gospel  minister.  In  the  Homeric  age  the  herald 
partook  of  the  character  of  an  ambassador.  He  summoned  the 
assembly  and  kept  order  in  it,  and  had  charge  of  arrangements 
at  sacrifices  and  festivals.  The  office  of  the  heralds  was  sacred, 
and  their  persons  inviolable  ;  hence  they  were  employed  to  bear 
messages  between  enemies.  The  symbol  of  their  office  was  the 
herald's  staff,  or  caduoeus,  borne  by  Mercury,  the  herald-god. 
This  was  originally  an  olive-branch  with  fillets,  which  were 
afterward  formed  into  snakes,  according  to  the  legend  that 
Mercury  found  two  snakes  fighting  and  separated  them  with  his 
wand,  from  which  circumstance  they  were  used  as  an  emblem  of 
peace.     Plato  ("  Laws,"  xii.,  941)  thus  speaks  of   the  fidelity 


Ch.  II.]         THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETEB.  693 

entailed  by  the  office:  "If  any  herald  or  ambassador  carry  a 
false  message  to  any  other  city,  or  bring  back  a  false  message 
from  the  city  to  which  he  is  sent,  or  be  proved  to  have  brought 
back,  whether  from  friends  or  enemies,  in  his  capacity  of  herald 
or  ambassador,  what  they  have  never  said — -let  him  be  indicted 
for  having  offended,  contrary  to  the  law,  in  the  sacred  office 
and  appointment  of  Hermes  and  Zeus,  and  let  there  be  a  pen- 
alty fixed  which  he  shall  suffer  or  pay  if  he  be  convicted."  In 
later  times,  their  position  as  messengers  between  nations  at  war 
was  emphasized.  In  Herodotus  (i.,  21),  the  word  herald  is  used 
as  synonymous  with  apostle.  "  Alyattes  sent  a  herald  {ic^pvKa) 
to  Miletus  in  hopes  of  concluding  a  truce,  etc.  The  herald 
{a.TToa-ToXo'i)  went  on  his  way  to  Miletus."  A  priestly  house  at 
Athens  bore  the  name  of  KripvKe<;,  heralds. 

Bringing  in  {i'n-d^a<;).  The  verb  may  be  said  to  be  used  by 
Peter  only.  Besides  this  passage  and  ver.  1,  it  occurs  only  at 
Acts  V.  28,  where  Luke  probably  received  the  account  from 
Peter  as  the  principal  actor:  "ye  intend  to  bring  upon  us 
{eTrayayeiv)  this  man's  blood." 

6.  Turning  into  ashes  (recppwa-ag).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament. 

Having  made  them  an  example  {v-rroBeiyfia  reBeiKox;). 
Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  21.  The  word  for  example  is  condemned  as 
unclassical  by  the  Attic  grammarians,  and  irapaSeiyfia  is  substi- 
tuted, which  means,  properly,  a  sculptor's  or  a  painter's  model, 
or  an  architect's  plan. 

7.  Just  (BiKaiov).     Occurring  three  times  in  vv.  7,  8. 

Vexed  {KaTavovovfievov).  Only  here  and  Acts  vii.  24.  Kara 
gives  the  force  of  worn  down.     So  Rev.,  sore  distressed. 

With  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked  {virb  t^?  t&v 
aSio'/icop  iv  dcreXr/ela  dvaaTpotpfj';).  Lit.,  by  the  behavior  of  the 
lawless  in  wantonness.     Eev.,  the  lascivious  life  of  the  wicked. 


694  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

Life  or  heha/vior  {avaarpo(j»j<!).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  15.  Wicked 
{ci^ecrijbwv),  lit.,  Icmoless.  Only  here  and  ch.  iii.  17.  Wanton- 
ness (do-eXyeta),  see  on  Mark  vii.  22. 

8.  Dwelling  {h/KWToiK&v).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Dwelling,  and  therefore  suffering  continually,  from  day  to  day. 

In  seeing  (fiKkiiiian).  Only  here  in  New  Testament  Usu- 
ally of  the  look  of  a  man  from  without,  through  which  the 
vexation  comes  to  the  soul.     "  Vexed  his  righteous  soul" 

Vexed  (i^aa-avl^ev).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  24,  torments.  The 
original  sense  is  to  test  hy  touclostone  or  iy  torture.  See  on 
toiling,  Mark  vi.  48.     Rev.  gives  tormented,  in  margin. 

Unlawful  (dvo/iot?).  'Rev.,  lawless.  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament with  things.     In  all  other  cases  it  is  applied  to  persons. 

9.  Godly  (euo-ejSe??).  Used  by  Peter  only.  Compare  Acts 
X.  2,  7.  The  reading  at  Acts  xxii.  12,  is  evka^ri<i,  d&uout.  See 
on  ch.  i.  3. 

Temptation  {ireipaafiov).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  6. 

To  reserve  {Ttjpeiv).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4.  Kev.,  keep,  is  not 
an  improvement. 

To  be  punished  {Ko\a^ofiivov<;).  Only  here  and  Acts  iv. 
21,  where  the  narrative  probably  came  from  Peter.  The  par- 
ticiple here  is,  lit.,  being  jmnished,  and  therefore  the  A.  Y.  is 
wrong.  Kev.,  rightly,  under  punishment.  Compare  Matt. 
XXV.  46. 

10.  Go  after  the  flesh.     Compare  Jude  7. 

Of  uncleanness  (jiiaa/iov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
See  on  defilements,  ver.  20.     Compare  Jude  8. 

Despise  government.     'Rev.,  dominion.     Compare  Jude  8. 


t!H.  n.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  695 

Presumptuous  {ToKfji/tjTai).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Lit.,  darers.    Eev.,  darviig. 

Self-willed  (au^aSets).  Only  here  and  Tit.  i.  7.  From  airo?, 
self,  and  i^So/xai,  to  delight  in.     Therefore  a  self-loving  spirit. 

They  tremble  {Tpifiova-iv).  Compare  Mark  v.  33.  An  un- 
common word  in  the  New  Testament.  Luke  viii.  47 ;  Acts 
ix.  6. 

Dignities  {S6^a<i).  Lit.,  glories.  Compare  Jude  8.  Prob- 
ably angelic  powers :  note  the  reference  to  the  angels  imme- 
diately following,  as  in  Jude  9  to  Michael.  They  defy  the 
spiritual  powers  though  knowing  their  might. 

11.  Power  and  might  (to-;)^t;i;KatSum/iet).  'Rev.,  might  and 
power.  The  radical  idea  of  lcTxv<i,  might,  is  that  of  indwelUng 
strength,  especially  as  emhodied :  might  which  inheres  in  phys- 
ical powers  organized  and  working  under  individual  direction, 
as  an  army :  which  appears  in  the  resistance  of  physical  organ- 
isms, as  the  earth,  against  which  one  dashes  himself  in  vain  : 
which  dwells  in  persons  or  things,  and  gives  tbem  influence  or 
value :  which  resides  in  laws  or  punishments  to  make  them  irre- 
sistible. This  sense  comes  out  clearly  in  the  New  Testament 
in  the  use  of  the  word  and  of  its  cognates.  Thus,  "  Love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  sl/rength  "  (Mark  xii.  30) :  "  accord- 
ing to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power"  (Eph.  i.  19).  So  the 
kindred  adjective  Icyxypo^.  "  A  strong  man  "  (Matt.  xii.  29) : 
a  mighty  famine  (Luke  xv.  14) :  his  letters  are  powerful  (2 
Cor.  x.  10) :  a  strong  consolation  (Heb.  vi.  18) :  a  mighty  angel 
(Apoc.  xviii.  21).  Also  the  verb  ia-)(vai.  "  It  is  good  for  noth- 
ing "  (Matt.  v.  13) :  "  shall  not  be  able"  (Luke  xiii.  24) :  "lean 
do  all  things  "  (Philip,  iv.  13) :  "  OAjaileih  much  "  (Jas.  v.  16).    . 

Avvayi.i<i  is  rather  ability,  faculty :  not  necessarily  manifest,  as 
tcr%i^9 :  power  residing  in  one  by  nature.  Thus  ability  (Matt. 
XXV.  15)  :  mrtv,e  (Mark  v.  30) :  power  (Luke  xxiv.  29  ;  Acts  i. 
8  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4) :  "  strength  of  sin  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  56).  So  of  moral 
vigor.     "  Strengthened  with  might  in  the  inner  man  "  (Eph. 


696  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  U 

iii.  16) :  "  with  all  might  (Col.  i.  11).  It  is,  however,  mostly 
power  in  action,  as  in  the  frequent  use  of  Zvvdfiei'i  for  miracles, 
•mighty  woi'Jcs,  they  being  exhibitions  of  divine  virtue.  Thus 
'■'■jpower  unto  salvation  "  (Roiii.  i.  16) :  the  kingdom  coming  in 
jpower''''  (Mark  ix.  1):  God  himself  called  ^owe?' — "the  right 
hand  of  the  power  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  64),  and  so  in  classical  Greek 
used  to  denote  the  magistrates  or  authorities.  Also  of  the 
angelic  powers  (Eph.  i.  21 ;  E,om.  viii.  38  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  22).  Gen- 
erally, then,  it  may  be  said  that  while  both  words  include  the 
idea  of  manifestation,  or  of  power  in  action,  l<r')(v'i  emphasizes 
the  outtvard,  physical  manifestations,  and  SvvafiL'?  the  invM7'd, 
spiritual  or  moral  virtue.  Plato  ("  Protagoras,"  350)  draws  the 
distinction  thus :  "  I  should  not  have  admitted  that  the  able 
(hvvaTov'i)  are  strong  {Icr^vpovi;),  though  I  have  admitted  that 
the  strong  are  able.  For  there  is  a  difference  between  ability 
{BiivafMiv)  and  strength  {la-')(yv).  The  former  is  given  by  knowl- 
edge as  well  as  by  madness  or  rage  ;  but  strength  comes  from 
nature  and  a  healthy  state  of  the  body.  Aristotle  ("  Rhet.,"  i., 
5)  says  "  strength  (la'^v^)  is  the  power  of  moving  another  as  one 
wills ;  and  that  other  is  to  be  moved  either  by  drawing  or  push- 
ing or  carrying  or  pressing  or  compressing ;  so  that  the  strong 
(o  la-'xypbsi)  is  strong  for  all  or  for  some  of  these  things." 

Railing  judgment.     Compare  Jude  9  ;  Zech.  iii.  1,2. 

12.  As  natural  brute  beasts  made  to  be  taken  and  de- 
stroyed. This  massing  of  epithets  is  characteristic  of  Peter. 
Natural  (^vo-iko),  Rev.,  7nere  animals,  should  be  constiaied 
with  made,  or  as  Kev.,  horn  {yeyevvrjfieva).  Brute  {aXoya),  lit., 
unreasoning  or  irrational.  Rev.,  without  reason.  Compare 
Acts  XXV.  27.  Beasts  (fwa).  Lit.,  Iivi7ig  creatures,  from  ^dm, 
to  live.  More  general  and  inclusive  than  beasts,  since  it  denotes 
•strictly  all  creatures  that  live,  including  man.  Plato  even  ap- 
plies it  to  God  himself.  Hence  Rev.,  properly,  creatures.  To 
be  taken  and  destroyed  (et?  SXaxriv  xal  <f>Sopdv).  Lit.,  /b?'  capture 
and  destruction.  Destruction  twice  in  this  verse,  and  with  a 
cognate  verb.  Render  the  whole,  as  Rev.,  But  these,  as  creatures 
without  reason,  born  mere  animals  to  be  taken  and  destroyed. 


Ca  II.]         THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  697 

Speak  evil  (/SXao-ipij/toOi/Te?).  Participle,  ^ev.,  rightly,  rail- 
ing.    Compare  vv.  10,  11. 

And  shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  corruption  (eV  tt} 
<\)^opa  avT&v  KoL  (ft^ap-qa-ovTai).  There  is  a  play  upon  the  words, 
which  the  Rev.  reproduces  by  rendering,  "  shall  in  their  destroy- 
ing surely  be  destroyed."  The  and,  which  in  the  A.  V.  connects 
this  and  the  preceding  sentence,  is  rather  to  be  taken  with  shall 
be  destroyed,  as  emphasizing  it,  and  should  be  rendered,  as  Eev., 
surely,  or  as  others,  even  or  also.  Compare  on  the  whole  verse 
Jude  10. 

13.  And  shall  receive  {Ko/jLiov/ievoi).  Lit.,  teing  about  or 
destined  to  receive.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  9,  and  compare  1  Pet.  v. 
4.  Some  good  texts  read  aZucovfievoi,  suffering  wrong.  So 
He  v.,  suffering  wrong  as  the  hire  of  wrong -doing. 

Reward  of  unrighteousness  (jiiaB^ov  aZiKla<s).  Mia-Sb<!  is 
hire,  and  so  is  rendered  in  E,ev.  Compare  Matt.  xx.  8 ;  Luke 
X.  7 ;  John  iv.  36.  It  also  has  in  classical  Greek  the  general 
sense  of  reward,  and  so  very  often  in  the  New  Testament,  in 
passages  where  hire  or  wages  would  be  inappropriate.  Thus 
Matt.  V.  12  ;  vi.  1 ;  x.  41.  Mire  would  seem  to  be  better  here, 
because  of  the  reference  to  Balaam  in  ver.  15,  where  the  word 
occurs  again  and  requires  that  rendering.  The  phrase  /ittr.&6? 
aSt/ci'a?,  reward  or  wages  of  iniquity,  occurs  only  here  and  in 
Peter's  speech  concerning  Judas  (Acts  i.  18),  where  the  Rev. 
retains  the  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.,  reward  of  iniquity.  It 
would  have  been  better  to  render  wages  of  iniquity  in  both 
places.  Iniquity  and  unrighteousness  are  used  in  English 
almost  synonymously ;  though,  etymologically,  iniquity  empha- 
sizes the  idea  of  injustice  {inaequus),  while  unrighteousness 
(non-rightness)  is  more  general,  implying  all  deviation  from 
right,  whether  involving  another's  interests  or  not.  This  dis- 
tinction is  not,  however,  observed  in  the  Rev.,  where  the  render- 
ing of  aSiKta,  and  of  the  kindred  adjective  dSiKo<;,  varies  unac- 
countably, if  not  capriciously,  between  unrighteous  and  unjust^ 


698  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H 

As  they  that  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  {riBovf]v  ■^yovfiei^oi 

rpvjyrjv).  The  as  of  the  A.  V.  is  needless.  The  discourse  pro- 
ceeds from  ver.  13  by  a  series  of  participles,  as  far  2i&foUowmg 
(ver.  15).     Literally  the  passage  runs,  counting  riot  a  pleasure. 

Riot  (jpv^v).  Meaning  rather  daintiness,  delicacy,  luosu- 
riousness.  Even  the  Kev.  revel  is  almost  too  strong.  Compare 
Luke  vii.  25,  the  only  other  passage  where  the  word  occurs,  and 
where  the  Rev.  retains  the  A.  V.,  li/ve  delicately.  So,  also,  Eev. 
substitx^tes,  in  Jas.  v.  5,  lived  delicately  for  li/ved  in  pleasure. 

In  the  daytime.     Compare  Peter's  words  Acts  ii.  15 ;  also,  1 

Thess.  V.  7. 

Spots  (a-TTiXot).  Only  here  and  Eph.  v.  27.  Compare  the 
kindred  participle  spotted  (Jude  23),  and  dejileth  (Jas.  iii.  6). 

Blemishes  {fxafiob).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The 
negatives  of  the  two  terms  spots  and  blemishes  occur  at  1  Pet. 
i.  19. 

Sporting  themselves  {ivrpvipavTes;).  Prom  rpv^ij,  luxu- 
riousness.     See  on  riot.     Rev.,  revelling. 

With  their  own  deceivings  (eV  rat?  a7raTat9  avrav).  The 
Rev.,  however,  follows  another  reading,  which  occurs  in  the 
parallel  passage  Jude  12 :  ayaTrat?,  love-feasts,  the  public  ban- 
quets instituted  by  the  early  Christians,  and  connected  with  the 
celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Rev.  renders  revelling  in 
their  love-feasts,  though  the  American  Committee  insist  on  de- 
ceivings. On  the  abuses  at  these  feasts,  see  1  Cor.  xi.  20-22. 
For  avT&v,  their  own,  the  best  texts  read  aiiTwp,  their. 

While  they  feast  with  you  (a-vvevmxovfievoi,).  The  word 
originally  conveys  the  idea  of  sumptuous  feasting,  and  is  ap- 
propriate in  view  of  the  fact  to  which  Peter  alludes,  that  these 
sensualists  converted  the  love-feast  into  a  revel.  Compare 
Paul's   words,    1    Cor.   xi.    21,  "one   is  hungry   and  another 


Ch.  II.]  THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  PETER.  69& 

drunken.''^     This  seems  to  favor  the  reading  ayd'jrai'i.     The 
■word  occurs  only  here  and  Jude  12. 

14.  Eyes.  Another  ilhistration  of  Peter's  emphasis  on  sight. 
It  is  the  instrument  of  evil  no  less  than  of  good.  Compare 
Matt.  V.  28. 

Adultery  (/*ot%a^iSo?).  Lit.,  an  adulteress,  but  used  as  an 
adjective  Matt.  xii.  39 ;  xvi.  4. 

That  cannot  cease  {aKaTaTrava-Tovs).  Only  here,  in  New 
Testament.     Compare  hath  ceased  (1  Pet.  iv.  1). 

Beguiling  (SeXea^oi/res).  Only  here,  ver.  18,  and  Jas.  i.  14. 
From  SeXeap,  a  iait.  An  appropriate  word  from  Peter  the 
fisherman.     Eev.,  enticing. 

Unstable  {aa-TripiKTovi).  A  compound  of  the  word  at  1  Pet. 
V.  10,  stahlish.     See  note  there,  and  on  2  Pet.  i.  12. 

An  heart  they  have  exercised  {KapSiav  yeyvfjLvaa-fiivrjv 
e)(pvTe<;).  The  A.  V.  is  awkward.  Better,  Kev.,  having  a 
heart  exercised.  Exercised  is  the  word  used  for  gymnastic 
training,  from  which  gymnastic  is  derived. 

With  covetous  practices.  The  A.  V.  follows  the  old  read- 
ing, trXeove^iaii;.  The  best  texts  read  7rXeove^ia<;,  covetousness. 
Eev.,  therefore,  rightly,  in  covetousness. 

Cursed  children  {Kardpai;  reKva).  Lit.,  children  of  cursing ,' 
and  so  Eev.     See  on  Mark  iii.  17,  and  1  Pet.  i.  14. 

15.  Right  (eiS-eiav).  Lit.,  straight,  which  is  the  radical 
meaning  of  right. 

Are  gone  astray  (infKavri^aav).     See  on  Mark  xii.  24. 

Following  (e'^a/toXou.Si^a-ai'Tes).  See  on  ch.  i.  16  ;  ii.  2.  Com- 
pare Jude  11. 


700  WOED  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H 

The  way.  Note  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  word  way 
in  the  story  of  Balaam  (Num.  xxii.),  and  Peter's  use  of  the 
same  phrase,  as  here,  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord,  in  Acts  xiii.  10. 

Bosor.  Kev.  gives  Beor,  the  Old  Testament  form  of  the 
name. 

Wages  of  unrighteousness.     See  on  ver.  13. 

16.  Was  rebuked  (6'X.67^«' ecr;)^ez^).  lAt.,  had  a  rebuhe.  The 
word  for  rebuke  only  here  in  New  Testament. 

For  his  iniquity  (tS/a?  'Kapavofiia<;).  Eev.,  his  own  i/rans- 
gression.  His  own,  see  on  ch.  i.  3.  Transgression,  from  irapd, 
contrary  to,  and  v6fx,o<;,  law.  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Compare  the  kindred  verb  Trapavofiico,  also  occurring  but  once. 
Acts  xxiii.  3,  where  see  note  on  contrary  to  the  law. 

The  dumb  ass.  Inserting  an  article  not  in  the  text,  and 
omitted  by  Eev. 

Ass  (vTro^vyiov).  Ijit.,  ieast  of  burden.  An  animal  subjected 
to  the  yoke.  From  vtto,  beneath,  and  ^vyov,  a  yoke.  See  on 
Matt  xxi.  5. 

Speaking  {(j)3^ey^dfievov).  The  verb  is  found  in  Peter  only, 
here  and  ver.  18,  and  in  Acts  iv.  18,  a  Petrine  narrative.  It 
is  well  chosen,  however.  The  verb  denotes  the  utterance  of  a 
sound  or  voice,  not  only  by  man,  but  by  any  animal  having 
lungs.  Hence,  not  only  of  men's  articulate  cries,  such  as  a 
battle-shout,  but  of  the  neigh  of  the  horse,  the  scream  of  the 
eagle,  the  croak  of  the  raven.  It  is  also  applied  to  sounds 
made  by  inanimate  things,  such  as  thunder,  a  trumpet,  a  lyre, 
the  ring  of  an  earthen  vessel,  showing  whether  it  is  cracked  or 
not.  Schmidt  ("Synonymik")  says  that  it  does  not  indicate 
any  physical  capability  on  the  part  of  the  man,  but  describes  the 
sound  only  from  the  hearer's  stand-point.  In  view  of  this 
general  sense  of  the  verb,  the  propriety  is  apparent  of  the  de- 
fining phrase,  with  man''s  voice. 


Ch.  II.]  THE  SECOND   GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  701 

Forbad  {iKcokvcrev).  'Rather,  hindered,  or,  as  Rev.,  stayed 
Compare  Acts  viii.  36  ;  Eom.  i.  13,  Kev. 

Madness  {'7rapa<j>poviav).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
But  compare  the  kindred  verb  irapa^povem  (2  Cor.  xi.  23),  in 
the  phrase,  "/  speah  as  afooV  From  irapd,  heside,  and  4>PWi 
the  mind;  and  so  equivalent  to  the  phrase,  beside  one's  self. 

17.  Wells  {TTTj^al).  Better,  as  Rev.,  springs ;  yet  the  Rev. 
has  retained  well  at  John  iv.  14,  where  the  change  would  have 
given  more  vividness  to  Christ's  metaphor,  which  is  that  of  an 
ever  upleaping,  Mvmg  fountain. 

Without  water.  As  so  often  in  the  East,  where  the  verd- 
ure excites  the  traveller's  hope  of  water.  Compare  Jer.  ii.  13, 
and  the  contrast  presented  in  Isa.  Iviii.  11 ;  Prov.  x.  11 ;  xiii.  14. 

Clouds.  The  A.  Y.  has  followed  the  Tex.  Rec,  ve^ekai,  as 
in  Jude  12.  The  correct  reading  is  ofii'xXai,  mists,  found  only 
here  in  New  Testament.     So  Rev. 

With  a  tempest  {vTrb  XaiX.a-rro';).  Rev.,  by  a  storm.  The 
word  occurs  only  twice  elsewhere — Mark  iv.  37 ;  Luke  vii.  23 — 
in  the  parallel  accounts  of  the  storm  on  the  lake,  which  Jesus 
calmed  by  his  word.  There  on  the  lake  Peter  was  at  home,  as 
well  as  with  the  Lord  on  that  occasion  ;  and  the  peculiar  word 
describing  a  whirlwind — one  of  those  sudden  storms  so  frequent 
on  that  lake  (see  note  on  the  word,  Mark  iv.  37) — would  be  the 
first  to  occur  to  him.    Compare  Paul's  similar  figure,  Eph.  iv.  14. 

Blackness  (^o^os).     See  on  ver.  4,  and  compare  Jude  13. 

Of  darkness  (toO  <7«6tou?).  Lit.,  the  darkness,  denoting  a 
well-understood  doom. 

Is  reserved  (rer'^prjTai).  Lit.,  hath  been  reserved,  as  Rev. 
See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  4. 

Forever.    The  best  texts  omit. 


702  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Oh.  XL 

18.  When  they  speak  (<f>^£yy6fj,evoi).  Eev.,  better,  uttet^- 
ing.     See  on  ver.  16. 

Great  swelling  (v'n-epoyKa).  Only  here  and  Jude  16.  The 
word  means  of  excesswe  hulh.  It  accords  well  with  the  peculiar 
word  uttering,  since  it  denotes  a  kind  of  speech  full  of  high- 
sounding  verbosity  without  substance,  ^^^eyyofievoi,  uttering, 
is  significantly  applied  alike  to  Balaam's  beast  and  to  these 
empty  declaimers. 

Entice.    See  ver.  14. 

Were  clean  escaped.  The  A.  V.  follows  the  Tex.  Eec, 
ovT(i><i  aTTotjivyovTaf ;  6vTa)<;  meaning  really,  actually,  as  Luke 
xxiv.  34 ;  and  the  participle  being  the  aorist,  and  so  meaning 
were  escaped.  But  the  best  texts  all  read  o\^7&)?,  in  a  little 
degree,  or  just,  or  scarcely  ;  and  airot^evyovTa'i,  the  present  par- 
ticiple, are  escaping  ;  and  denoting  those  who  are  in  the  early 
stage  of  their  escape  from  error,  and  are  not  safe  from  it  and 
confirmed  in  the  truth.  Hence,  Kev.,  correctly,  who  are  ju&t 
escaping.     'OXtryws,  only  here. 

19.  Is  overcome  {^TTrjTai).  Lit.,  is  worsted;  from  rja-a-wv, 
inferior.     Only  here,  ver.  20,  and  2  Cor.  xii.  13. 

Brought  into  bondage  (SeSovXwrat).  Mislaved.  Compare 
Rom.  vi.  16. 

20.  Pollutions  (jModa-iJiaTa).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Compare  ver.  10.     The  word  is  transcribed  in  Tniasma. 

Entangled  {ifnrXaKevTe';).  Only  here  and  2  Tim.  ii.  4.  The 
same  metaphor  occurs  in  Aeschylus  ("  Prometheus  ") :  "  For  not 
on  a  sudden  or  in  ignorance  will  ye  be  entangled  {ijMirT^X' 
S^a-ecr^e)  by  your  folly  in  an  impervious  net  of  Ate  {destruc- 
tion).''^ 

22.  According  to  the  true  proverb  [to  rij';  aXrj^v^  irapoi- 
(i(a<;).     Lit.,  that  of  the  true  proverb,  or  the  matter  of  the  pro- 


Ch.  III.]        THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  703 

verb.  For  a  similar  construction  see  Matt.  xxi.  21,  that  of  the 
fig-tree;  Matt.  viii.  33,  the  thvnga  of  those  possessed.  Onjproverh, 
see  notes  on  Matt.  xiii.  3. 

Vomit  {i^epafia).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Wallowing  {KvXia-fiov).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Mire  (/3op/3opou).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  This  use 
of  dogs  and  swine  together  recalls  Matt.  vii.  6. 

CEAPTER  III. 

1.  Beloved.    Occurring  four  times  in  this  chapter. 

Second— I  write.  An  incidental  testimony  to  the  author- 
ship of  the  second  epistle. 

Pure  minds  {elKiKpivq  Sidvoiav).  The  latter  word  is  sin- 
gular, not  plural.  Hence,  as  Rev.,  mind.  The  word  rendered 
j)ure  is  often  explained  tested  by  the  sunlight ;  but  this  is  very 
doubtful,  since  eiXr),  to  which  this  meaning  is  traced,  means  the 
heat,  and  not  the  light  of  the  sun.  Others  derive  it  from  the 
root  of  the  verb  e'Ckiaam,  to  roll,  and  explain  it  as  that  which  is 
separated  or  sifted  by  rolling,  as  in  a  sieve.  In  favor  of  this 
etymology  is  its  association  in  classical  Greek  with  different 
words  meaning  unmixed.  The  word  occurs  only  here  and 
Philip,  i.  10.  The  kindred  noun  elXiKplveia,  sincerity,  is  found 
1  Cor.  V.  8  ;  2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  ii.  17.     Kev.,  here,  sincere. 

Mind  (Sidvoiav).  Compare  1  Pet.  i.  13;  and  see  on  Mark 
xii.  30. 

3.  Scoffers  walking  {ifnraiKTai  iropevS/ievoi).  This  is  the 
reading  followed  by  A.  Y.  But  the  later  texts  have  added 
e/Miraiyfiov^,  in  mockery,  occurring  only  here,  though  a  kindred 
word  for  mockings  {i/j.irai'yfi&v)  is  found  Heb.  xi.  36.      This 


704  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  in. 

addition  gives  a  play  upon  the  words ;  and  so  Kev.,  "Mockefs 
shall  come  with  mockery,  walking,"  etc. 

4.  From  the  beginning  of  the  creation  {air  apxri^  ktC- 
o-eo)?).  ISTot  a  common  phrase.  It  occurs  onlj  Mark  x.  6 ;  xiii. 
19  ;  Apoc.  iii.  14. 

Fell  asleep  {iKOifi-^Sria-av).  A  literal  and  correct  translation 
of  the  word,  which  occurs  frequently  in  the  New  Testament,  but 
only  here  in  Peter.  Some  have  supposed  that  the  peculiarly 
Christian  sense  of  the  word  is  emphasized  ironically  by  these 
mockers.  It  is  used,  however,  in  classical  Greek  to  denote 
death.  The  difference  between  the  pagan  and  the  Christian 
usage  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  latter,  it  was  defined  by  the 
hope  of  the  resurrection,  and  therefore  was  used  literally  of  a 
sleep,  which,  though  long,  was  to  have  an  awaking.  See  on  Acts 
vii.  60. 

5.  This  they  willingly  are  ignorant  of  (XavSdvei  avToii's 
TovTo  Se\ovTa<;).  Lit.,  this  escapes  them  of  their  own  will. 
Eev.,  this  they  wilfully  forget. 

The  heavens  were.  But  the  Greek  has  no  article.  Een- 
der,  there  were  heavens.  So,  too,  not  the  earth,  but  an  earth, 
as  Eev. 

Standing  {a-wea-rcbaa).  Incorrect ;  for  the  word  is,  literally, 
standing  together;  i.e.,  compacted  or  formed.  Compare  Col.  i. 
17,  consist.     Rev.,  compacted. 

Out  of  the  water.  Again  no  article.  Eender  out  of  water; 
denoting  not  the  position  of  the  earth,  but  the  material  or 
mediating  element  in  the  creation  ;  the  waters  being  gathered 
together  in  one  place,  and  the  dry  land  appearing.  Or,  pos- 
sibly, with  reference  to  the  original  liquid  condition  of  the 
earth — -without  form  and  void. 

In  the  water  {hi  {JSaro?).  Omit  the  article.  Aid  has  its 
usual  sense  here,  not  as  Eev.,  amidst,  but  hj  means  of.     Bengel : 


Ch.  III.]         THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF   PETER.  705 

"The  water  served  that  the  earth  should  consist."  Expositors 
are  much  divided  as  to  the  meaning.  This  is  the  view  of 
Huther,  Salmond,  and,  substantially,  Alford. 

6.  The  world  that  then  was  (o  rare  Koafio^).  liit,  the  then 
toorld.  The  word  for  world  is  literally  order,  and  denotes  the 
perfect  system  of  the  material  universe. 

Being  overflowed  {KaTaickva-^eh).  Only  here  in  IS^ew  Tes- 
tament.     Cataclysm  is  derived  from  it. 

7.  The  heavens — which  now  are  (olvvvoipavol).  A  con- 
struction similar  to  the  then  world  (ver.  6).  The  now  heavens, 
or  the  present  heavens. 

Kept  in  store  {Tel^aavpia-fievoi).  'Rev.,  stored  up.  Lit., 
treasured  up.  The  same  word  which  is  used  in  Luke  xii.  21, 
layeth  up  treasure.  Sometimes  with  the  kindred  noun  ^aav- 
poix;,  treasures,  as  Matt.  vi.  19  ;  lit.,  treasure  treasures. 


Unto  fire.  Some  construe  this  with  treasured  up;  as  Rev., 
stored  upfoi'f/re  y  others  with  reserved,  as  A.  V. ;  others  again 
give  the  sense  stored  with  fire,  indicating  that  the  agent  for  the 
linal  destruction  is  already  prepared. 

9.  Is  not  slack  {ov  ^pahvvei).  Only  here  and  1  Tim.  iii.  15. 
The  word  is  literally  to  delay  or  loiter.  So  Septuagint,  Gen. 
xliii.  10,  "  except  we  had  lingered.''''  Alford's  rendering,  is  not 
tardy,  would  be  an  improvement.  The  word  implies,  besides 
delay,  the  idea  of  lateness  with  reference  to  an  appointed  time. 

Come  {x^copfja-ai).     Move  on,  or  advance  to. 

10.  The  day  of  the  Lord.  Compare  the  same  phrase  in 
Peter's  sermon.  Acts  ii.  20.  It  occurs  only  in  these  two  passages 
and  1  Thess.  v.  2.     See  1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  2  Cor.  i.  14. 

As  a  thief.     Omit  in  the  rdght.     Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  43,- 
1  Thess.  v.  2,  4 ;  Apoc.  iii.  3 ;  xvi.  15. 
45 


706  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  Ch.  IH. 

With  a  great  noise  (poi^r^hov).  An  adverb  peculiar  to  Peter, 
and  occurring  only  here.  It  is  a  word  in  which  the  sound  sug- 
gests the  sense  {rhoisedon) ;  and  the  kindred  noun,  poi^o^,  is  used 
in  classical  Greek  of  the  whistling  of  an  arrow ;  the  sound  of  a 
shepherd's  pipe ;  the  rush  of  wings  ;  the  plash  of  water ;  the  hiss- 
ing of  a  serpent ;  and  the  sound  of  filing. 

The  elements  (crrot^eta).  Derived  from  o-rotx"?,  «  ''"o^o, 
and  meaning  originally  one  of  a  row  or  series  ;  hence  a  compo- 
nent or  element.  The  name  for  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  as 
being  set  in  rows.  Applied  to  the  four  elements — fire,  air,  earth, 
water  ;  and  in  later  times  to  the  planets  and  signs  of  the  zodiac. 
It  is  used  in  an  ethical  sense  in  other  passages ;  as  in  Gal.  iv.  3, 
'■'■elements  or  rtud.iments  of  the  world."  Also  of  elementary 
teaching,  such  as  the  law,  which  was  fitted  for  an  earlier  stage 
in  the  world's  history  ;  and  of  the  first  principles  of  religious 
knowledge  among  men.  In  Col.  ii.  8,  of  formal  ordinances. 
Compare  Heb.  v.  12.  The  kindred  verb  <TTOLyka>,  to  walk,  car- 
ries the  idea  of  keeping  in  line,  according  to  the  radical  sense. 
Thus,  walk  according  to  rule  (Gal.  vi.  16) ;  walkest  orderly 
(Acts  xxi.  24).  So,  too,  the  compound  avaTOi,-)(eco,  only  in  Gal. 
iv.  25,  answereth  to,  lit.,  helongs  to  the  same  row  or  column  with. 
The  Greek  grammarians  called  the  categories  of  letters  arranged 
according  to  the  organs  of  speech  crva-Toi.'x^iai.  Here  the  word 
is  of  course  used  in  a  physical  sense,  meaning  the  parts  of  which 
this  system  of  things  is  composed.  Some  take  it  as  meaning  the 
heavenly  bodies,  but  the  term  is  too  late  and  technical  in  that 
sense.     Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  29,  the  powers  of  the  heaven. 

Shall  melt  (\v3nja-ovTai).  More  literally,  as  Kev.,  shall  be 
dissolved. 

With  fervent  heat  [Kavcrov/Jieva).     Lit.,  being  scorched  wp. 

11.  To  be  dissolved  {Xvofievcov).  So  Rev.  But  the  parti- 
ciple is  present ;  and  the  idea  is  rather,  a/re  in  process  of  disso- 
lution.    The  world  and  all  therein  is  essentially  transitory. 

Ought  ye  to  be  {virdpxeip).     See  on  ch.  i.  8. 


Ch.  ni.]         THE  SECOND  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  PETER.  707 

Conversation  {avatrTpo^ah).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  15.  Eev., 
Iwi/ng. 

* 

Godliness  (eio-eySeiat?).  See  on  ch.  i.  3.  Both  words  are 
plural ;  hohj  Imings  and  godlvnesses. 

12.  Looking  for  {irpoaZoKSyvra';).  The  same  verb  as  in  Luke 
i.  21,  of  waiting  for  Zacharias.  GomeXma  waited  {A.ci&  x.  24) ; 
the  cripple  exfpecting  to  receive  something  (Acts  iii.  5). 

Hasting  unto  (crTrevBovTa<;).  Wrong,  Eev.,  earnestly  de- 
sirvng,  for  which  there  is  authority.  I  am  inclined  to  adopt, 
with  Alford,  Huther,  Saltnond,  and  Trench,  the  transitive  mean- 
ing, hastening  on;  i.e.,  "causing  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  come 
more  quickly  by  helping  to  fulfil  those  conditions  without  which 
it  cannot  come ;  that  day  being  no  day  inexorably  fixed,  but 
one  the  arrival  of  which  it  is  free  to  tlie  church  to  hasten  on 
by  faith  and  by  prayer"  (Trench,  on  "  The  Authorized  Version 
of  the  New  Testament ").  See  Matt.  xxiv.  14 :  the  gospel  shall 
be  preached  in  the  whole  world,  "and  then  shall  the  end  come." 
Compare  the  words  of  Peter,  Acts  iii.  19 :  "  Pepent  and  be 
converted,"  etc.,  "  that  so  there  may  come  seasons  of  refreshing  " 
(so  Eev.,  rightly) ;  and  the  prayer,  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  Sal- 
mond  quotes  a  rabbinical  saying,  "  If  thou  keepest  this  precept 
thou  hastenest  the  day  of  Messiah."  This  meaning  is  given  in 
margin  of  Eev. 

Wherein  {hi  fjv).  Wrong.  Eev.,  correctly,  iy  reason  of 
which. 

Melt  {r-^Kerat).  Literal.  Stronger  than  the  word  in  vv.  10, 
11.  Not  only  the  resolving,  but  the  wasting  a/uoay  of  nature. 
Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

13.  We  look  for.  The  same  verb  as  in  ver.  12.  It  occurs 
three  times  in  12-14. 

New  {Kaivoiisi).     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29. 


708  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HL 

14.  Without  spot  and  blameless.    See  on  ch.  ii.  13. 

16.  Hard  to  be  understood  (Su<ri/6«;Ta).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament. 

They  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  {ol  afjut^eh  koI 
da-T^pcKToi).  Both  words  are  peculiar  to  Peter.  On  the  latter, 
see  on  ch.  ii.  14. 

Vi  rest  (cTTpe^ova-iv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Mean- 
ing, originally,  to  hoist  with  a  windlass  or  screw;  to  twist  or 
dislocate  the  limhs  on  a  rack.  It  is  a  singularly  graphic  word 
applied  to  the  perversion  of  scripture. 

The  other  scriptures  (ra?  XotTra?  7/3a^as).  Showing  that 
Paul's  epistles  were  ranked  as  scripture.     See  on  Mark  xii.  10. 

17.  Being  led  away  (o-wa7ra;^.5ei'T6?).  Better,'Rev.,  carried 
away.  It  is  the  word  used  by  Paul  of  Barnabas,  when  he  dis- 
sembled with  Peter  at  Antioch.  "  Barnabas  was  ca/rriedawoay 
with  their  dissimulation  "  (Gal.  ii.  13). 

Of  the  wicked  {aSia-fimv).     See  on  ch.  ii.  7. 

Fall  from  {mireariTe).  Lit.,  "fall  out  of."  Compare  GaL 
V.  4. 

Steadfastness  {a-Trjpvy/jiov).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
See  on  ch.  i.  12. 


UST  OF  GEEEK  WORDS  USED  BY  PETEE  ONLY. 


ayaSoTTOtfa,  well-doing,  1,  iv.,  19 
dyaSojroi'os,  a  well-doer,  1,  ii.,  14 
a8e\<l)6Tiis,  brotherhood,  1,  ii.,  17; 

V,  9 
&8o\os,  without  guile,  1,  ii.,  2 
oiSeo-nos,  wicked,  2,  ii.,  7 ;  iii.,  17 
aliTXpoKepSas,  for  filthy  lucre,  1,  v.,  2 
aKardiraaTos,  that  cannot  cease,  2,  ii., 

14. 
oKKoTpioeirla-Kowos,   a   busy-body  in 

other  men's  matters,  1,  iv.,  15 
SKuicris,  capture,  2,  ii.,  12 
afja3^s,  unlearned,  2,  iii.,  16 
a/idpavTivos,  unfading,  1,  v.,  4 
aiiapavTos,  unfading,  1,  i.,  4 
aiiajirjTos,  blameless,  2.  iii.,  14 
dvayfwao),  to  beget  again,  1,  i.,  3,  23 
avayKaorajf,  by  constraint,  1,  v.,  2 
dva^avwiu,  gird  up,  1,  i. ,  13 
ai>a;(V(r(r,  excesS,  1,  iv.,  4 

dwKXdAj/TOf,  unspeakable,  1,  i.,  8 
avTiKoibopem,  to  revile  again,  1,  ii., 

23 
anoyivoiiai,  to  De  dead,  1,  ii.,  24 
aTrdSeo-tf,  putting  away,  1,  iii.,  21 ; 

2,  i.,  14 
dnovep-co,  assign,  impart,  1,  iii.,  7 
dno'pevya,  to  escape,  2,  i.,  4  ;  ii.,  18, 

20 
diTpotramoXripirrais,    without    respect 

of  persons,  1,  i.,  17 
dpyea,  linger,  2,  ii.,  3 
dpTiyevvrjTos,  new-born,  1,  ii.,  2 
dpxi'iroip.riv,  chief  shepherd,  1,  v. ,  4 


diTTTipiKTos,  unsteadfast,  2,  ii.,  14; 

'  iii.,  16 
avxiiripos,  dry,  dark,  2,  i.,  19 
/SidcB,  live,  1,  iv.,  2 
^XeVfia,  seeing,  2,  ii.,  8 
^pfiopos,  mire,  2,  ii.,  22 
/SpaSuTijr,  slackness,  2,  iii.,  9 
yvvaiKiios,  female  (adj.),  1,  iii.,  7 
biavyd^a,  to  dawn,  2,  i.,  19 
Suo-raTjToj,  hard  to  be  understood,  2, 

iii.,  16 
iyKaroiKeo),  dwell  among,  2,  ii.,  8 

eyKOfi^6op,ai,  gird,  1,  V.,  5 
fKaaroTf,  always,  2,  i.,  15 
fKjra\ai,  from  of  old,  2,  ii.,  3  ;  iii.,  5 
iKTcvris,  intense,  1,  iv.,  8 
eXeylts,  rebuke,  2,  ii.,  16 
efiirmyp,ovfi,  mockery,  2,  iii.,  3 
ip-TzKoKj],  plaiting,  1,  iii.,  3 
tvbva-ii,  putting  on,  1,  iii.,  3 
ivTpv(j)dm,  revel,  2,  ii.,  13 
c^aKoXov3ea>,  follow  (out),  2,  i.,  16 ; 

ii.,  2,  15 
e^€pap.a,  vomit,  2,  ii.,  22 
e^epavvdo),  search  diligently,  1,  i.,  10 
eirdyyeXpiu,  promise,  2,  i.,  4 ;  iii.,  13 
cnepaTTjua,  inquiry,  appeal,  1,  iii.,  21 
iniKoKvpiia,  cloke,  1,  ii.,  16 
irciKomo^,  remaining,  1,  iv.,  2 
fViXuo-ir,  interpretation,  2,  i.,  20 
ijrtpapTvpfm,  testify,  1,  v.,  12 
enoTTTris,  eye-witness,  2,  i.,  16 
eVoTTTfuo),  behold,  1,  ii.,  12 ;  iii.,  2 
iepdrevina,  priesthood,  1,  ii.,  5,  9 


710 


LIST  OP  GREEK  WORDS  USED  BT  PETER  ONLY. 


iVoTiiuof,  like-precious,  2,  i.,  1 
KaTaiiKi^ofuu,  to  be  overflowed,   2, 

iii.,  6 
KaviToa,  to  burn  with  intense  heat, 

2,  iii.,  10,  12 
kKcos,  glory,  1,  ii.,  20 
Kparmos,  mighty,  1,  v.,  6 
KTta-TTis,  creator,  1,  iv.,  19 
KuXio-^o'f,  wallowing,  2,  ii.,  22 
XijSj;,  forgetfulness,  2,  i.,  9 
lifyaKoirpcTrrjs,  excellent,  2,  i.,  17 
fiiaa-fia,    1  defilement,  2,  ii.,  20;  ii., 
ixiaa-fxost  i  1^ 

livr]firi,  remembrance,  2,  i.,  15 
^uun-dfo),  to  be  shortsighted,  2,  i.,  9 
fjLwXailf,  stripe,  weal,  1,  ii.,  24 
fiSinos,  blemish,  2,  ii.,  13 
divo(ji\vyia,  wine-bibbing,  1,  iv.,  3 
oXi'ymf,  but  a  little,  just,  2,  ii.,  18 
ojiixKri,  mist,  2,  ii.,  17 
6ii6<^pasv,  like-minded,  1,  iii.,  8 
cmKi^ofiai,  arm  one's  self,  1,  iv.,  1 
irapavopia,  transgression,  2,  ii.,  16 
napa(t>pov[a,  madness,  2,  ii.,  16 
wapficraym,  bring  in  privily,  2,  ii.,  1 
7rapeiiT<p€pa>,  add,  2,  i.,  5 
■jraTpovapahoTOi,  handed  down  from 

the  fathers,  1,  i.,  18 
TTepiSfo-tf,  wearing,  1,  iii.,  3 
■nXa(TT69,  feigned,  2,  ii.,  3 
itoTos,  carousing,  1,  iv.,  3 
TTpoSu/ncBf,  willingly,  1,  v.,  2 


npopMpT'upojiai,    testify    beforehand, 

1,  i.,  11 
TTToriiTis,  terror,  1,  iii.,  6 
pot^-qbov,  with  a  great  noise,  2,  iii.,  10 
pvnos,  filth,  1,  iii.,  21 
ffSfKom,  strengthen,  1,  v.,  10 
o-fipos,  a  pit,  2,  ii.,  4 
anopa,  seed,  1,  i.,  23 
a-Trjpiypos,  steadfastness,  2,  iii.,  17 
<TTp€^\6a>,  wrest,  2,  iii.,  16 
a-vfinatiji,  compassionate,  1,  iii.,  8 
(TvpLTipea-^vTepos,  fellow-elder,  1,  v.,  1 
(TvveKKfKTos,  elected  together,  1,  v.,  13 
(TwoiKca,  dwell  with,  1,  iii.,  7 
Tairfivofjipav,  humble-minded,  1,  iii. ,  8 
raprapoa,  cast  down  to  hell,  2,  ii.,  4 
raxivos,  quick,  swift,  2,  i.,  14 ;  ii.,  1 
TfXfims,  perfectly,  1,  i.,  13 
T€<f)p6ai,  turn  to  ashes,  2,  ii.,  6 
TrjKopai,  melt,  2,  iii.,  12 
7-oioo-Sf,  such,  2,  i.,  17 
ToXjiiijTijr,  daring,  2,  ii.,  10 
vTToypajxpot,  example,  1,  ii.,  21 
xmo^vyiov,  beast  of  burden,  2,  ii.,  16 
vTTokipiravai,  leave,  1,  ii.,  21 
is,  sow,  2,  ii.,  22 
0(Xa8eX<^os,  loving  as  a  brother,  1, 

iii.,  8 
(f>ai(T(j}6pos ,  day-stai',  2,  i.,  19 
\jffvSo8i8da-Ka\os,    false  teacher,    2, 

ii.,  1 
a>pvop.ai,  roar,  1,  v.,  8 


Of  these,  fifty-five  are  peculiar  to  the  second  epistle,   and 
only  one,  diro^ea-i'i,  putting  off,  is  common  to  the  two  epistles 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE. 


1.  Jude.  Eev.,  Judas.  One  of  the  brethren  of  Jesus ;  not 
the  brother. of  James  the  Apostle,  the  son  of  Alphaeus,  but  of 
James  the  superintendent  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem.  He  is 
named  among  the  brethren  of  the  Lord.  Matt.  xiii.  55  ;  Mark 
vi.  3. 

Servant.  He  does  not  call  himself  an  apostle,  as  Paul  and 
Peter  in  their  introductions,  and  seems  to  distinguish  himself 
from  the  apostles  in  vv.  17,  18  :  "  The  apostles  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  how  that  they  said,"  etc.  We  are  told  that 
Christ's  brethren  did  not  believe  on  him  (John  vii.  5) ;  and  in 
Acts  i.  the  brethren  of  Jesus  (ver.  14)  are  mentioned  in  a  way 
which  seems  to  separate  them  from  the  apostles.  Aov\o<;, 
hond-servant,  occurs  in  the  introductions  to  Romans,  Philip- 
pians,  Titus,  James,  and  2  Peter. 

Brother  of  James.  That  Jude  does  not  allude  to  his  rela- 
tionship to  the  Lord  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the 
natural  relationship  in  his  mind  would  be  subordinate  to  the 
spiritual  (see  Luke  xi.  27,  28),  and  that  such  a  designation 
would,  as  Dean  Alford  remarks,  "  have  been  in  harmony  with 
those  later  and  superstitious  feelings  with  which  the  next  and 
following  ages  regarded  the  Lord's  earthly  relatives."  He 
would  shrink  from  emphasizing  a  distinction  to  which  none  of 
the  other  disciples  or  apostles  could  have  a  claim,  the  more  so 
because  of  his  former  unbelief  in  Christ's  authority  and  mission. 
It  is  noticeable  that  James  likewise  avoids  such  a  designation. 


712  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  L 

Kept.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4.     Compare  John  xvii.  6,  12. 

In  Jesus  Christ  {'Irjo-ov  XpiaTm).  The  simple  dative  with- 
out preposition.  Therefore /or  Jesus  Christ ;  by  the  Father  to 
whom  Christ  committed  them  (John  xvii.  11).  Compare  1 
Thess.  V.  23 ;  Philip,  i.  6,  10. 

Called  (wX^jTot?).     At  the  end  of  the  verse,  for  emphasis. 

2.  Love.     Peculiar  to  Jude  in  salutation. 

3.  Beloved.  Occurring  at  the  beginning  of  an  epistle  only 
here  and  3  John  2. 

When  I  gave  all  diligence  {iracrav  cnrovBrjv  •jroiov/ievot;). 
Lit.,  making  all  diligence;  the  phrase  found  only  here.  In 
Heb.  vi.  11,  we  find  "  sJiew  diligence  "  {ivSelKvvaSai) ;  and  in  2 
Pet.  i.  5',  "  adding  diligence."     See  note  there. 

The  common  salvation.  The  best  texts  add  ■^fj.av,  of  us. 
So  Rev.,  "  our  common  salvation." 

It  was  needful  {avap/Kr}v  €a-')(pv).  Lit.,  I  had  necessity.  Al- 
f  ord,  I  found  it  necessary.     Eev.,  /  was  constrained. 

Earnestly  contend  {iirar/mvl^ea-Sai).  Only  here  in  Ifew 
Testament. 

The  faith.     The  sum  of  what  Christians  believe.     See  on 

Acts  vi.  7. 

Once  (flSTra^).  'Sot  formerly,  hut  once  for  all.  So  Eev., 
"  No  other  faith  will  be  given,"  says  Bengel. 

4.  "With  the  whole  verse  compare  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

Crept  in  unawares  {-Trapeia-iBva-av).  Hev.,  privily.  See 
on  2  Pet.  ii.  1.  The  verb  means  to  get  in  ly  the  side  {irapd), 
to  slip  in  by  a  side-door.     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  713 

Ordained  (Trpoyeypafifiivoi).  The  meaning  is  in  dispute. 
The  word  occui's  four  times  in  New  Testament.  In  two  of 
these  instances  irpo  has  clearly  the  temporal  sense  iefore  (Rom. 
XV.  4 ;  Eph.  iii.  3).  In  Gal.  iii.  1,  it  is  taken  by  some  in  the 
sense  of  openly,  puUioly  (see  note  there).  It  seems  better,  on 
the  whole,  to  take  it  here  in  the  temporal  sense,  and  to  render 
written  of  ieforehand,  i.e.,  in  prophecy  as  referred  to  in  vv.  14, 
15.     So  the  American  Eev. 

Lasciviousness.     See  on  1  Pet.  iv.  3. 

Lord  God.  God  is  omitted  in  the  best  texts.  On  Lord 
{SeairoTTjv),  see  on  2  Pet.  ii.  1. 

5.  Ye  once  knew  {elSoraf  ava^).  Entirely  wrong.  The 
participle  is  to  be  rendered  as  present,  and  the  once  is  not  /"or- 
merly,  but  once  for  all,  as  ver.  3.  So  Rev.,  rightly,  though  ye 
know  all  things  once  for  all. 

6.  First  estate  {apxfjv).  The  word  originally  signifies  be- 
ginning, and  so  frequently  in  New  Testament,  mostly  in  the 
Gospels,  Acts,  Hebi-ews,  Catholic  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse. 
From  this  comes  a  secondary  meaning  of  sovereignty,  dominion, 
magistracy,  as  being  the  beginning  or  frst  place  of  power. 
So  mostly  by  Paul,  as  principalities  (Rom.  viii.  38) ;  rule  (1 
Cor.  XV.  24).  Compare  Luke  xii.  11,  magisPrates  ;  Rev.,  rulers ; 
and  Luke  xx.  20,  power.  Rev.,  rule.  A  peculiar  use  of  the 
word  occurs  at  Acts  x.  11,  "  the  sheet  knit  at  the  four  corners 
{ap')(ah) ;  "  the  corners  being  the  beginnings  of  the  sheet.  In 
this  passage  the  A.  V.  has  adopted  the  first  meaning,  beginning, 
in  its  rendering  first  estate.  Rev.  adopts  the  second,  rendering 
principality.  The  Jews  regarded  the  angels  as  having  do- 
minion over  earthly  creatures  ;  and  the  angels  are  often  spoken 
of  in  the  New  Testament  as  ap')(ai,  principalities;  as  Rom. 
viii.  38  ;  Eph.  i.  21 ;  so  that  this  term  would  be  appropriate  to 
designate  their  dignity,  which  they  forsook. 

Habitation  {plicr]Tr)piov).     Only  here  and  2  Cor.  v.  2. 


714  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  1. 

Everlasting  (aiBioi'i).  Only  here  and  Kom.  i.  20.  For  a 
longer  form  deiScof,  from  dei,  always. 

Under  darkness  (utto  ^6<f)ov).  Under  carries  the  sense  of 
the  darkness  brooding  over  the  fallen  spirits.  On  da/rTmess, 
see  on  2  Pet.  ii.  4.      Compare  Hesiod : 

"There  the  Titanian  gods,  to  murky  gloom 
Condemned  by  will  of  cloud-collecting  Jove, 

Lie  hid  in  region  foul." 

Theogony,  v.,  729. 

7.  The  cities  about  them.  Admah  and  Zeboim.  Deut 
xxix.  23  ;  Hos.  xi.  8. 

Giving  themselves  over  to  fornication  {eKiropveia-aa-ai). 
Kev.,  more  strictly,  having  given,  etc.  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. The  force  of  eK  is  out  and  out;  giving  themselves  up 
utterly.     See  on  followed,  2  Pet.  i.  16. 

Going  after  {aires3ov(Tai  oiricrai).  The  aorist  participle. 
Pev.,  having  gone.  The  phrase  occurs  Mark  i.  20  ;  James  and 
John  leaving  their  father  and  going  after  Jesus.  "  The  world 
is  gone  after  him"  (John  xii.  19).  Here  metaphorical.  The 
force  of  aTTo  is  away ;  turning  away  from  purity,  and  going 
after  strange  flesh. 

Strange  flesh.  Compare  2  Pet.  ii.  10;  and  see  Rom.  i.  27; 
Lev.  xviii.  22,  23.  Also  Jowett's  introduction  to  Plato's  "  Sym- 
posium;" Plato's  "Laws,"  viii.,  836,  841;  Bollinger,  "The 
Grentile  and  the  Jew,"  Darnell's  trans.,  ii.,  238  sq. 

Are  set  forth  (TrpoKeivrai,).  The  verb  means,  literally,  to  lie 
exposed.  Used  of  meats  on  the  table  ready  for  the  guests  ;  of 
a  corpse  laid  out  for  burial;  of  a  question  under  discussion. 
Thus  the  corruption  and  punishment  of  the  cities  of  the  plain 
are  laid  out  in  plain  sight. 

As  an  example  {Sely/ia).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
From  Bel/cvvfii,  to  display  or  exhibit;  something,  therefore, 
which  is  held  up  to  view  as  a  warning. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  715 

Suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire  {•rrvpb<;  alaviov 
hUt^v  vTri'Xpvaai.).  Kev.,  rightly,  snhstitutes  punishment  ior  ven- 
gecmce,  since  Swcij  carries  the  underlying  idea  of  rig/d  or  justice, 
which  is  not  necessarily  implied  in  vengeance.  Some  of  the 
best  modern  expositors  render  a/re  set  forth  as  an  example  of 
eternal  f/re,  suffering  punishment.  This  meaning  seems,  on  the 
whole,  more  natural,  though  the  Greek  construction  favors  the 
others,  since  eternal  fire  is  the  standing  term  for  the  finally 
condemned  in  the  last  judgment,  and  could  hardly  be  correctly 
said  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  Those  cities  are  most  truly  an 
exaTnple  of  eternal  fire.  "  A  destruction  so  utter  and  so  per- 
manent as  theirs  has  been,  is  the  nearest  approach  that  can  be 
found  in  this  world  to  the  destruction  which  awaits  those  who 
are  kept  under  darkness  to  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  " 
(Lumby).  Suffering  {vTrexova-ai).  Only  here  in  l^ew  Testa- 
ment. The  participle  is  present,  indicating  that  they  are  suffer- 
ing to  this  day  the  punishment  which  came  upon  them  in  Lot's 
time.  The  verb  means,  literally,  to  hold  under  /  thence  to  up- 
hold or  support,  and  so  to  suffer  or  undergo. 

8.  Yet  (fievToi).  Not  rendered  by  A.  V.,  but  expressing 
that  though  they  have  these  fearful  examples  before  them,  yet 
they  persist  in  their  sin. 

Dominion — dignities  {icvpioTrjra — S6^a<;).  It  is  not  easy 
to  determine  the  exact  meaning  of  these  two  terms.  KvpioTj]^, 
dominion,  occurs  in  three  other  passages,  Eph.  i.  21 ;  Col.  i.  16 ; 
2  Pet.  ii.  10.  In  the  first  two,  and  probably  in  the  third,  the 
reference  is  to  angelic  dignities.  Some  explain  this  passage  and 
the  one  in  Peter,  oi-evil  angels.  In  Colossians  the  term  is  used 
with  thrones,  principalities,  and  powers,  with  reference  to  the 
orders  of  the  celestial  hierarchy  as  conceived  by  Gnostic  teach- 
ers, and  with  a  view  to  exalt  Christ  above  all  these.  Glories  or 
dignities  is  used  in  this  concrete  sense  only  here  and  at  2  Pet. 
ii.  10. 

9.  IVIicliael  the  archangel.  Here  we  strike  a  peculiarity 
of  this  epistle  which  caused  its  authority  to  be  impugned  in  very 


716  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ce.  t 

earlj  times,  viz.,  the  apparent  citations  of  apocryphal  writings. 
The  passages  are  vv.  9,  14,  15.  This  reference  to  Michael  was 
said  by  Origen  to  be  founded  on  a  Jewish  work  called  "  The 
Assumption  of  Moses,"  the  first  part  of  which  was  lately  found 
in  an  old  Latin  translation  at  Milan ;  and  this  is  the  view  of 
Davidson,  so  far  at  least  as  the  words  "  the  Lord  rebuke  thee  " 
are  concerned.  Others  refer  it  to  Zech.  iii.  1 ;  but  there  is 
nothing  there  about  Moses'  body,  or  Michael,  or  a  dispute  about 
the  body.  Others,  again,  to  a  rabbinical  comment  on  Deut. 
xxxiv.  6,  where  Michael  is  said  to  have  been  made  guardian  of 
Moses'  grave.  Doubtless  Jude  was  referring  to  some  accepted 
story  or  tradition,  probably  based  on  Deut.  xxxiv.  6.  For  a 
similar  reference  to  tradition  compare  2  Tim.  iii.  8  ;  Acts 
vii.  22. 

Michael.  Angels  are  described  in  scripture  as  forming  a 
society  with  different  orders  and  dignities.  This  conception  is 
developed  in  the  books  written  during  and  after  the  exile, 
especially  Daniel  and  Zeehariah.  Michael  ( Who  is  like  God  ?) 
is  one  of  the  seven  archangels,  and  was  regarded  as  the  special 
protector  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  He  is  mentioned  three  times 
in  the  Old  Testament  (Dan.  x.  13,  21 ;  xii.  1),  and  twice  in  the 
New  Testament  (Jude  9  ;  Apoc.  xii.  7).  He  is  adored  as  a  saint 
in  the  Eomish  Churcli.  For  legends,  see  Mrs.  Jameson,  "  Sacred 
and  Legendary  Art,"  i.,  94  sq. 

A  railing  accusation  {Kpicnv  ^Xa(T(jyi]iMia<;).  Lit.,  a  judg- 
ment of  railing;  a  sentence  savoring  of  impugning  his  dignity. 
Michael  remembered  the  high  estate  from  which  he  fell^  and 
left  his  sentence  to  God. 

10.  Compare  2  Pet.  ii.  12. 

They  know  not  (ovk  oiSaa-iv).  Mental  comprehension  and 
knowledge,  and  referring  to  the  whole  range  of  invisible  things  ; 
while  the  other  verb  in  this  verse,  also  translated  by  A.  Y.  know 
{iiriaTavTai,  originally  of  skill  in  handicraft),  refers  to  palpable 
things ;  objects  of  sense ;  the  circumstances  of  sensual  enjoy- 


Cb.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  OP  JUDB.  717 

ment.     Rev.  mai-ks  the  distinction  by  rendering  the  latter  verb 
understand. 

Naturally  {(pvcnKm).  Only  here  in  NewTestament.  Com- 
pare ^vaiKa,  natural,  2  Pet.  ii.  12. 

11.  Woe  (oval).  Often  used  by  our  Lord,  but  never  else- 
where except  here  and  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  expression  in  1 
Cor.  ix.  16  is  different.  There  the  word  is  not  used  as  an  impreca- 
tion, but  almost  as  a  noun  :  "  Woe  is  unto  me."  So  Hos.  ix.  12 
(Sept.). 

Ran  greedily  {e^e^xyBrfaav).  Lit.,  were  poured  out.  Eev., 
ram,  riotously.  A  strong  expression,  indicating  a  reckless,  aban- 
doned devotion  of  the  energies,  like  the  Latin  qff'undi.  So 
Tacitus  says  of  Maecenas,  "  he  was  gwen  up  to  love  for  Bathyl- 
lus  ; "  lit.,  poured  out  vato  love. 

After.  Better,  as  Rev.,  vn  ;  as,  "  in  the  way  of  Cain."  The 
error  was  their  sphere  of  action.     Similarly, 

In  the  gainsaying  (t^  avriXoyla).  In  the  practice  of  gain- 
saying like  Korah's.  'AvriXoyia  is  from  dvri,  against,  and  \eyw, 
to  speak.  Hence,  literally,  contradiction.  Gainsay  is  a  literal 
translation,  being  compounded  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  p'^n,  which 
reappears  in  the  German  gegen,  against,  and  say. 

Korah.  Who  spake  against  Moses  (Num.  xvi.  3).  The 
water  which  Moses  brought  from  the  rock  at  Kadesh  was  called 
the  water  of  Meribah  {Stnfife),  or,  in  Septuagint,  vhwp  avriKoyla^, 
the  water  of  contradiction, 

12.  Spots  (o-TTtXaSe?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  So 
rendered  in  A.  Y.,  because  understood  as  kindred  to  o-TrtXot  (2 
Pet.  ii.  13) ;  but  rightly,  as  Rev.,  hidden  rocJcs.  So  Homer, 
("  Odyssey,"  iii.,  298),  "  the  waves  dashed  the  ship  against  the 
rocks  {a-TTiXaSea-a-iv)."  See  on  deceiAiings,  2  Pet.  ii.  13.  These 
men  were  no  longer  mere  hlots,  but  elements  of  danger  and  wreck. 


718  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I, 

When  they  feast  with  you.     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

Feeding  (TroifiaivovTes;).  See  on  1. Pet.  v.  2.  Lit.,  shepherd- 
ing themselves  j  and  so  Kev.,  shepherds  that  feed  themselves  j 
further  their  own  schemes  and  lusts  instead  of  tending  the  flock 
of  God.     Compare  Isa.  Ivi.  11. 

Without  fear  {a^6^a}<;).  Of  such  judgments  as  visited  Ana- 
nias and  Sapphira.  Possibly,  as  Lumby  suggests,  implying  a 
rebuke  to  the  Christian  congregations  for  having  suffered  such 
practices. 

Clouds  without  water.  Compare  2  Pet.  ii.  17,  springs 
without  water.  As  clouds  which  seem  to  be  charged  with  re- 
freshing showers,  but  are  iorne  past  {irapa^epojievaC)  and  yield 
no  rain. 

Whose  fruit  withereth  {^^woirapiva).  From  <^Mvw  or 
^^tiw,  to  waste  away,  pine,  and  oTrdipa,  autumn.  Hence,  liter- 
ally, pertaining  to  the  late  autumn,  and  rightly  rendered  by 
Eev.,  autumn  (trees).  The  A.  V.  is  entirely  wrong.  Wye, 
harvest  trees.     Tynd.,  trees  without  fruit  at  gathering-time. 

Twice  dead.  JSTot  only  the  apparent  death  of  winter,  but  a 
real  death ;  so  that  it  only  remains  to  pluck  them  up  by  the 
roots. 

13.  Raging  (aypta).  Eev.,  wiZc?,  which  is  better,  as  imply- 
ing quality  rather  than  act.  Waves,  by  nature  untamed.  The 
act  or  esipression  of  the  nature  is  given  by  the  next  word. 

Foamingout  {iira^pi^ovTa).  Only  here  in  New  Testament 
Compare  Isa.  Ivii.  20. 

Shame  {al<Txvva<s).     Lit.,  shames  or  disgraces. 

Wandering  stars.  Compare  2  Pet.  ii.  17.  Possibly  re- 
ferring to  comets,  which  shine  a  while  and  then  pass  into  dark- 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  719 

ness.  "  They  belong  not  to  the  system  :  they  stray  at  random 
and  without  law,  and  must  at  last  be  severed  from  the  lights 
which  rule  while  they  are  ruled"  (Lumby). 

Blackness  {^6(f)o^).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  4. 

Of  darkness  (toO  ctkotov^).  Lit.,  "  the  darkness,"  the  article 
pointing  back  to  the  darkness  already  mentioned,  ver.  6. 

14.  Enoch  prophesied.  This  is  the  second  of  the  apocry- 
phal passages  referred  to  in  notes  on  ver.  9.  If  is  quoted  from 
the  apocryphal  book  of  Enoch,  directly,  or  from  a  tradition 
based  upon  it.  The  passage  in  Enoch  is  as  follows  :  "  Behold 
he  comes  with  ten  thousands  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment 
upon  them,  and  to  destroy  the  wicked,  and  to  strive  (at  law) 
with  all  the  carnal  for  everything  which  the  sinful  and  ungodly 
have  done  and  committed  against  him."  The  Book  of  Enoch, 
which  was  known  to  the  fathers  of  the  second  century,  was 
lost  for  some  centuries  with  the  exception  of  a  few  fragments, 
and  was  found  entire  in  a  copy  of  the  Ethiopic  Bible,  in  1773, 
by  Bruce.  It  became  known  to  modern  students  through  a 
translation  from  this  into  English  by  Archbishop  Lawrence,  in 
1821.  It  was  probably  written  in  Hebrew.  It  consists  of  rev- 
elations purporting  to  have  been  given  to  Enoch  and  ISf oah,  and 
its  object  is  to  vindicate  the  ways  of  divine  providence,  to  set 
forth  the  retribution  reserved  for  sinners,  angelic  or  human, 
and  "  to  repeat  in  every  form  the  great  principle  that  the  world — • 
natural,  moral,  and  spiritual — is  under  the  immediate  govern- 
ment of  God."  Besides  an  introduction  it  embraces  five  parts  : 
1.  A  narrative  of  the  fall  of  the  angels,  and  of  a  tour  of  Enoch 
in  company  with  an  angel  through  heaven  and  earth,  and  of 
the  mysteries  seen  by  him.  2.  Parables  concerning  the  king- 
dom of  God,  the  Messiah,  and  the  Messianic  future.  3.  Astro- 
nomical and  physical  matter ;  attempting  to  reduce  the  images 
of  the  Old  Testament  to  a  physical  system.  4.  Two  visions, 
representing  symbolically  the  history  of  the  world  to  the  Mes- 
sianic completion.  5.  Exhortations  of  Enoch  to  Methuselah 
and  his  descendants.     The  book  shows  no  Christian  influence. 


720  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  1 

is  highly   moral   in   tone,    and   imitates  the   Old   Testament 
myths. 

With  ten  thousands  of  his  saints  (eV  dyiai,<;  fivpida-tv). 
Lit.,  in  or  among  holy  myriads.  Compare  Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ; 
Zech.  xiv.  5. 

Ungodly  {da-e^ei<;) — ungodly  deeds  {epycov  cKre/Seta?,  lit., 
worhs  of  ungodliness)  which  they  have  ungodly  committed 
(r\(jk^i](Tav),  and  of  all  their  hard  speeches  which  ungodly 
(a<7e/3et?)  sinners,  etc.  The  evident  play  upon  the  word  un- 
godly can  be  rendered  bnt  clumsily  into  English.  Kev.,  trans- 
lates, All  the  ungodly.,  of  all  their  worries  of  ungodliness  which 
they  home  ungodly  wrought,.,  and  of  all  the  hard  things  which 
ungodly  sinners  home  spohen  agai/nst  him.  The  words  ungodly 
sinners  are  placed  in  an  unusual  position,  at  the  end  of  the  sen- 
tence, for  emphasis ;  ungodliness  being  the  key-note  of  the  writ- 
er's thought. 

WzixA  {rSiv  (TKKi)p5iv).  /i§?eecAes  is  supplied.  JAt.,ha7'd  things. 
So  Rev.  The  railwig,  gainsaying ;  the  profaiie  and  vain  hab- 
hlings  (2  Tim.  ii.  16).  Compare  John  vi.  60,  a  hard  saying, 
where  the  word  means  not  abusive  but  difficult.  In  Jas.  iii.  4, 
rough,  used  of  the  winds.  In  Acts  xxvi.  14,  of  Saul  of  Tarsus ; 
"  hard  to  kick  against  the  pricks." 

16.  Murmurers  (7077i»o-Tat).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
Doubtless,  originally,  with  some  adaptation  of  sound  to  sense, 
gongustai.     It  is  used  of  the  cooing  of  doves. 

Complainers  (jiefji-finoipoi).  From  fie/jLtfyofiai,  to  find  fault 
with,  and  fiolpa,  apart  or  lot.     Lit.,  Uamers  of  their  lot. 

Great  swelling  words.     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  18. 

Having  men's  persons  in  admiration  (.Jau/iafoi/Te?  Tr/aoV- 
aira).  The  Eev.,  shewing  respect  of  persons,  is  neater,  but  the 
A.  V.  more  literal :  admiring  the  countenances.     Compare  Gen. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  EPISTLE  OF  J  DDE.  721 

xix.  21,  Sept.,  "  I  have  OGe&pted  thee  : "  lit.,  hme  admi/red  thy 
face. 

Because  of  advantage.     See  2  Pet.  ii.  3,  14. 

Beloved.    Compare  ver.  3. 

18.  Mockers.     See  on  2  Pet.  iii.  3. 

Ungodly  lusts  {inri^viila^  rmv  da-e/Seimv).  Lit.,  lusts  of 
ungodlinesses. 

19.  Separate  themselves  {diroSiopl^ovTe'i).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  Themselves  is  unnecessary'.  Better,  as  Pev., 
raake  separations^  i.e.,  cause  divisions  in  the  church.  The  verb 
is  compounded  with  diro,  away  •  Bid,  through  ;  opo'i,  a  houndary 
line.  Of  those  who  draw  a  line  through  the  church  and  set  off 
one  part  from  another. 

Sensual  (ilry^i^t/cot).  See  on  Mark  xii.  30.  As  i/rv^^  denotes 
life  in  the  distinctness  of  individual  existence,  "  the  centre  of 
the  personal  being,  the  7" of  each  individual,"  so  this  adjective 
derived  from  it  denotes  what  pertains  to  man  as  man,  the 
natural  personality  as  distinguished  from  the  renewed  man. 
So  1  Cor.  ii.  14  ;  xv.  44.  The  rendering  sensual,  here  and  Jas. 
iii.  15,  is  inferential :  sensual  because  natural  and  unrenewed 
In  contrast  with  this  is 

The  spirit.  The  higher  spiritual  life.  So  the  adjective 
TrvevfiariKO'i,  spiritual,  is  everywhere  in  the  New  Testament 
opposed  to  T^vT^t/co?,  natural.     See  1  Cor.  xv.  44,  46. 

22.  And  of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference. 

This  follows  the  reading,  k(u  oi)?  ymi  eXeetre  (eXeare)  SiaKpi- 
vofievoi.  The  best  texts,  however,  read  BcaKpivofiivov;,  which 
would  require,  "  On  some  have  mercy  who  are  in  doubt.  So 
Kev.  Others,  again,  for  eXeetre,  have  mercy,  read  eXiy^^ere, 
reprvve,  and  render  BiaKpivofiivov;,  who  are  contentious :  "  Some 
46 


722 


LIST   OF   GREEK  WORDS  USED  BY  JUDE   ONLY. 


who  are  contentious  rebuke."  The  Kev.  rendering  better  suits 
what  follows. 

23.  Snatching  them  out  of  the  fire.  The  writer  has  in 
mind  Zech.  iii.  2,  a  hrand  jplAMked  from  the  hurning.  Com- 
pare Amos.  iv.  11. 

With  fear  (eV  ^o/S^)).  Lit.,  in  fear;  i.e.,  of  the  contagion 
of  sin  while  we  are  rescuing  them. 

Spotted  {ea-TriXm/^evov).  Only  here  and  Jas.  iii.  6.  See  on 
2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

24.  To  keep  you  from  falling  {(pvXd^ai  v/jLd(;  airTaia-rovi). 

Lit.,  "  to  keep  you  without  stumbling.  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. See  the  kindred  word  offend.  Rev.,  stumble,  Jas.  ii, 
10  ;  iii.  2. 

Exceeding  joy  {a/yaWida-et).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  6. 

25.  Both  now  and  ever  (/cot  vvv  koI  eh  Travra?  tov<;  al&va'i). 
Lit.,  hoth  now  and  unto  all  the  ages.  The  best  texts  add  irpt 
TravTO'i  Tov  alS)vo<s,  before  all  time. 


LIST  OF  GBEEK  WORDS  USED  BY  JUDE  ONLY. 


aTTobiopl^a,  to  separate,  19 
aTTTaicTTot,  without  falling,  24 
yoyyticTTijr,  murmurer,  16 
Seiyfia,  example,  7 
eKTropvfiia,  to  give  over  to  fornica- 
tion, 7 
(TOTrwdfo),  to  dream,  8 
inayaiv'i.^ojj.m,  earnestly  contend,  3 


fna(f>pi^a>,  to  foam  out,  13 
li.efr<^ifioipos,  complainer,  16 
irapeitrSvo),  to  creep  in  unawares,  i 
nXavrJTTis.  a  wanderer,  13 
o-TTiXdy,  rock,  12 
{mexa,  to  suffer,  undergo,  7 
cf)ti.v(mapiv6s,  autumnal,  12 
<f)v(TiKws,  naturally,  10 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  Jesus  Christ.  Only  here  and  in  ch.  ii.  1 ;  nowhere  in 
the  speeches  of  James  (Acts  xv.  14,  15  ;  xxi.  20  sq.).  Had 
he  used  Jesus'  name  it  might  have  been  supposed  to  arise  from 
vanity,  because  he  was  the  Lord's  brother.  In  all  the  addresses 
of  epistles  the  full  name,  Jesus  Christ,  is  given. 

Servant  {hovKo^).  Properly,  hired  servant.  Compare  Phil- 
ip, i.  1;  Jude  1. 

That  are  scattered  abroad  (eV  Ty  hicuriropa).  Lit.,  in  the 
dispersion ;  on  which  see  on  1  Pet  i.  1.  Kev.,  which  a/re  of 
the  dispersion. 

Greeting  (^at/seti/).  lAt.,  rejoice.  The  ordinary  Greek  salu- 
tation, hail !  welcome  !  Also  used  at  parting :  joy  he  with  you. 
Compare  the  same  expression  in  the  letter  from  the  church  at 
Jerusalem,  Acts  xv.  23 ;  one  of  the  very  few  peculiarities  of 
style  which  connect  this  epistle  with  the  James  of  the  Acts.  It 
does  not  occur  in  the.  address  of  any  other  of  the  Apostolic 
Epistles. 

2.  All  joy  (irao-av  'xapav).  Joy  follows  up  the  rejoice  of  the 
greeting.  The  all  has  the  sense  of  wholly.  Count  it  a  thing 
wholly  joyful,  without  admixture  of  sorrow.  Perhaps,  as 
Bengel  suggests,  the  all  applies  to  all  kinds  of  temptations. 


724  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

When  (Srav).  Lit.,  whenever :  better,  because  it  implies  that 
temptation  may  be  expected  all  along  the  Christian  course. 

Ye  fall  into  {irepiTriavTe).  The  preposition  irepi,  around, 
suggests  falling  into  something  which  surrounds.  Thus  Thu- 
cydides,  speaking  of  the  plague  at  Athens,  says,  "  The  Athe- 
nians, having  fallen  into  (TreptTreo-oj/Te?)  such  afflictioit,  were 
pressed  by  it." 

Divers  (Trot/ciXois).     Rev.,  manifold.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  6. 

Temptations  {ireipacrfj^ol'i).  In  the  general  sense  of  trials. 
See  on  Matt.  vi.  13  ;  1  Pet.  i.  6. 

3.  Trying  {SoKlfiwv).  ~B,er.,  2>roqf;  but  the  American  Ke- 
visers  insist  on  proving,  and  rightly.     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  7. 

Worketh  {Karepr/d^eTai).  The  compound  verb  with  Kara, 
down  through,  indicates  accomplishment.  The  proving  will 
work  successfully  and  thoroughly.  This  harmonizes  with  a 
perfect  worJc,  ver.  4. 

Patience  {virofjiovrjv).     See  on  2  Pet.  i.  6,  and  Jas.  v.  7. 

4.  Perfect  work  {ep^ov  rekeiov).  "  This  is  followed  by  a 
perfect  man.  The  man  himself  is  characterized  from  his  con- 
dition and  work  "  (Bengel).  Work  (epyov)  is  the  word  with 
which  KaTepyd^erai,,  worheth,  is  compounded.  It  is  the  accom- 
plished result  of  patience  in  moral  purification  and  ennobling. 
Compare  worh  of  faith,  1  Thess.  i.  3. 

Perfect  and  entire  (reXetot/tal  oKoKXrjpot).  The  two  words 
express  different  shades  of  thought.  TeXeioi,  perfect,  from 
TeXo?,  fulfilment  or  completion  {jjerfect,  from  perfectus,  per 
factus,  made  throughout),  denotes  that  which  has  reached  its 
maturity  or  fulfilled  the  end  contemplated.  ' 0\6/c\i]poi,  from 
o\o<;,  entire,  and  tcXrjpoi;,  a  lot  or  allotinent ;  that  which  has  all 
which  properly  belongs  to  it ;  its  entire  allotment,  and  is,  there- 


Gh.  I.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  725 

fore,  intact  in  all  its  parts.  Thus  Peter  (Acts  iii.  16)  says  of 
the  restored  cripple,  "  faith  has  given  him  this  perfect  sound- 
ness {oKoKKtfpiav).  Compare  the  familiar  phrase,  an  accom- 
plished mam.  Note,  also,  James'  repetition  of  the  key-words 
of  his  discourse,  rejoice,  joy ,  patience,  perfect. 

Wanting  nothing  {iv  fj,7]Bevl  Xemojievoi).  Eev.,  more  liter- 
ally, lacJcing  in  nothing.  Note  James'  characteristic  corrobora- 
tion of  a  positive  statement  by  a  negative  clause  :  enti/re,  lack- 
ing in  nothing ;  God  that  giveth  &aA  upbraideth  not ;  in  faith, 
nothing  doubting.  The  conditional  negative  /irjBevl,  nothing,  is 
used,  rather  than  the  absolute  negative  ovBevl,  as  implying  noth- 
ing which  may  be  supposed;  no  possible  thing. 

5.  B  ut.  Omitted  in  A.  V.  In  pursuing  this  perfection  you 
will  find  yourselves  lacking  in  wisdom.  One  may  say,  "  I  know 
not  how  to  become  perfect ; "  but,  if  any  man,  etc. 

Lack.    Note  the  repetition. 

Of  God  that  giveth  (toO  SiSovto';  0eov).  The  Greek  puts  it 
so  that  giving  is  emphasized  as  an  attribute  of  God.  Lit., 
"  Ask  of  the  giving  God,"  or  of  "  God  the  giver." 

Liberally  (dTrXw?).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Liter- 
ally the  wordmeans  simply,  and  this  accords  with  the  following 
negative  clause,  upbraiding  not.  It  is  pure,  simple  giving  of 
good,  without  admixture  of  evil  or  bitterness.  Compare  Eom. 
xii.  8,  where  a  kindred  noun  is  used  :  "  He  that  giveth  let  him 
do  it  with  simplicity  (iv  dTrXoTrjTi)."  Compare,  also,  Prov.  x. 
22.  Men  often  complicate  and  mar  their  giving  with  reproach, 
or  by  an  assumption  of  superiority. 

6.  Doubting  (SiaKpivofievos!).  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  21.  Not 
equivalent  to  unbelief,  but  expressing  the  hesitation  which 
balances  between  faith  and  unbelief,  and  inclines  toward  the 
latter.     This  idea  is  brought  out  in  the  next  sentence. 


726  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

A  wave  {KkvScovi).  'Rev.,  surge.  Only  here  and  Luke  viii. 
24;  though  the  kindred  verb  occurs  at  Eph.  iv.  14.  The 
word  is  admirably  chosen,  as  by  a  writer  who  lived  near  the 
sea  and  was  familiar  with  its  aspects.  The  general  distinction 
between  this  and  the  more  common  Kvfia,  wave,  is  that  kXvScov 
describes  the  long  ridges  of  water  as  they  are  propelled  in 
horizontal  lines  over  the  vast  surface  of  the  sea ;  while  Kvfia 
denotes  the  pointed  masses  which  toss  themselves  up  from 
these  under  the  action  of  the  wind.  Hence  the  word  kXvBoiv 
here  is  explained,  and  the  picture  completed  by  what  follows : 
a  billow  or  surge,  driven  by  the  wind  in  lines,  and  tossed  into 
wcuves.  Both  here  and  in  the  passage  in  Luke  the  word  is  used 
in  connection  with  the  wind.  It  emphasizes  the  idea  of  exten- 
sion, while  the  other  word  throws  forward  the  idea  of  concen- 
trating into  a  crest  at  a  given  point.  Hence,  in  the  figure,  the 
emphasis  falls  on  the  tossing  •  not  only  moving  before  the  im- 
pulse of  the  wind,  but  not  even  moving  in  regular  lines  ;  tossed 
into  rising  and  falling  peaks. 

Driven  by  the  wind  {dvefii^o/jLevai).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. 

Tossed  {piiri^o/jbivep).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  From 
ptTr/?,  a  fan.  Anyone  who  has  watched  the  great  ocean-swell 
throwing  itself  up  into  pointed  waves,  the  tops  of  which  are 
caught  by  the  wind  and  fanned  off  into  spray,  will  appreciate 
the  vividness  of  the  figure. 

7.  That  man  (eKetvo?).  Emphatic,  and  with  a  slightly  con- 
temptuous force. 

Anything,  i.e.,  which  he  asks  for. 

8.  A  double-minded  man  is  unstable,  etc.  The  A.  Y. 
puts  this  as  an  independent  apophthegm,  which  is  wrong.  The 
sentence  is  a  comment  and  enlargement  upon  that  man.  "  Let 
not  that  man  think,"  etc.,  "  a  double-minded  man,  unstable  in 
all  his  ways."    So  Rev. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  727 

Double-minded  (Sli^vxo^).  Peculiar  to  James,  here  and 
ch.  iv.  8.    Not  deceitful,  but  dubious  and  undecided. 

Unstable  {aKaToa-TaToi}).  Only  here  in  New  Testament. 
The  kindred  aKaTaaraa-ia,  confusion,  is  found  ch.  iii.  16,  and 
elsewhere. 

9.  But.  Omitted  in  A.  V.  Introducing  a  contrast  with  the 
double-minded. 

The  brother  of  low  degree  (o  aSeX^os  6  Taireivo<i).  Lit., 
the  h'other,  the  lowly  one.  Not  in  the  higher  Christian  sense 
of  rarrretv6<;  (see  on  Matt.  xi.  29),  but,  ra,theT,poor  and  afflicted, 
as  contrasted  with  rich. 

Rejoice  (/eaiiT^ao-^a)).  Not  strong  enough.  It  is,  rather,  hoast. 
So  Rev.,  glory.     Compare  Kom.  v.  3 ;  Philip,  iii.  3. 

In  that  he  is  exalted  {iv  rw  vyjrei  ainov).  Lit.,  in  his  e'jt- 
altation.     Kev.,  in  his  high  estate. 

10.  In  that  he  is  made  low  (eV  Tfj  Taireivaxrei  avrov).  A 
form  of  expression  similar  to  the  preceding.  Lit.,  m  his  hu- 
miliation. Both  the  A.  Y.  and  Hev.  preserve  the  kinship  be- 
tween Taireivo's  and  Tairetvma-et,  by  the  word  low. 

Flower  {dvSo'i).     Only  here,  ver.  11,  and  1  Pet.  i.  24. 

11.  For  the  sun  is  no  sooner  risen,  etc.  {avireiXev  jap  6 
^Xto?).  By  the  use  of  the  aorist  tense  James  graphically  throws 
his  illustration  into  the  narrative  form  :  "  For  the  sun  arose 
— and  withered,"  etc. 

With  a  burning  heat  (rm  Kavaapt).  Eev.,  with  the  scorch- 
ing wind.  The  article  denotes  something  familiar ;  and  the 
reference  may  be  to  the  scorching  east-wind  (Job  i.  19,  Sept. ; 
Ezek.  xvii.  10),  which  withers  vegetation.  Some  of  the  best 
authorities,  however,  prefer  the  rendering  of  the  A.  V. 


728  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I 

Falleth  (e'^eTreo-ei').     Aorist  tense.     Lit.,  fell  of. 

The  grace  of  the  fashion  {evTvpiireia  tov  irpoamiTov).  Lit., 
the  heauly  of  its  face  or  appea/rance.  EvTrpeveba  only  here  in 
New  Testament. 

Fade  away  (jiapavS^creTai).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Ways  {'TTopeiai';).  Eev.,  goings.  Only  here  and  Luke  xiii. 
22.     His  goings  to  and  fro  in  acquiring  riches. 

12.  Is  tried  (SoKt^ao?  yevofievoi;).  Lit.,  having  become  ap- 
proved. See  on  trial,  1  Pet.  i.  7.  The  meaning  is  not,  as  the 
A.  V.  suggests,  when  his  trial  is  finished,  but  when  he  has 
been  approved  by  trial.  Rev.,  rightly,  when  he  hath  been  ap- 
proved. 

The  crown  {a-Te<pavov).     See  on  1  Pet.  v.  4. 

Of  life  (t^?  ^wJj?).  Lit.,  the  life  :  the  article  pointing  to  the 
well-known  eternal  life.  The  figure  is  not  that  of  the  athlete's 
crown,  for  an  image  from  the  Grecian  games,  which  the  Jews 
despised,  would  be  foreign  to  James'  thought  and  displeasing 
to  his  readers.  Rather  the  hingly  crown,  the  proper  word  for 
which  is  SidSrjfia,  diadem.  In  Ps.  xx.  3  (Sept.),  a-ri<pavo'i  is 
used  of  the  royal  crown.  In  Zech.  vi.  11,  14,  the  reference 
seems  to  be  to  a  priestly  crown,  forming  part  of  the  high- 
priest's  mitre. 

13.  Of  God  (aTTo  0eov).  Lit.,  fro?7i  God.  JS"ot  by  God,  as 
the  direct  agent,  but  by  agency  proceeding  frmn  God.  Com- 
pare Matt.  iv.  1,  where  the  direct  agency,  "  by  the  spirit,"  "  by 
the  devil,"  is  expressed  by  vtto. 

Cannot  be  tempted  {airelpa<no<i  eVrt).  Lit.,  is  incapable 
of  being  tempted.  But  some  of  the  best  expositors  render  is 
unversed  in  evil  things,  as  better  according  both  with  the  usage 
of  the  word  and  with  the  context,  since  the  question  is  not  of 


Ch.  I.]  THE  GENEEAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  729 

God's  being  tempted,  but  of  God's  tempting.     Eev.  gives  tbis 
iij  margin.     ' Airelpa<TTo^  only  here  in  ISfew  Testament. 

Neither  tempteth  he  {Treipd^et  Be  airo?).  The  A.  Y.  fails 
to  render  avrbi :  "  He  himself  teim^teth  no  man."     So  Kev. 

14.  Drawn  away  {i^eXK6/i€vo<;).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. This  and  the  following  word  are  metaphors  from  hunt- 
ing and  fishing.     Drawn  away,  as  beasts  are  enticed  from  a 

safecovert  into  a  place  beset  with  snares.  Note  the  present 
participle,  as  indicating  the  progress  of  the  temptation :  "  is 
being  drawn  away." 

Enticed  (SeXeago/Acvos).  As  a  fish  with  bait.  Also  the 
present  participle.     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  14. 

15.  The  lust.  Note  the  article,  omitted  in  A.  V.  The 
peculiar  lust  of  his  own. 

Hath  conceived  (a-vWa^ova-a).     Lit.,  homing  conceived. 

Bringeth  forth  {TiKrei).  Metaphor  of  the  mother.  Kev., 
hea/reth. 

When  it  is  finished  {a7roTe\ea-!^eiaa).  Better,  Eev.,  when 
it  is  full  grown.  Not  when  the  course  of  a  sinful  life  is  com- 
pleted ;  but  when  sin  has  reached  its  full  development. 

Bringeth  forth  (aTroKvei).  A  different  verb  from  the  pre- 
ceding, bringeth  forth.  Kev.  has  rendered  riKrei,  beareth,  in 
order  to  avoid  the  repetition  of  bringeth  forth.  The  verb  is 
used  by  James  only,  here  and  at  ver.  18.  The  image  is  inter- 
preted in  two  ways.  Either  (1)  Sin,  figured  as  female,  is  already 
pregnant  with  death,  and,  when  full  grown,  bringeth  forth 
death  (so  Eev.,  and  the  majority  of  commentators).  "  The  har- 
lot, Lust,  draws  aw;ay  and  entices  the  man.  The  guilty  union 
is  committed  by  the  will  embracing  the  temptress :  the  con- 
sequence is  that  she  beareth  sin.    .    .    .    Then  the  sin,  that 


730  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  t 

particular  sin,  wlien  grown  up,  herself,  as  if  all  along  pregnant 
with  it,  bringeth  forth  death  "  (Alford).  Or  (2)  Sin,  figured  as 
male,  when  it  has  reached  maturity,  becomes  the  hegetter  of 
death.  So  the  Yulgate,  general,  and  Wye,  gendereth.  I  am 
inclined  to  prefer  this,  since  the  other  seems  somewhat  forced. 
It  has  the  high  endorsement  of  Bishop  Lightfoot.  There  is  a 
suggestive  parallel  passage  in  the  "Agamemnon"  of  Aeschylus, 
751-771 : 

' '  There  is  a  saying  old, 
Uttered  in  ancient  days, 
That  human  bliss,  full-grown. 
Genders,  and  dies  not  childless  : 
And,  for  the  coming  race, 
Springs  woe  insatiate  from  prosperity. 
But  I  alone 

Cherish  within  my  breast  another  thought. 
The  impious  deed 

Begets  a  numerous  brood  alike  in  kind  ; 
While  households  ruled  by  right  inflexible 
Blossom  with  offspring  fair. 
Insolence  old 

In  men  depraved  begetteth  insolence. 
Which  springs  afresh  from  time  to  time 
As  comes  the  day  of  doom,  and  fresh  creates 
In  Ate's  dismal  halls  ' 

Fierce  wrath  from  light, 
Unhallowed  Daring,  fiend  invincible, 
Unoonquered,  with  its  parents'  likeness  stamped." 

The  magnificent  passage  in  Milton's  "  Paradise  Lost,"  ii.,  760- 
801,  is  elaborated  from  these  verses  of  James. 

17.  The  first  words  of  this  verse  form  a  hexameter  line,  thus : 

Haaa  S6|(7is  ar^a\^r)  Kal\  irav  SmlpTj/jua  Te\K€iov. 

Such  verses,  or  parts  of  verses,  occur  occasionally  in  the  New 
Testament.  Sometimes  they  are  quotations  from  the  Greek 
poets;  sometimes  the  writer's  words  unconsciously  fall  into 
metrical  form.  Poetical  quotations  are  confined  to  Paul,  Acts 
xvii.  28  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  33 ;  Tit.  i.  12. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  731 

Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  (see  Greek  above). 
The  statement  that  these  gifts  are  from  God  is  in  pursuance  of 
the  idea  that  God  does  not  tempt  men  to  evil.  The  gifts  of 
God  are  contrasted  with  the  evil  springing  from  man's  lust. 
Two  words  are  used  for  gift.  A6(7l<;  occurs  only  here  and 
Philip,  iv.  15  ;  there  in  an  active  sense ;  but  here  passive,  as  in 
Prov.  xxi.  14  (Sept.).  Acoprifia  is  found  Kom.  v.  16.  It  enlarges 
slightly  upon  the  other  word  in  empliasizing  the  gift  asfree, 
large,  full ;  an  idea  which  is  further  developed  in  ver.  18,  of  his 
own  will.  The  Rev.,  rather  awkwardly,  endeavors  to  bring  out 
the  distinction  by  the  word  hoon,  for  which  the  American  Revis- 
ers insist  on  retaining  gift.  Boon  originally  means  a  petition  / 
famor  being  a  secondary  and  later  sense,  as  of  something  given 
in  response  to  a  petition.  The  word  is  of  Scandinavian  origin, 
and  the  meaning/o^or  seems  to  indicate  a  confusion  with  the 
Latin  tonus,  good  ;  French,  hon. 

Perfect.  Enlarges  upon  good,  bringing  out  more  distinctly 
the  moral  quality  of  the  gift. 

And  Cometh  down  {Kara^atvov).  A  present  participle,  to 
be  construed  with  dvatS-ev  icrnv,  is  from  above.  Lit.,  is  com,ing 
down  from  above.  As  usual,  this  union  of  the  participle  with  the 
finite  verb  denotes  something  habitual.  Render,  descendeth 
from,  above.     Compare  ch.  iii.  15. 

Father  of  lights  {tov  irarpo';  t&v  ^atrmv).  Lit.,  the  lights, 
by  which  are  meant  the  heavenly  bodies.  Compare  Ps.  cxxxv. 
7  (Sept.) ;  and  Jer.  iv.  23  (Sept.).  God  is  called  "  the  Father  of 
the  lights,"  as  being  their  creator  and  maintainor.  Compare 
Job  xxxviii.  28  ;  Ps.  viii.  3  ;  Amos  v.  8. 

Is  no  variableness  (evi).  Abbreviated  from  evea-ri,  is  in. 
Stronger  than  the  simple  is,  and  denoting  inherence  or  indtoeU- 
i/ng.    Rev.,  can  be. 

Variableness  {irapaWarfrf).  Better,  Rev.,  va/riablon.  The 
word  is  not  used,  as  some  suppose,  in  a  technical,  astronomical 


732  WOKD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

sense,  which  James'  readers  would  not  have  understood,  but  in 
the  simple  sense  of  change  in  the  degree  or  intensity  of  light, 
such  as  is  manifested  by  the  heavenly  bodies.  Compare  Plato, 
"  Eepublic,"  vii.,  630  :  "  Will  he  (the  astronomer)  not  think  that 
the  heaven  and  the  things  in  heaven  are  framed  by  the  Creator 
in  the  most  perfect  manner  ?  But  when  he  reflects  that  the 
proportions  of  night  and  day,  or  of  both,  to  the  month,  or  of  the 
month  to  the  year,  or  of  the  other  stars  to  these  and  to  one  an- 
other, are  of  the  \'isible  and  material,  he  will  never  fall  into  the 
error  of  supposing  that  they  are  eternal  and  liable  to  no  devia- 
tion (oiiSev  TrapaXXaTrecv) — that  would  be  monstrous." 

Shadow  of  turning  (t/jottjj?  airoa-Kiacr/ia).  This  is  popularly 
understood  to  mean  that  there  is  in  God  not  the  faintest  hint  or 
shade  of  change,  like  the  phrase,  a  shadow  of  suspicion.  But 
the  Greek  has  no  such  idiom,  and  that  is  not  James'  meaning. 
Eev.,  rightly,  i-enders,  shadow  that  is  cast  iy  turning  •  referring 
still  to  the  heavenly  orbs,  which  cast  shadows  in  their  revolution, 
as  when  the  moon  turns  her  dark  side  to  us,  or  the  sun  is 
eclipsed  by  the  body  of  the  moon. 

18.  Begat  (aTreKurjaev).  Rev.,  hrought  forth.  See  on  ver. 
15,  and  compare  1  John  iii.  9  ;  1  Pet.  i.  23. 

A  kind  of  first-fruits  {airapxnv  riva).  A  kind  q/" indicates 
the  figurative  nature  of  the  term.  The  figure  is  taken  from  the 
requirement  of  the  Jewish  law  that  the  first-born  of  men  and 
cattle,  and  the  first  growth  of  fruits  and  grain  should  be  conse- 
crated to  the  Lord.  The  point  of  the  illustration  is  that  Chris- 
tians, like  first-fruits,  should  be  consecrated  to  God.  The  ex- 
pression "  first-fruits  "  is  common  in  the  New  Testament.  See 
Eom.  viii.  23  ;  xvi.  6 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  20,  23 ;  Apoc.  xiv.  4 

19.  Wherefore.  The  A.  Y.  follows  the  reading  wo-re.  But 
the  correct  reading  is  tare,  ye  know,  and  so  Rev.  Others  render 
it  as  imperative,  know  ye,  as  calling  attention  to  what  follows. 

21.  Filthiness  {pviraplav).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
but  James  uses  the  kindred  adjective  (ch.  ii.  2),  "  vile  raiment." 


Ch.  I.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  733 

'PvTro<i,  filth,  occurs  in  1  Pet.  iii.  21 — on  which  see  notes  ;  and 
the  verb  pwoco,  to  he  filthy,  is  found  in  Apoc.  xxii.  11. 

Superfluity  of  naughtiness  {irepiaaeiav  KaKia<;).  A  trans- 
lation which  may  be  commended  to  tlie  attention  of  indiscrim- 
inate panegyrists  of  the  A.  Y.  Uepicrcreia  is  an  unclassical 
word,  and  occurs  in  three  other  New-Testament  passages — Rom. 
V.  17  ;  2  Gor.  viii.  2  ;  x.  15.  In  all  tliese  it  is  rendered  abun- 
dance, both  by  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  There  seems  to  be  no  need  of 
departing  from  this  meaning  here,  as  Rev.,  overfiowing.  The 
sense  is  abounding  or  abundant  wichedness.  For  naughtiness 
Rev.  gives  wichedness,  as  in  1  Pet.  ii.  1,  16,  where  it  changes 
malice  to  wichedness.  It  is  mostly  rendered  malice  in  both  A. 
V.  and  Rev.  In  this  passage,  as  in  the  two  from  Peter,  Rev. 
gives  malice,  in  margin.  Malice  is  an  adequate  translation,  the 
word  denoting  a  malevolent  disposition  toward  one's  neighbor. 
Hence  it  is  not  a  general  term  for  moral  evil,  but  a  special  form 
of  vice.  Compare  the  wrath  of  man,  ver.  20.  Naughtiness 
has  acquired  a  petty  sense  in  popular  usage,  as  of  the  mischiev- 
ous pranks  of  children,  which  renders  it  out  of  the  question 
here. 

With  meekness  (Iv  irpavrvfTt).  Lit.,  "m  meekness;"  op- 
posed to  malice. 

Engrafted  (efj,(f)VTOv).  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  Bet- 
ter, and  more  literally,  as  Rev.,  implanted.  It  marks  a  char- 
actei'istic  of  the  word  of  truth  (ver.  18).  It  is  iTmplanted ; 
divinely  given,  in  contrast  with  something  acquired  by  study. 
Compare  Matt.  xiii.  19,  "  the  word  of  the  kingdom — sown  in 
his  heart."  Grafted  or  graffed  is  expi-essed  by  a  peculiar  word, 
employed  by  Paul  only,  iyKevrpl^a),  from  Kevrpov,  a  sharp  point, 
thus  emphasizing  the  fact  of  the  incision  required  in  grafting. 
See  Rom.  xi.  17,  19,  23,  24. 

Which  is  able  to  save  {t6v  Swduevov  aSxrai).  Compare 
Rom.  i.  16,  '^iYiepoioer  of  God  unto  salvation." 

22.  Hearers  {aKpoaral).     Used  by  James  only. 


734  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  I. 

Deceiving  {irapaXoyi^ofievoi).  From  Trapd,  beside,  contrary 
to,  and  Xoyl^ofiai,  to  reckon,  and  hence  to  conclude  iy  reasoning. 
The  deception  referred  to  is,  therefore,  that  into  which  one 
betrays  himself  by  false  reasoning — reasoning  beside  the  truth. 

23.  B eho\d'mg  (KaravoovvTi).  With,  the  notion  of  attenti/vely 
considering  {Kara,  down  into,  or  through;  compare  eh,  into, 
ver.  25).  Compare  Luke  xii.  24,  27;  Heb.  iii.  1.  So  that  the 
contrast  is  not  between  a  hasty  look  and  a  careful  contempla- 
tion (ver.  25,  looJceth).  It  is  not  mere  careless  hearing  of  the 
word  which  James  rebukes,  but  the  neglect  to  carry  into  prac- 
tice what  is  heard.  One  may  be  an  attentive  and  critical  hearer 
of  the  word,  yet  not  a  doer. 

His  natural  face  {to  irpoa-wirov  Trj'i  yevecrem';).  Lit.,  the 
countenance  of  his  birth  /  the  face  he  was  bom  with. 

In  a  glass  {iv  ia-oTTTpai).  Better,  Rev.,  a  m/i/rror  ;  a  metalliG 
mirror.     The  word  occurs  only  here  and  1  Cor.  xiii.  12. 

24.  He  beholdeth  (KaTei/oiyo-ev).  The  aorist  tense,  throwing 
the  sentence  into  a  lively,  narrative  form :  he  beheld  himself 
and  forgot.     Compai'e  ver.  11. 

25.  Whoso  iooketh  (o  7rapaKir^a<;).  'Rev.,  more  strictly,  he 
that  looketh.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  12.  Theverbis  used  of  one  who 
stoops  sideioays  {irapd)  to  look  attentively.  The  mirror  is  con- 
ceived as  placed  on  a  table  or  on  the  ground.  Bengel  quotes 
Wisdom  of  Sirach  xiv.  23 :  "  He  that  prieth  in  at  her  (Wis- 
dom's) windows  shall  also  hearken  at  her  doors."  Coleridge 
remarks:  "  A  more  happy  or  forcible  word  could  not  have  been 
chosen  to  express  the  nature  and  ultimate  object  of  reflection, 
and  to  enforce  the  necessity  of  it,  in  order  to  discover  the  living 
fountain  and  spring-head  of  the  evidence  of  the  Christian  faith 
in  the  believer  himself,  and  at  the  same  time  to  point  out  the 
seat  and  region  where  alone  it  is  to  be  found  "  ("  Aphorisms  "). 

Into  {eh).  Denoting  the  penetration  of  the  look  into  the 
very  essence  of  the  law. 


Ch.  I.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  735 

The  perfect  law  of  liberty  {vofiov  reKeiov  tov  t?}?  eKev^e- 
pla<s).  Lit.,  t?ie  perfect  law,  the  law  of  liberty.  So  Eev.  The 
law  of  liberty  is  added  as  defining  the  perfect  law. 

Continueth  therein.  Better,  Kev.,  so  contvrmeth;  i.e., 
continues  looking. 

Forgetful  hearer  (a/cpoar^?  eVtXTjff/ioi/^?).  The  latter  word 
only  here  in  New  Testament.  Lit.,  a  hearer  of  forgetfulness ; 
whom  forgetfulness  characterizes.  Rev.,  very  happily,  a  hearer 
that  forgetteth ;  a  rendering  which  gives  the  proper  sense  of 
forgetfulness  as  a  characteristic  better  than  A.  V.,  a  forgetful 
hearer. 

Doer  of  the  work.  Lit.,  of  work,  as  the  noun  has  no  ar- 
ticle.    Eev.,  a  doer  that  worheth. 

In  his  deed  (eV  t^  iroiriaei,  avrov).  More  correctly,  as  Rev., 
m  his  doing.  Only  here  in  New  Testament.  The  preposition 
ev  {in)  marks  the  inner  connection  between  doing  and  blessed- 
ness. "  The  life  of  obedience  is  the  element  wherein  the 
blessedness  is  found  and  consists"  (Alford). 

26.  Seem  to  be  (Sowet).  Rev.,  correctly,  thinketh  himself 
to  he.  A  man  can  scarcely  seem  to  be  religious,  M'hen,  as  Trench 
observes,  "  his  religious  pretensions  are  belied  and  refuted  by 
the  allowance  of  an  unbridled  tongue." 

Religious  (.9/3J}o-«os).  Only  here  in  New  Testament,  and 
nowhere  in  classical  Greek.  The  kindred  noun  Sprjo-Keia,  re- 
ligion, occurs  Acts  xxvi.  5  ;  Col.  ii.  18  ;  Jas.  i.  26,  27 ;  and 
means  the  ceremonial  service  of  religion.  Herodotus  (ii.,  37) 
uses  it  of  various  observances  practised  by  the  Egyptian  priests, 
such  as  wearing  linen,  circumcision,  shaving,  etc.  The  deriva- 
tion is  uncertain.  Opeofiai,  to  mutter  forms  of  prayer,  has 
been  suggested,  as  the  followers  of  "Wycliffe  were  called  Zol- 
lards,  from  the  old  Dutch  hcllen  or  lollen,  to  sing.  Hence  the 
adjective  here  lefers  to  a  zealous  and  diligent  performance 
of  religious  services. 


736  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IL 

Bridleth  {'xaXtvayco'y&v).  Used  by  James  only.  Seech,  iii. 
2.  Lit.,  to  guide  with  a  hridle.  So  Plato,  "  Laws,"  701 :  "  I 
think  that  the  argument  ought  to  be  pulled  up  from  time  to 
time,  and  not  to  be  allowed  to  run  away,  but  held  with  bit  and 
bridle." 

27.  Undefiled  (a/iiavro'i).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4.  The  two  ad- 
jectives,  j>ure  and  undefiled,  present  the  positive  and  negative 
sides  of  purity. 

To  visit  {iiruTKeTTTea-B^ai).  See  on  Matt.  xxv.  36.  James 
strikes  a  downright  blow  here  at  ministry  by  proxy,  or  by  mere 
gifts  of  money.  Pure  and  undefiled  religion  dieia&nds  personal 
contact  with  the  world's  sorrow :  to  visit  the  afflicted,  and  to 
visit  them  in  their  affliction.  "The  rich  man,  prodigal  of 
money,  wliicli  is  to  him  of  little  value,  but  altogether  incapable 
of  devoting  any  personal  attention  to  the  object  of  his  alms, 
often  injures  society  by  his  donations;  but  this  is  rarely  the 
case  with  that  far  nobler  charity  which  makes  men  familiar 
with  the  haunts  of  wretchedness,  and  follows  the  object  of  its 
care  through  all  the  phases  of  his  life"  (Lecky,  "History  of 
European  Morals,"  ii.,  98). 

To  keep  {rrjpetv).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Unspotted  {acririkov).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  19. 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  Have  (%T6).  Eev.,  hold,  not  in  the  sense  of  hold  fast, 
cleave  to,  but  of  possessing,  occujpying,  and  practising,  as  a 
matter  of  habit.  Thus  we  say  that  a  man  holds  his  property 
by  a  certain  tenure.  A  rented  estate  is  a  holding.  So  of  an 
opinion,  or  set  of  opinions,  with  which  one  is  publicly  identified. 
We  say  that  he  holds  thus  and  so. 

With  respect  of  persons  (eV  irpoa-airoXrjfjiyfrlaK;).  Prom 
irpoaioTTov,  the  countenance,  and  Xafi^dvco,  to  receive.     To  re- 


Ch.  II.]  the  general  epistle  op  JAMES.  737 

ceive  the  cov/ntenance  is  a  Hebrew  phrase.  Thus  Levit.  xix.  15 
(Sept.) :  Ov  'K,ri'^  irpocTcoTrov  tttwxov  :  T/iou  shalt  not  respect  the 
jperson  (receive  the  countenance)  of  the  poor.  Compare  Luke 
XX.  21  ;  Kom.  ii.  11 ;  and  Jude  16. 

The  Lord   of  glory.     Compare  1  Cor.  ii.  8;  Acts  vii.  2; 
Eph.  i.  11. 

2.  Assembly  (awaycoyrjv).  The  word  synagogue  is  a  tran- 
script of  this.  From  aw,  together,  and  ar^w,  to  hring.  Hence, 
literally,  a  gathering  or  congregation,  in  which  sense  the  word 
is  common  in  the  Septuagint,  not  only  of  assemblies  for  wor- 
ship, but  of  gatherings  for  other  public  purposes.  Fi-om  the 
meeting  itself  the  transition  is  easy  to  the  place  of  meeting, 
the  synagogue ;  and  in  this  sense  the  term  is  used  throughout  the 
jS^ew  Testament,  with  the  following  exceptions :  In  Acts  xiii. 
43,  it  is  rendered  congregation  by  the  A.  V.,  though  Eev.  gives 
synagogue  j  and  in  Apoc.  ii.  9  ;  iii.  9,  the  unbelieving  Jews,  as 
a  body,  are  called  synagogue  of  Satan.  As  a  designation  of  a 
distinctively  Jewish  assembly  or  place  of  worship  it  was  more 
sharply  emphasized  by  the  adoption  of  the  word  eKKkijaia, 
ecclesia,  to  denote  the  Christian  church.  In  this  passage  alone 
the  word  is  distinctly  applied  to  a  Christian  assembly  or  place 
of  worship.  The  simplest  explanation  appears  to  be  that  the 
word  designates  the  place  of  meeting  for  the  Christian  body, 
James  using  the  word  most  familiar  to  the  Jewish  Christians  ; 
an  explanation  which  receives  countenance  from  the  fact  that, 
as  Huther  observes,  "the  Jewish  Christians  regarded  them- 
selves as  still  an  integral  part  of  the  Jewish  nation,  as  the 
chosen  people  of  God."  As  such  a  portion  they  had  their 
special  synagogue.  From  Acts  vi.  9,  we  learn  that  there  were 
numerous  synagogues  in  Jerusalem,  representing  different  bod- 
ies, such  as  the  descendants  of  Jewish  freedmen  at  Rome,  and 
the  Alexandrian  or  Hellenistic  Jews.  Among  these  would  be 
the  synagogue  of  the  Christians,  and  such  would  be  the  case  in 
all  large  cities  where  the  dispersed  Jews  congregated.  Alford 
quotes  a  phrase  from  the  "  Testaments  of  the  Twelve  Patri- 
archs :  "  the  synagogue  of  the  Gentiles.  Compare  Heb.  x.  25, 
"  the  assemhling  together  (kirLdvvarjw^rfv)  of  yourselves." 
47 


738  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  H. 

With  a  gold  ring  {'xpvcrohaKTvXto'i).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  Not  a  man  wearing  a  single  gold  ring  (as  A.  V. 
and  Rev.),  which  would  not  attract  attention  in  an  assembly 
where  most  persons  wore  a  ring,  but  a  gold-ringed  man,  having 
his  hands  conspicuously  loaded  with  rings  and  jewels.  The 
ring  was  regarded  as  an  indispensable  article  of  a  Hebrew's  at- 
tire, since  it  contained  his  signet ;  and  the  name  of  the  ring, 
tabbath,  was  derived  from  a  root  signifying  to  imjpress  a  seal. 
It  was  a  proverbial  expression  for  a  most  valued  object.  See 
Isa.  xxii.  24 ;  Hag.  ii.  23.  The  Greeks  and  Eomans  wore  them 
in  great  profusion.  Hannibal,  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  sent 
as  a  trophy  to  Carthage,  three  bushels  of  gold  rings  from 
the  fingers  of  the  lioman  knights  slain  in  battle.  To  wear 
rings  on  the  right  hand  was  regarded  as  a  mark  of  effemi- 
nacy ;  but  they  were  worn  profusely  on  the  left.  Martial  says 
of  one  Charinus  that  he  wore  six  on  each  finger,  and  never  laid 
them  aside,  either  at  night  or  when  bathing.  The  fops  had 
rings  of  different  sizes  for  summer  and  winter.  Aristophanes 
distinguishes  between  the  populace  and  those  who  wear  rings, 
and  in  his  comedy  of  "  The  Clouds  "  uses  the  formidable  word 
a-cjjparytSovv'xapyoKOfi'fJTai,  lazy,  long-haired  fops,  with  rings 
and  well-t/rimmed  nails.  Demosthenes  was  so  conspicuous  for 
this  kind  of  ornament  that,  at  a  time  of  public  disaster,  it  was 
stigmatized  as  unbecoming  vanity.  Frequent  mention  is  made 
of  their  enormous  cost.  They  were  of  gold  and  silver,  some- 
times of  both  ;  sometimes  of  iron  inlaid  with  gold.  The  pos- 
sible beauty  of  these  latter  will  be  appreciated  by  those  who 
have  seen  the  elegant  gold  and  iron  jewellery  made  at  Toledo, 
in  Spain.  Sometimes  they  were  of  amber,  ivory,  or  porcelain. 
The  practice  of  wearing  rings  was  adopted  by  the  early  Chris- 
tians. Many  of  their  rings  were  adorned  with  the  symbols  of 
the  faith — the  cross,  the  anchor,  the  monogram  of  Chi'ist,  etc. 
Among  the  rings  found  in  the  catacombs  are  some  with  a  key, 
and  some  with  both  a  key  and  a  seal,  for  both  locking  and  seal- 
ing a  casket. 

Goodly  apparel  {ea^ri,  XanirpS).    Lit.,  bright  or  shining 

clothes.     ^ev,,fine  clothing. 


CH.n.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  739 

Vile  ipvirapa).     Compare  cli.  i.  21 ;  and  see  on  1  Pet.  iii.  21. 

3.  Ye  have  respect  (eVt^Xei/n/Te).  Lit.,  ye  look  upon,  with 
the  idea  of  respectful  consideration  ;  ye  regard.  Compare  Luke 
i.  48  ;  ix,  38. 

In  a  good  place  (/caXws).  Lit.,  honorably;  in  a  seat  of 
honor. 

Under.  Not  literally  underneath,  but  down  on  the  ground 
beside.  Compare  Matt,  xxiii.  6,  on  the  fondness  of  the  Jews 
for  the  chief  places  in  the  synagogue. 

4.  Are  ye  not  partial  in  yourselves  ?  {ov  hiSKpl^re  iv 
€avT0i<;).  "Wrong.  The  constant  sense  of  the  verb  in  the  New 
Testament  is  doubt,  except  Acts  xi.  2 ;  Jude  9,  where  it  means 
dispute.  Compare  ch.  i.  6.  The  meaning  here  is,  therefore, 
that,  in  making  a  distinction  between  the  rich  and  the  poor,  they 
expressed  a  doubt  concerning  the  faith  which  they  professed, 
and  which  abolished  such  distinctions.  Hence,  Kev.,  rightly. 
Are  ye  not  dvoided  in  your  own  mind  f 

Judges  of  evil  thoughts  (Kpiral  SidKoyia-ti&v  irovqpoiv). 
Better,  as  Rev.,  "judges  with  evil  thoughts."  The  form  of  ex- 
pression is  the  same  as  in  Luke  xviii.  6,  /cpirrj';  tiJ?  aSticia%  the 
judge  of  injustice,  i.e.,  the  unjust  judge.  So  Jas.  i.  25,  a 
hea/rer  offorgetfulness.  The  word  thoughts  is,  rather,  reason- 
ings. See  on  deoei/ving  yourselves  (ch.  i.  22).  Compare  Luke 
V.  21.  Their  evi]  processes  of  thought  lead  to  these  unjust  dis- 
criminations.    • 

5.  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren.  Alford  cites  this 
phrase  as  one  of  the  very  few  links  which  connect  this  epistle 
with  the  speech  of  James  in  Acts  xv.  13. 

The  poor  of  this  world  (tow?  irTtoxoixs  rod  Kovp-ov).  But 
the  correct  reading  is  t&  Koap-m,  to  the  world ;  and  the  ex- 
pression is  to  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  do-retos  r&  Qe&, 


740  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  U 

fair  unto  God,  Acts  vii.  20,  and  hvvaTa  tS  Qew,  mighty 
through  (Eev.,  before)  God,  2  Cor.  x.  4.  So  Rev.,  j>oor  as  to  the 
world,  in  the  world's  esteem.     Poor,  see  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

Rich  in  faith.  The  Kev.,  properly,  inserts  to  he,  since  the 
words  are  not  in  apposition  with  j^oor,  but  express  the  object 
for  which  God  has  chosen  them.  Faith  is  not  the  quality  in 
which  they  are  to  be  rich,  but  the  sphere  or  element ;  rich  in 
their  position  as  believers.  "ITot  the  measure  of  faith,  in 
virtue  of  which  one  man  is  richer  than  another,  is  before  the 
writer's  mind,  but  the  substance  of  the  faith,  by  virtue  of  which 
every  believer  is  rich  "  (Wiesinger,  cited  by  Alf ord). 

6.  Despised  {^TLfida-aTe).  Not  strong  enough.  They  had 
manifested  their  contempt ;  had  done  despite  to  them.  Rev., 
correctly,  dishonored.  From  the  use  of  the  aorist  tense,  ye  dis- 
honored, which  the  A.  Y.  and  Rev.  render  as  a  perfect,  ye  have 
dishonored,  the  reference  would  appear  to  be  to  a  specific  act 
like  that  described  in  vv.  2,  3. 

Oppress  {jcaTahwaa-Tevoveriv).  Only  here  and  Acts  x.  38. 
The  preposition  Kara,  against,  implies  a  power  exercised  for 
harm.  Compare  being  lords  over,  1  Pet.  v.  3,  and  exercise  do- 
minion, Matt.  XX.  25,  both  compounded  with  this  preposition. 

Draw  (eXKova-iv).  Not  strong  enough.  The  word  implies 
violence.  Hence,  better,  as  Rev.,  drag.  Compare  Livy's  phrase, 
"  a  Uctoribus  trahi,  to  be  dragged  by  the  lietors  to  judgment ;  " 
Acts  viii.  3,  of  Saul  haling  or  hauling  men  and  women  to  prison ; 
and  Luke  xii.  58. 

Judgment-seats  {KpiTijpia).     Only  here  and  1  Cor.  vi.  24. 

7.  They  (avrol).  Emphatic.  "Is  it  not  they  who  blas- 
pheme ? " 

Worthy  (kuXov).  Rev.,  better,  because  stronger,  honorable. 
By  this  epitliet  the  disgracefulness  of  the  blasphemy  is  empha- 
sized. 


Ch.  n.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  741 

By  the  which  ye  are  called  {rb  eVi/eXij^ev  itf  v/iai).  Lit., 
wkioh  is  called  lupon  you  ;  the  name  of  Christ,  invoked  in  bap- 
tism. The  phrase  is  an  Old-Testament  one.  See  Deut.  xxviii. 
10,  where  the  Septuagint  reads  thM  the  name  of  the  Lord  has 
heen  called  upon  thee.  Also,  2  Chron.  vii.  14;  Isa.  iv.  1.  Com- 
pare Acts  XV.  17. 

8.  Fulfil  the  royal  law  (vo/mov  reXeire  ^acriKiKov).  The 
phrase  occurs  only  here  and  E.om.  ii.  21.  TeXeiv,  fulfil,  is 
stronger  than  the  more  common  word  rrjpetv,  observe  or  keep, 
which  appears  in  ver.  10.  Compare,  also,  Matt.  xix.  17;  xxiii. 
3  ;  John  xiv.  15,  etc.  James  here  speaks  of  a  single  com- 
mandment, the  proper  word  for  which  is  ivTokri,  while  i/o'/io? 
is  the  body  of  commandments.  It  is  appropriate  here,  how- 
ever, since  this  special  commandment  sums  up  the  entire  law. 
See  Kom.  xiii.  10 ;  Gal.  v.  14.  It  is  the  royal  law ;  the  king 
of  all  laws. 

The  phrase  royal  law  is  of  Roman  origin  (lex  regia).  In  the 
kingly  period  of  Roman  history  it  did  not  signify  a  law  pro- 
mulgated by  the  absolute  authority  of  the  king,  but  a  law  passed 
by  a  popular  assembly  under  the  presidency  of  the  king.  In 
later  times  the  term  was  applied  to  all  laws  the  origin  of  which 
was  attributed  to  the  time  of  the  kings.  Gradually  the  term 
came  to  represent  less  of  the  popular  will,  and  to  include  all  the 
rights  and  powers  which  the  Roman  people  had  formerly  pos- 
sessed, so  that  the  emperor  became  what  formerly  the  people 
had  been,  sovereign.  "  It  was  not,"  says  Gibbon,  "  before  the 
ideas  and  even  the  language  of  the  Romans  had  been  corrupted, 
that  a  royal  law  (lex  regia)  and  an  irrevocable  gift  of  the  people 
were  created.  .  .  .  The  pleasure  of  the  emperor,  accord- 
ing to  Justinian,  has  the  vigor  and  effect  of  law,  since  the  Roman 
people,  by  the  royal  law,  have  transferred  to  their  prince  the 
full  extent  of  their  own  power  and  sovereignty.  The  will  of 
a  single  man,  of  a  child,  perhaps,  was  allowed  to  prevail  over, 
the  wisdom  of  ages  and  the  inclinations  of  millions ;  and  the 
degenerate  Greeks  were  proud  to  declare  that  in  his  hands 
alone  the  arbitrary  exercise  of  legislation  could  be  safely  depos- 
ited "  ("Decline and  Fall,"  ch.  xliv.). 


742  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  1L 

9.  Ye  have  respect  to  persons  {TrpoacoTroXijfitrTeiTe).  Only 
here  in  New  Testament.     See  on  ver.  1. 

Ye  commit  sin  (a/jutpTiav  epyd^eaSe).  Lit.,  "work  sin." 
Compare  Matt.  vii.  23 ;  Acts  x.  35  ;  Heb.  xi.  33.  The  phrase 
is  rather  stronger  than  the  more  common  d/jLapriav  Troielv,  to  do 
sm,  John  viii.  34  ;  Jas.  v.  15  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  22.  The  position  of 
sin  is  emphatic  :  "  it  is  sin  that  ye  are  working." 

And  are  convinced  (i\eYX°f^^'>')-  Rather,  as  Rev.,  con- 
victed. The  word,  which  is  variously  rendered  in  A.  V.  tell  a 
fault,  reprove,  rebuke,  convince,  while  it  carries  the  idea  of  re- 
buke, implies  also  a  rebuke  which  produces  a  conviction  of  the 
error  or  sin.  See  on  John  viii.  46.  Compare  John  iii.  20; 
viii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25. 

10.  Keep  {rrjpT^crrj).     See  on  ver.  8. 

Offend  (TTTaia-ij).     Lit.,  as  Rev.,  stumble. 

He  is  guilty  (yiyovev  evo'xp'i).  Lit.,  he  is  become  guilty. 
"Evoxo^  guilt)/,  is,  strictly,  holden;  within  the  condemning 
power  of.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  66 ;  Mark  iii.  29 ;  1  Cor.  xi. 
27.  Huther  cites  a  Talmudic  parallel :  "  But  if  he  perform  all, 
but  omit  one,  he  is  guilty  of  every  single  one." 

11.  A  transgressor  {-rrapa/Sdrr)^).  From  -n-apd,  beyond,  and 
^aivco,  to  go.  A  transgressor,  therefore,  is  one  who  goes  beyond 
the  line.  So,  also,  trespass,  which  is  transpass,  from  the  Latin 
trans,  across,  &u&  passus,  a  step.  A  similar  word  occurs  in 
Homer,  virep^aa-la,  a  transgression  or  trespass,  from  virep,  over, 
and  l3aiva),  to  go. 

12.  So.     With  reference  to  what  follows,  speak  and  do. 

13.  He  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy  that  hath 
shewed  no  mercy   (^  7^^  Kpla-i<i  dvlXem  t&  fit)  -n-oirjcravTi 


Ch.  II.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  743 

e\eo?).  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  judgment  is  without  mercy  to  him  that 
hath  shewed  no  mercy.  Eoth  A.  Y.  and  Eev.  omit  the  article 
"<Ae  judgment,"  that,  namely,  wliieh  is  coming.  Hath  shewed, 
or,  lit.,  shewed  (aorist  tense).  The  writer  puts  himself  at  the 
stand-point  of  the  judgment,  and  looks  backward. 

Rejoiceth  QcaTaKavxaTat,).  The  simple  verb  Kavxao/j,at 
means  to  speak  loud,  to  he  loud-tongued ;  hence,  to  hoast. 
Better,  therefore,  as  Kev.,  glorieth.  Judgment  and  mercy  are 
personified.  "While  judgment  threatens  condemnation,  mercy 
interposes  and  prevails  over  judgment.  "  Mercy  is  clothed 
with  the  divine  glory,  and  stands  by  the  throne  of  God.  When 
we  are  in  danger  of  being  condemned,  she  rises  up  and  pleads 
for  us,  and  covers  us  with  her  defence,  and  enfolds  us  with  her 
wings"  (Chrysostom,  cited  by  Gloag). 

14.  What  doth  it  profit?  (rt  to  o^€Ko<i).  Lit.,  what  is  the 
^profit  f    "O^eKo'i, profit,  only  here,  ver.  16,  and  1  Cor.  xv.  32. 

15.  Be  (t;7rap%(j)o-w).  The  distinction  between  this  word  and 
the  simple  elvai,  to  he,  is  very  subtle.  The  verb  vTrapxio  origi- 
nally means  to  make  a  heginning  /  hence,  to  hegin  or  to  corns 
into  hevng  ;  and,  though  used  substantially  as  a  synonym  of 
etvat,  of.  a  thing  actually  existing  and  at  hand,  it  has  a  back- 
ward look  to  an  antecedent  condition  which  has  been  protracted 
into  the  present.  Thus  we  might  paraphrase  here,  "  If  a 
brother  or  sifter,  having  been  in  a'  destitute  condition,  be  found 
by  you  in  that  condition."  Elvai,  on  the  other  hand,  would 
simply  state  the  present  fact  of  destitution.    See  on  2  Pet.  i.  8. 

Destitute  (Xeiirofievoi).  Lit.,  left  hehind/  and  hence  lacking, 
as  Rev.  Compare  ch.  i.  4,  5.  This  usage  of  the  word  occurs 
in  James  only. 

Daily  {e<jyr)iJ,epov).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

16.  Depart  in  peace  (uTrayere  iv  elprjvrj).  Compare  virar^e 
or  iropevov  ek  elprjvijv,  go  into  peace,  Mark  v.  34  ;  Luke  vii.  50. 


744  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Cn.  H 

Be  filled  {xopTa^eaS^e).     See  on  Matt.  v.  6. 

Those  things  which  are  needful  (to;  eTrtTjjSeia).    Only 

here  in  New  Testament. 

17.  Being  SL\one  {koS  eavTTjv).  Wrong.  Eev.,  correctly,  w 
itself.  The  phrase  belongs  to  dead.  It  is  dead,  not  merely  in 
reference  to  something  else,  but  absolutely. 

18.  Without  (xcoph).     Eev.,  more  literally,  ajpa/rtfrom. 

And  I  will  shew  thee,  etc.  The  Eev.  brings  out  the  an- 
tithesis more  sharply  by  keeping  more  closely  to  the  Greek 
oi'der  ;  1  hy  my  worhs  will  shew,  etc. 

19.  Tremble  {^pia-a-ovaiv).  Only  here  in  l^ew  Testament. 
It  means,  originally,  to  he  rough  on  the  surface',  to  hrisile. 
Hence,  used  of  the  fields  with  ears  of  corn  ;  of  a  line  of  battle 
bristling  with  shields  and  spears  ;  of  a  silver  or  golden  vessel 
rough  with  embossed  gold.  Aeschylus,  describing  a  crowd 
holding  up  their  hands  to  vote,  says,  the  air  hristled  with 
right  hands.  Hence,  of  a  horror  which  makes  the  hair  stand 
on  end  and  contracts  the  surface  of  the  skin,  making  "  goose- 
flesh."     Eev.,  much  better,  shudder. 

20.  Vain  {xeve).     Lit.,  empty,  without  spiritual  life. 

Dead  {yeKpa).  But  the  best  texts  read  apyT^,  idle  /  as  of 
money  which  yields  no  interest,  or  of  land  lying  fallow. 

21.  When  he  had  offered  (ai/ei/ey/ea?).  Incorrect.  For  the 
participle  states  the  ground  of  his  justification.  By  worJcs 
gives  the  general  ground  ;  offered,  etc.,  the  sjpecifio  work.  Com- 
pare Gen.  xxii.  16,  17.  Eev.,  correctly,  in  that  he  offered. 
The  word  dveveyKw^  is,  lit.,  brought  uj>  to ;  and  means,  not 
actually  to  offer  up  in  sacrifice  (though  Isaac  was  morally  sacri- 
ficed in  Abraham's  will),  but  to  bring  to  the  altar  as  an  offering. 
See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  5. 


Ch.  II.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  745 

22.  Wrought  with  his  works  {a-vvj]pyei  rot?  epyoi<}).  There 
is  a  play  on  the  words  in  the  Greek  :  worked  with  his  works. 

23.  Was  fulfilled  {eirXrjpwl^ri).  Not  was  confirmed,  which 
the  word  does  not  mean  either  in  New-Testament  or  in  classi- 
cal usage,  but  was  actually  and  fully  realised.  James  here 
uses  the  formula  which  in  the  Old  Testament  is  employed  of 
the  realizing  of  a  former  utterance.  See  1  Kings  ii.  27;  2 
Chron.  xxxvi.  22  (Sept.). 

Imputed  {i\oyia-37]).    Lit.,  as  Kev.,  reckoned. 

He  was  called  the  friend  of  God.  The  term,  however, 
does  not  occur  either  in  the  Hebrew  or  Septuagint,  though  it  is 
found  in  the  A.  Y.  and  retained  in  Eev.  Old  Testament.  In  2 
Chron.  xx.  7  (Sept.),  thy  friend  is  to5  rffa-jrrifihtp  aov,  thy  he- 
loved.  In  Isa.  xli.  8  (Sept.),  my  friend  is  ov  r)<^aTrt](Ta^  whom 
I  loved.  "  The  friend  of  God  "  is  still  the  favorite  title  of 
Abraham  among  the  Jews  and  Mohammedans. 

25.  Rahab.  Also  referred  to  in  Heb.  xi.  31,  among  the  ex- 
amples of  faith.     Dante  places  her  in  the  third  heaven : 

' '  Thou  fain  wouldst  know  who  is  within  this  light 
That  here  beside  me  thus  is  scintillating, 
Even  as  a  sunbeam  in  the  limpid  water. 
Then  know  thou,  that  within  there  is  at  rest 
Rahab,  and  being  to  our  order  joined. 
With  her  in  its  supremest  grade  'tis  sealed. 

First  of  Christ's  Triumph  was  she  taken  up. 
Full  meet  it  was  to  leave  her  in  some  heaven, 
Even  as  a  palm  of  the  high  victory 
Which  he  acquired  with  one  palm  and  the  other, 
Because  she  favored  the  first  glorious  deed 
Of  Joshua  upon  the  Holy  Land." 

ParMise,  ix.,  113-135. 

Kahab  became  the  wife  of  Salmon,  and  the  ancestress  of  Boaz, 
Jesse's  grandfather.  Some  have  supposed  that  Salmon  was 
one  of  the  spies  wliose  life  she  saved.     At  any  rate,  she  be- 


746  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  Ul 

came  the  mother  of  the  line  of  David  and  of  Christ,  and  is  so 
recorded  in  Matthew's  genealogy  of  our  Lord,  in  which  only 
four  women  are  named.  There  is  a  peculiar  significance  in  this 
selection  of  Rahab  with  Abraham  as  an  example  of  faith,  by 
James  the  Lord's  brother. 

Sent  them  out  {eK^aKovffa).  Better,  thrust  them  forth,  im- 
plying haste  and  fear.  Compare  Mark  i.  12;  Luke  iv.  29; 
Acts  xvi.  37. 

Another  way.  Than  that  by  which  they  entered.  Through 
the  window.     See  Josh.  ii.  15. 

26.  Works  {twv  epymv).  Note  the  article :  the  works  belong- 
ing or  corresponding  to  faith ;  its  works. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Masters  i^iZaaKdhjoC).  Literally,  and  better,  teachers, 
with  a  reference  to  the  exhortation  to  be  slow  to  speak  (ch.  i. 
19).  Compare  1  Cor.  xiv.  26-34.  James  is  warning  against  the 
too  eager  and  general  assumption  of  the  privilege  of  teaching, 
which  was  not  restricted  to  a  particular  class,  but  was  exercised 
by  believers  generally. 

2.  Offend  {wTaiofiev).  Lit.,  stumble,  as  Kev.  Compare  ch. 
ii.  10. 

To  bridle.     See  on  ch.  i.  26. 

3.  Behold.  Following  the  old  reading,  tSe.  All  the  best 
texts  read  el  Se,  now  if.     So  Rev. 

Bits  {xoKivoix;).  Only  here  and  Apoc.  xiv.  20.  It  may  be 
rendered  either  hit,  as  A.  V.,  or  hridle,  as  Rev.,  but  hridle  is 
preferable  because  it  corresponds  with  the  verb  to  hridle  (ver. 
2)  which  is  compounded  with  this  noun. 


Ch.  ni.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  747 

Horses.     The  position  in  the  sentence  is  emphatic. 
We  turn  about  {/Merceyofiev).    Used  by  James  only.' 

4.  The  ships.  See  Introduction,  on  James'  local  allusions. 
Dean  Howson  observes  that  "there  is  more  imagery  drawn 
from  mere  natural  phenomena  in  the  one  short  epistle  of  James 
than  in  all  St.  Paul's  epistles  put  together." 

So  great.  As  the  ship  which  conveyed  Paul  to  Malta, 
which  contained  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  persons  (Acts 
xxvii.  37). 

Fierce  {aicKripSyv).  More  literally,  and  better,  as  Kev.,  rough. 
The  word  primarily  means  hard,  ha/rsh. 

Helm  (-TrijSaXiov).  Better,  rudder,  as  Eev.  The  rudder  was 
an  oar  worked  by  a  handle.  Helm  and  rudder  were  thus  one. 
The  word  occurs  only  here  and  Acts  xxvii.  40. 

The  governor  listeth  (^  opfii]  tov  eiSwovTO^  ^ovXerai). 
Lit.,  the  impulse  or  desire  of  the  steersman  wisheth.  'Opfir), 
impulse,  only  here  and  Acts  xiv.  5,  of  an  assault,  onset. 

The  governor  {rov  €v3-vvovto<;).  Eev.,  steersman.  Lit.,  of 
him  who  is  guiding.  Only  here  and  John  i.  23.  From  ev^v?, 
straight. 

5.  Boasteth  great  things  (/ieyaXau^ei).  The  best  texts 
separate  the  compound,  and  read  fieyaXa  aixet,  of  course  with 
the  same  meaning.  Avx^i,  boasteth,  only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. 

How  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  {rj\lKov  irvp 
7)KiKi}v  vXtjv  avdvTei).  The  word  vKti  (only  here  in  ISTew  Tes- 
tament) means  wood  or  a  forest,  and  hence  the  matter  or  raw 
material  of  which  a  thing  is  made.  Later,  it  is  used  in  the 
philosophical  sense  of  matter — "  the  foundation  of  the  mani- 
fold"— opposed  to  the  intelligent  or  formative  principle  vow. 


748  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  m. 

mind.  The  authorized  version  has  taken  the  word  in  one  of  its 
secondary  senses,  hardly  the  philosophical  sense  it  would  seem ; 
but  any  departure  from  the  earlier  sense  was  not  only  needless, 
but  impaired  the  vividness  of  the  figure,  the  familiar  and  nat- 
ural image  of  a  forest  on  fire.     So  Homer : 

"  As  when  a  fire 
Seizes  a  thick-grown  forest,  and  the  wind 
Drives  it  along  in  eddies,-  while  the  trunks 
Fall  with  the  boughs  amid  devouring  flames." 

Iliad,  xi.,  155. 

Hence,  Eev.,  rightly,  "  Behold  how  rmoeh  wood  or  how  great  a 
forest  is  kindled  hy  how  small  afire. 

This,  too,  is  the  rendering  of  the  Yulgate :  quam,  magnam 
siVvam. 

6.  World  of  iniquity  («6cr/io?  tt;?  oSt/ctW).  Kotr/io?,  prima- 
rily, means  order,  and  is  applied  to  the  world  or  universe  as 
an  orderly  system.  A  world  of  iniquity  is  an  organism  con- 
taining within  itself  all  evil  essence,  which  from  it  permeates 
the  entire  man.  World  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the  lat- 
ter part  of  Prov.  xvii.  6  (Sept.),  which  is  not  given  in  the 
A.  V.  "  The  trusty  hath  the  whole  world  of  things,  but  the 
faithless  not  a  groat." 

Is  the  tongue  (KaSia-Tarat).  This  differs  a  little  from  the 
simple  is,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  rend«r  it  accurately.  The 
verb  means  to  ajppoint,  establish,  institute,  and  is  used  of  the 
tongue  as  having  an  appointed  and  definite  place  in  a  system 
(among  our  members).     It  might  be  rendered  hath  its  place. 

Defileth  {aTriXovaa).  Lit.,  defiling.  Only  here  and  Jude 
23.     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

Setteth  on  fire  (<^Xo7/^oucra).  JAi.,  setting  on  fire.  Only  in 
this  verse  in  New  Testament. 

The  course  of  nature  (rpoxov  Trj<}  yevia-ew';).  A  very  ob- 
scure passage.     Tpox6<}  (only  here  in  New  Testament),  from 


Ch.  III.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  749 

Tpexm,  to  run,  applies  generally  to  anything  round  or  circular 
which  runs  or  rolls,  as  a  wheel  or  sphere.  Hence,  often  a 
wheel.  Used  of  the  circuit  of  fortifications  and  of  circles  or 
zones  of  land  or  sea.  From  the  radical  sense,  to  rim,  comes 
the  meaning  course,  as  the  course  of  the  sun  ;  and  from  this  a 
place  for  running,  a  race-course.  Tevea-eco';,  rendered  nature, 
means  origin,  beginning,  iirth,  manner  of  iirth,  production, 
and  is  used  by  Plato  for  the  creation,  or  the  sum  of  created 
things.  It  also  means  a  race,  and  a  generation  or  age.  In  the 
New  Testament  it  occurs  but  twice  outside  of  this  epistle,  viz., 
at  Matt.  i.  1,  "the  book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ," 
where  the  meaning  is  origin  or  hirih ;  the  hirth-hooJc  of  Jesus 
Christ.  The  other  passage  is  Matt.  i.  18,  according  to  the  best 
texts,  also  meaning  hirth.  In  Jas.  i.  23,  as  we  have  seen, 
■jrpoaoDTrov  Tri<;  yevea-eoo';  is  the  face  of  his  birth.  We  may  then 
safely  translate  T/)o;;^o'?  by  ^«AeeZ  /  and  as  birth  is  the  meaning 
of  7ei'e(7t9  in  every  New-Testament  passage  where  it  occurs,  we 
may  give  it  the  preference  here  and  render  the  wheel  of  birth — 
i.e.,  the  wheel  which  is  set  in  motion  at  birth  and  runs  on  to 
the  close  of  life.  It  is  thus  a  figurative  description  of  human 
life.     So  Anacreon : 

"The  chariot-wheel,  like  life,  runs  rolling  round." 

Tertullian  says  :  "  The  whole  revolving  wheel  of  existence  bears 
witness  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  The  Kev.,  which 
gives  nature,  puts  birth  in  margin.  This  revolving  wlieel  is 
kindled  by  the  tongue,  and  rolls  on  in  destructive  blaze.  The 
image  is  justified  by  the  fact.  The  tongue  works  the  chief 
mischief,  kindles  the  most  baleful  fires  in  the  course  of  life. 

7.  Kind  ((/)W(7t?).  Wrong.  James  is  not  speaking  of  the  rela- 
tion between  indmidual  men  and  individual  beasts,  but  of  the 
relation  between  the  natnire  of  man  and  that  of  beasts,  which 
may  be  different  in  different  beasts.  Hence,  as  Rev.,  in  margin, 
nature. 

Beasts  {^plav).  Quadrupeds.  Not  beasts  generally,  nor 
wild  beasts  only.     In  Acts  xxviii.  4,  5,  the  word  is  used  of  the 


750  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch,  IH 

viper  whicli  fastened  on  Paul's  hand.  In  Peter's  vision  (Acts 
X.  12 ;  xi.  6)  there  is  a  different  classification  from  the  one  here ; 
quadrupeds  being  denoted  by  a  specific  term,  TeTpairoha,  four- 
footed  creatures.  There  ^pla  includes  fishes,  which  in  this 
passage  are  classed  as  ivaXicov,  things  in  the  sea. 

By  mankind  {ry  (pva-ei  ry  av^pwirlvrj).  Rather,  hy  the  nat- 
ure of  man,  ^iJo-t?,  as  before,  denoting  the  generic  character. 
Every  nature  of  beasts  is  tamed  by  the  nature  of  man.  Com- 
pare the  fine  chorus  in  the  "  Antigone  "  of  Sophocles,  343-362 : 

"  The  thoughtless  tribe  of  birds, 
The  beasts  that  roam  the  fields, 
The  brood  in  sea  depths  born, 
He  takes  them  all  in  nets, 
Knotted  in  snaring  mesh, 
Man,  wonderful  in  skill. 
And  by  his  subtle  arts 
He  holds  in  sway  the  beasts 

That  roam  llie  fields  or  tread  the  mountain's  height ; 
And  brings  the  binding  yoke 
Upon  the  neck  of  horse  with  shaggy  mane, 
Or  bull  on  mountain  crest, 
Untamable  in  strength." 

8.  No  man  {ovZeU  avSpcoirav).  A  strong  expression.  Lit., 
no  one  of  men. 

Unruly  (a/caTao-^^eroi/).  JAt.,nottoheheldhach.  The  proper 
reading,  however,  is  aKarda-TaTov,  unsettled.  See  on  Ko^laraTai,, 
hath  its  place,  ver.  6.     Eev.,  correctly,  restless. 

Deadly  {^avarritjiopov).  Lit.,  death-hearing,  or  -bringing. 
Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Poison  (toO).     Rendered  ru^st  at  ch.  v.  3  ;  and  found  only  in 
these  two  passages  and  in  Rom.  iii.  13,  in  the  citation  of  Ps 
cxl.  3. 

9.  God,  even  the  Fattier  (Tw0ewKal7raTepa).  The  proper 
reading  is  rov  Kvpiov,  the  Lord,  and  the  kcu,,  and,  is  simply  con- 


Ch.  ni.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  751 

nectiv^e.     Read,  therefore,  as  Eev.,  tlie  Lord  and  Father.    This 
combination  of  terms  for  God  is  uncommon.     See  ch.  i.  27. 


Which.  Not  wTio,  which  would  die&igudAe personally  certain 
men ;  whereas  James  designates  them  generically. 

11.  Doth  a  fountain,  etc.  The  interrogative  particle, /ij;Ti, 
which  begins  the  sentence,  expects  a  negative  answer.  Foun- 
tain has  the  article,  "  the  fountain,"  generic.  See  Introduction, 
on  James'  local  allusions.  The  Land  of  Promise  was  pictured 
to  the  Hebrew  as  a  land  of  springs  (Deut.  viii.  7 ;  xi.  11). 
"  Palestine,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  was  the  only  country  where 
an  Eastern  could  have  been  familiar  with  the  language  of  the 
Psalmist :  '  He  sendeth  the  springs  into  the  valleys  which  run 
among  the  mountains.'  Those  springs,  too,  however  short- 
lived, are  remarkable  for  their  copiousness  and  beauty.  Not 
only  not  in  the  East,  but  hardly  in  the  West,  can  any  fountains 
and  sources  of  streams  be  seen,  so  clear,  so  full-grown  even  at 
their  birth,  as  those  which  fall  into  the  Jordan  and  its  lakes 
throughout  its  whole  course  from  north  to  south  "  ("  Sinai  and 
Palestine ").  The  Hebrew  word  for  a  fountain  or  spring  is 
dyin,  meaning  an  eye.  "  The  spring,"  saj's  the  same  author, 
"  is  the  bright,  open  source,  the  eye  of  the  landscape."* 

Send  forth  {0pvei).  An  expressive  word,  found  nowhere 
else  in  the  New  Testament,  and  denoting  a  full,  copious  dis- 
charge. Primarily  it  means  to  he  full  to  bursting  /  and  is  used, 
therefore,  of  budding  plants,  teeming  soil,  etc.,  as  in  the  charm- 
ing picture  of  the  sacred  grove  at  the  opening  of  the  "  Oedi- 
pus Coloneus  "  of  Sophocles :  '■'■full  {^pvav)  of  bay,  olive,  and 
vine."  Hence,  to  hurst  forth  or  gush.  Though  generally  in- 
transitive, it  is  used  transitively  here. 

Place  {ovfi<}).  Rather,  opening  or  hole  in  the  earth  or  rock. 
Rev.,  opening.  Compare  ca/ves,  Heb.  xi.  38.  The  word  is 
pleasantly  suggestive  in  connection  with  the  image  of  the  eye  of 
the  landscape.    See  above. 

*  See  Scott's  "  Castle  Dangerous,"  oh.  i 


752  WORD   STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HL 

Sweet  water  and  bitter.  The  readers  of  the  epistle  would 
recall  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah  (Exod.  xv.  23),  and  the  un- 
wholesome spring  at  Jericho  (2  Kings  ii.  19-21). 

12.  So  can  no  fountain  both  yield  salt  water  and  fresh. 

The  best  texts  omit  so  can  no  fountain,  and  the  and  between 
salt  andfresh.  Thus  the  text  reads,  ovre  oXvkov  jXvkv  iroirjaai 
vBeop.  Render,  as  Rev.,  neither  can  salt  water  yield  svjeet.  An- 
other of  James'  local  allusions,  salt  waters.  The  Great  Salt  Sea 
was  but  sixteen  miles  from  Jerusalem.  Its  shores  were  lined 
with  salt-pits,  to  be  filled  when  the  spring  freshets  should  raise 
the  waters  of  the  lake.  A  salt  marsh  also  terminated  the  valley 
through  which  the  Jordan  flows  from  the  Lake  of  Tiberias  to 
the  Dead  Sea,  and  the  adjoining  plain  was  covered  with  salt 
streams  and  brackish  springs.  Warm  springs  impregnated  with 
sulphur  abound  in  the  volcanic  valley  of  the  Jordan.  'AKvkov, 
salt,  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

13.  Wise  and  endued  with  knowledge  {a-o^o^  koI  eVto-- 
irrjiKov).  A  rendering  needlessly  verbose,  yet  substantially  cor- 
rect. Probably  no  very  nice  distinction  was  intended  by  the 
writer.  It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  fix  the  precise  sense  of  o-o^os, 
since  there  is  no  uniformity  in  its  usage  in  the  New  Testament. 
In  classical  Greek  it  primarily  means  shill^  in  a  handicraft  or 
art.  Thence  it  runs  into  the  sense  of  clever,  in  matters  of  com- 
mon life,  worldly  wise.  Then,  in  the  hands  of  the  philosophers, 
it  acquires  the  sense  of  learned  in  the  sciences ;  and,  ironically, 
abstruse,  subtle,  obscure,  like  the  English  cunning,  which  origi- 
nally meant  hnowing  or  sJcilful,  and  is  often  used  in  that  sense 
in  the  English  Bible  (see  Gen.  xxv.  27  ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  16). 

In  the  New  Testament  cro^o?  is  used — 1.  In  the  original  classi- 
cal sense,  sJcilled  in  handicraft  (1  Cor.  iii.  10).  2.  Accomplished 
in  letters,  learned  (Rom.  i.  14,  22  ;  1  Cor.  i.  19,  26 ;  iii.  18). 
So  of  the  Jewish  theologians  and  doctors  (Matt.  xi.  25),  and  of 
Christian  teachers  (Matt,  xxiii.  34).  3.  In  a  practical  sense, 
of  the  practice  of  the  law  of  piety  and  honesty ;  so  Eph.  v.  15, 
where  it  is  joined  with  loalJcing  circumspectly,  and  1  Cor.  vi. 
5,  where  it  is  represented  as  the  quality  adapted  to  adjust  differ- 


Ch.  in.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  753 

ences  in  the  church.  4.  In  the  higher,  pliilosophical  sense,  of 
devising  the  best  counsels  and  employing  the  best  means  to 
carry  them  out.  So  of  God,  Kom.  xvi.  27 ;  1  Tim.  i.  17  ;  Jude 
25  ;  1  Cor.  i.  25.  In  this  passage  the  word  appears  to  be  used 
in  the  sense  of  3 :  practical  wisdom  inj)ious  livingr. 

' E-ma-T-qficov  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  In  clas 
sical  Greek  it  is  often  used  like  ao<j>6<;,  in  the  sense  of  skilled, 
versed;  and  by  the  philosophers  in  the  higher  sense  of  scientifi- 
cally versed,  in  which  sense  it  is  opposed  by  Plato  to  Bo^aar')]';, 
a  mere  conjecturer.  In  this  passage  ao<p6<;  would  seem  to  be 
the  broader,  more  general,  and  perhaps  more  dignified  term 
of  the  two,  as  denoting  the  habit  or  quality,  while  iiricrTi^/Mav 
indicates  the  special  development  and  intelligent  application 
of  the  quality  to  particular  things.  The  Rev.,  wise  and  under- 
standing, gives  the  distinction,  on  the  whole,  as  nearly  as  is 
necessary. 

Conversation  [avaoTpo^i).     See  on  1  Pet.  1.  15.     , 

Meekness  of  wisdom.     On  meekness,  see  on  Matt.  v.  5. 
The  meekness  which  is  the  proper  attribute  of  wisdom. 

"  Knowledge  is  proud  that  she  has  learned  so  much, 
Wisdom  is  humble  that  she  knows  no  more." 

14.  .Envying  {^rjhov).  The  word  is  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment both  in  a  bad  and  a  good  sense.  For  the  latter,  see  John 
ii.  17 ;  Rom.  x.  2  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  2.  From  it  is  our  word  zeal, 
which  may  be  either  good  or  bad,  wise  or  foolish.  The  bad 
sense  is  predominant  in  the  New  Testament.  See  Acts  v.  17 ; 
Rom.  xiii.  13 ;  Gal.  v.  20,  and  here,  where  the  bad  sense  is  de- 
fined and  emphasized  by  the  epithet  hitter.  It  is  often  joined 
with  e/3i9,  strife,  as  here  with  ipiSeia,  intriguing  or  faction. 
The  rendering  envying,  as  A.  V.,  more  properly  belongs  to 
<j)S6vo<;,  which  is  never  used  in  a  good  sense.  Emulation  is 
the  better  general  rendering,  which  does  not  necessarily  include 
envy,  but  may  be  fuU  of  the  spirit  of  self-devotion.  Rev.  ven- 
AerB  jealousy. 
38 


754  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  HL 

Strife  {ipt^e'iav).  A  wrong  rendering,  founded  on  the  mis- 
taken derivation  from  ept?,  strife.  It  is  derived  from  epi^o<i,  a 
hired  servant,  and  means,  primarily,  lahor  for  hire.  Compare 
Tobit  ii.  11 :  My  wife  did  take  women^s  work  to  do  {^piSevero). 
Thus  it  comes  to  be  applied  to  those  who  seiwe  in  official 
positions  for  their  own  selfish  interest,  and  who,  to  that  end, 
promote  party  spirit  and  faction.  So  Rom.  ii.  8  :  them  that 
are  contentious  (ef  ipiSeia'i),  lit.,  of  faction.  Eev.,  factious. 
Also,  2  Cor.  xii.  20.     Eev.,  here,  rightly, /acfow. 

15.  Wisdom  {a-o<f>ia).     See  on  ao<^6<;,  ver.  13. 

From  above.    Compare  ch.  i.  17. 

Sensual  (i^u^^tw?;).     See  on  Jude  19. 

Devilish  {Sat/M}vieoBr]<;).  Or  demoniacal,  according  to  the 
proper  rendering  of  Baificov  (see  on  Matt.  iv.  1).  Only  here  in 
New  Testament.  Devilish,  "  such,"  says  Bengel,  "  as  even 
devils  have."     Compare  ch.  ii.  19. 

16.  Confusion  {aKaracrraaLa).     See  on  resUess,  ver.  8. 

Evil  {i^avkov).  An  inadequate  rendering,  because  it  fails  to 
bring  out  the  particular  phase  of  evil  which  is  dominant  in  the 
word  :  wortklessness,  good-for-nothingness.  In  classical  Greek 
it  has  the  meanings  slight,  trivial,  paltry,  which  run  into  had. 
In  the  New  Testament  it  appears  in  this  latest  stage,  and  is  set 
over  against  good.  See  John  iii.  20 ;  v.  29  ;  Tit.  ii.  8.  Rev., 
vile,  which,  according  to  its  etymology,  Lat.,  vilis,  follows  the 
same  process  of  development  from  clieap,  ov paltry,  to  had. 

17.  First.  Emphasizing  its  inner  qa&Mtj,  pure,  as  distin- 
gxiished  from  its  outward  expressions.  The  idea  is  not  first 
numerically,  but  first  essentially.  The  other  qualities  are  sec- 
ondary as  outgrowths  of  this  primary  quality. 

Gentle  (eTriet/t?;?).     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  18. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMBS.  755 

Easy  to  be  intreated  (evTret^jj?).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

Without  partiality  (aSta/eptro?).  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment and  very  rare  in  classical  Greek.  Rev.,  without  vwri- 
ance  or  doubting.    See  on  ch.  i.  6. 


CHAPTER  IT. 

1.  Lusts  (ijSovwv).  'LW,., pleasures,  as  Kev.  Properly,  sen- 
sual pleasures.  The  sinful  pleasures  are  the  outgrowths  of  the 
lusts,  yer.  2. 

That  war  (aTparevofiivav).  The  thought  of  wars  and  fight- 
ings is  carried  into  the  figurative  description  of  the  sensuality 
which  arrays  its  forces  and  carries  on  its  campaign  in  the  mem- 
bers. The  verb  does  not  imply  mere  fighting,  but  all  that  is 
included  in  military  service.  A  remarkable  parallel  occurs  in 
Plato,  "  Phaedo,"  66 :  "  For  whence  come  wars  and  fightings 
and  factions  ?  Whence  but  from  the  body  and  the  lusts  of  the 
body «  "     Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  11 ;  Eom.  vii.  23. 

2.  Ye  lust.     See  on  desire,  1  Pet.  i.  12  ;  Mark  iv.  19. 

Desire  to  have  {^rjXovTe).  Rev.,  covet,  and  are  jealous,  in 
margin.     See  on  ch.  iii.  14. 

3.  Ye  ask  (atVetTe).     See  on  riptorav,  hesought.  Matt.  xv.  23. 

Amiss  {jcaKm).  Lit.,  evilly  :  with  evil  intent,  as  explained 
by  the  following  sentence. 

Consume  it  upon  {Savavrja-rjre  iv).  More  correctly,  as  Rev., 
spend  it  in.  The  sense  is  not  lay  out  eospense  upon  yov/r pleas- 
ures, but  spend  in  the  exercise  of;  under  the  dominion  of. 

4.  Ye  adulterers  (/tot^ot).    All  the  best  texts  omit. 


756  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

Adulteresses  QioixaXiSe^).  The  feminine  term  is  the  gen- 
eral designation  of  all  whom  James  here  rebukes.  The  apos- 
tate members  of  the  church  are  figuratively  regarded  as  un- 
faithful spouses  ;  according  to  the  common  Old-Testament  fig- 
ure, in  which  God  is  the  hridegroom  or  husband  to  whom  his 
people  are  wedded.  See  Jer.  iii. ;  Hos.  ii.,  iii.,  iv. ;  Isa.  liv.  5  ; 
Ixii.  4,  5.  Also,  Matt.  xii.  39  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  2 ;  Apoc.  xix.  7 ; 
xxi.  9. 

Will  be  {^ovX.TjSf  elvai).  More  correctly,  as  Rev.,  would  ie. 
Lit.,  may  have  been  minded  to  be. 

Is  the  enemy  (KoSia-TaTai).  Thereby  constitutes  himself. 
Eev.,  maketk  himself.     See  on  ch.  iii.  6. 

5.  Do  ye  think  {SoKelre).     See  on  ch.  i.  26. 

The  scripture  (^  ypa^tj).  See  on  Mark  xii.  10.  Properly, 
a,  passage  of  scripture. 

In  vain  {Kevm).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

6.  Resisteth.    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  5. 
Proud.     See  on  Mark  vii.  22. 
Humble.    See  on  Matt.  vii.  29. 

7.  Submit  yourselves  {viroTwyrjTe).  Rev.,  be  subject.  The 
verb  means  to  place  or  arrange  under ;  as  resist  (ver.  6)  is  to 
array  against.  God  sets  himself  in  array  against  the  proud ; 
therefore,  array  yourselves  under  God,  that  ye  may  withstand 
the  devil. 

8.  Purify  {ar/vla-are).  One  of  the  three  instances  in  the  New 
Testament  in  which  the  word  is  not  used  of  ceremonial  purifi- 
cation.    The  others  are  1  Pet.  i.  22  ;  1  John  iii.  3. 

Double-minded  {Siyfrvxoi).     Compare  ch.  i.  8. 


Ch.  IV.]  THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  757 

9.  Be  afflicted  {TaXai-iraprjaaTe).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament.    The  kindred  noun  raXanrmpia,  misery,  occurs  ch.  v.  1. 

Mourn  (Trev^a-aTe).  Used  of  grief  that  is  manifested.  So 
mostly  in  ISTew  Testament,  and  very  commonly  joined,  as  here, 
with  weep.  So  Mark  xvi.  10 ;  Luke  vi.  25,  etc.  In  the  next 
sentence  occurs  the  kindred  noun  Trevl^oi;,  mourning,  into  which 
laughter,  also  something  manifest,  is  to  be  changed. 

Heaviness  {KaTi]<f>eiav).  Properly,  a  casting  down  of  the 
eyes.  Compare  Luke  xviii.  13.  Only  here  in  New  Testa- 
ment. 

12.  There  is  one  lawgiver  (eZ?  eo-riv  6  vo/io^erj;?).  The 
A.  Y.  fails  to  note  the  emphatic  position  of  one.  Better,  Kev., 
one  only  is  the  lawgi/ver.  Nofio^irrj^,  lawgiver,  only  here  in 
New  Testament. 

But  who  art  thou  ?  {a-v  Se  rk  el).  According  to  the  Greek 
order :  but  thou,  who  art  thou  ? 

13.  Go  to  now  (076  iniv).  Oo  to  is  an  obsolete  phrase, 
though  retained  in  Kev.  It  is  a  formula  for  calling  attention  : 
come  now. 

Such  a  city  (rj^vSe  Trp  nroKiv).  More  accurately,  as  Rev., 
this  city. 

Continue  there  a  year  {Troi'^ffofiev  iieei  ivcambv).  Lit.,  we 
will  make  a  year.  See,  for  the  same  form  of  expression.  Acts 
XV.  33 ;  xviii.  23  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  25.  Better,  as  Rev.,  spend  a  year 
there.  (Compare  the  A.  Y.,  Acts  xviii.  23,  rightly  retained  by 
Rev.)  The  word  iroiria-ofiev  implies  more  than  mere  con- 
tinuance /  rather,  a  doing  something  with  the  year. 

And.  The  frequent  use  of  the  copulative  gives  a  lively  tone 
to  the  passage,  expressive  of  the  lightness  and  thoughtlessness 
of  a  careless  spirit. 


TSS  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  IV. 

Buy  and  sell  {eiivopevaoiLe^a).  Eev.,  more  concisely,  trade. 
Only  here  and  2  Pet.  ii.  3. 

14.  Whereas  ye  know  not  (oiVtve?  ovk  eiria-raarSe).  The 
pronoun  marking  a  class,  as  being  of  those  who  know  not. 

What  shall  be  on  the  morrow  (to  t^9  avpiov).  Lit.,  the 
thing  of  the  morrow.  The  texts  vary.  Westcott  and  Hort 
read,  Ye  hnow  not  what  your  life  shall  he  on  the  morrow,  for 
ye  are  a  vajpor :  thus  throwing  out  the  question. 

What  is  your  life  ?  (Trota).     Lit.,  of  what  Tcimd  or  nature. 

It  is  even  a  vapor  (dr/it?  yap  eVrti').  But  all  the  best  texts 
read  eVre,  ye  are.  So  Eev.,  which,  however,  retains  the  ques- 
tion, what  is  your  life  ? 

Appeareth — vanlsheth.  Both  participles,  appearing,  van- 
ishing. 

And  then  {eirena  «at).  The  Kal  placed  after  the  adverb 
then  is  not  copulative,  but  expresses  that  the  vapor  vanishes  even 
as  it  appeared. 

15.  For  that  ye  ought  to  say  {avrl  tov  Xeyecv  v/ia?).  Yer. 
14  was  parenthetical,  so  that  at  this  point  the  thought  is  taken 
up  from  ver.  13 :  Ye  who  say  we  will  go,  etc.— for  that  ye  ought 
to  say.  The  rendering  in  margin  of  Rev.  is  simpler  :  instead 
of  your  saying. 

16.  Ye  rejoice  {Kavxao'^e).     Rev.,  glory.     See  on  ch.  ii.  13. 

Boastings  (dXaS'oj'etW).  Only  here  and  1  John  ii.  16.  The 
kindred  word  aXa^cov,  a  boaster,  is  derived  from  aXi/,  a  wan- 
dering or  roaming  ;  hence,  primarily,  a  vagabond,  a  quack,  a 
mountebank.  From  the  empty  boasts  of  such  concerning  the 
cures  and  wonders  they  could  perform,  the  word  passed  into 
the  sense  of  boaster.     One  may  boast  truthfully  ;  but  aXa^ovela 


Ch.  v.]  the  general  epistle  of  JAMES.  TSQ' 

\%  false  and  swaggering  boasting.  Eev.  renders  vauntings,  and 
rightly,  since  vaunt  is  from  the  Latin  va/rms,  empty,  and  there- 
fore expresses  idle  or  vam,  boasting. 


CHAPTER  Y. 

1.  Go  to.    See  on  ch.  iv.  13. 

Weep  and  howl  (KKavaare.  oKoKv^owe^.  Lit.,  weejp,  howl- 
ing. The  latter  is  a  descriptive  word,  ol-ol-us-o.  Only  here  in 
New  Testament,  and  denoting  a  more  demonstrative  and  pas- 
sionate expression  of  grief  than  weeping. 

Miseries  {raXanraplaK) .  Only  here  and  Horn.  iii.  16.  See 
on  he  afflicted,  ch.  iv.  9. 

That  shall  come  upon  {eTrepxafievaif).  Present  participle. 
More  correctly,  as  He  v.,  that  are  coming. 

2.  Are  corrupted  (a-ia-Tprev).     Only  here  in  New  Testament. 

Are  moth-eaten  {ar^To^pwra  yeyovev).  Lit.,  have  become 
moth-eaten.  Only  here  in  New  Testament,  but  compare  a-icwkr]- 
k6^PQ3to<;,  eaten  of  worms,  Acts  xii.  23 ;  and  see  Matt.  vi.  19,  20. 

3.  Is  cankered  (/eartWat).  Only  here  in  New  Testament, 
from  to?,  riist,  as  in  the  following  sentence.  Also  poison,  as 
ch.  iii.  8.  The  preposition  Kara  indicates  thoroughness,  oom- 
pletel/y  rusted. 

Flesh  (ra?  vapKai).  The  noun  is  plural:  th& fleshy j>arts  of 
the  body.  So  Sept.  (2  Kings  ix.  36) :  "  the  fl^sh  {Th<i  a-apKas!) 
of  Jezebel."     So  Apoc.  xix.  18. 

4.  Reaped  down  (d/Mja-dvTtov).  Only  here  in  New  Tes- 
tament. The  primary  meaning  is  to  reajp  corn  ;  also  in  classical 
Greek  of  mowing  down  in  battle.     The  secondary,  which  some 


760  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

mistake  for  the  primary  sense,  is  to  gather,  as  for  harvest. 
Rev.,  mowed. 

Fields  (x&J/aa?).  The  more  general  word,  jt^Zace,  for  oypd?,  the 
ordinary  word  for  2.  field ;  though  the  usage  is  warranted  by 
classical  Greek,  and  occurs  Luke  xii.  16  ;  John  iv.  35,  the  only 
two  instances  besides  this  in  the  New  Testament.  It  implies  a 
larger  tract  than  a'^pd'^,  as  is  evident  in  all  the  ISTew-Testament 
passages  cited.  In  two  cases  it  refers  to  a  rich  man's  estates; 
and  in  John  iv.  35,  the  Lord  directs  the  attention  of  the  disci- 
ples to  a  broad  area  or  series  of  fields. 

Crieth  (/cpa^'et).     An  inarticulate  cry.     Compare  Gen.  iv.  10. 

Lord  of  Sabaoth.  Lord  of  hosts.  The  only  instance  in 
which  the  phrase  is  used  by  a  New-Testament  writer.  Rom. 
ix.  29,  is  quoted  from  Isa.  i.  9. 

5.  Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  {iTpv(f>^a-aTe).  Only  here.in 
New  Testament.  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13,  on  the  kindred  noun 
rpviprj,  riot  or  renjel.     Kev.,  ye  home  lived  delicately. 

Been  wanton  {ia-TraraXi^aaTe).  Only  here  and  1  Tim.  v.  6. 
^ETpv^rjaare  denotes  dainty  living :  this  word,  luxurious  or 
prodigal  living.  Rev.,  taken  your jpleasure,  is  colorless,  and  is 
no  improvement  on  the  A.  V. 

As  in  a  day  of  slaughter  (w?  Iv  riiJbepa  a-(f)ayrj<;).  All  the 
best  texts  reject  a)?,  as.  The  meaning  of  the  passage  is  dis- 
puted. Some  find  the  key  to  it  in  the  words  last  days  (ver.  3). 
The  phrase  day  of  slaughter  is  used  for  a  day  of  judgment,  Jer. 
xii.  3 ;  XXV.  34  (Sept.).  According  to  this,  the  meaning  is, 
the  day  of  judgment,  at  the  supposed  near  coming  of  Christ. 
Others  explain  that  these  men  are  like  beasts,  which,  on  the 
very  day  of  their  slaughter,  gorge  themselves  in  unconscious 
security. 

7.  Be  patient  (fiaKpo^v/iTJaare).  From  /laKpo^,  long,  and 
Su/io?,  soul  or  spirit,  but  with  the  sense  of  strong  passion, 


Ch.  v.]  the  general  epistle  of  JAMES.  761 

stronger  even  than  0/3777,  anger,  as  is  maintained  by  Schmidt 
("  Synonymik  "),  who  describes  Su/to?  as  a  tumultuous  welling 
ai/p  of  the  whole  spirit ;  a  mighty  emotion  which  seizes  and 
moves  the  whole  inner  man.  Hence  tlie  restraint  implied  in 
fiUKpol^vfiM  is  most  correctly  expressed  by  long-suffering,  which 
is  its  usual  ren'dering  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  a  patient 
holding  out  under  trial ;  a  long-protracted  restraint  of  the  soul 
from  yielding  to  passion,  especially  the  passion  of  anger.  In 
the  ISTew  Testament  the  word  and  its  cognates  are  sometimes 
rendered  hy  patient  or  patience,  which  conceals  the  distinction 
from  vTroiMovrj,  uniformly  rendered ^ja^'ewce,  and  signifying^je/'- 
sistent  endurance,  whether  in  action  or  suffering.  As  Trench 
observes,  "  viro/jiovT]  is  perseverantia  and  patientia  both  in  one." 
Thus  Bishop  Ellicott :  "  The  brave  patience  with  which  the 
Christian  contends  against  the  various  hindrances,  persecutions, 
and  temptations  that  befall  him  in  his  conflict  with  the  inward 
and  outward  world."  'Tirofiov^  contains  an  element  of  manli- 
ness. Thus  Plato  joins  it  with  the  adverb  dvSptKm,  in  a  manly 
way,  and  contrasts  it  with  dvdvSpwi,  unmanly,  cowardly.  Muk- 
poSv/iia  is  exercised  toward  persons ;  virofiov^,  toward  things. 
The  former  is  ascribed  to  God  as  an  attribute  (Luke  xviii.  7  ;  1 
Pet.  iii.  20  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9, 15),  the  latter  never ;  for  the  God  of 
patience  (Pom.  xv.  5)  is  the  God  who  imparts  patience  to  his 
children.  "  There  can  be  no  resistance  to  God  nor  burden  upon 
him,  the  Almighty,  from  things.  Therefore  viro^ovrj  cannot 
find  place  in  him  "  (Trench).  Eev.  retains  A.  Y.,  he  patient. 
The  thought  links  itself  naturally  with  that  in  the  preceding 
verse :  the  righteous  doth  not  resist. 

T  h  e  r  ef o  re .     Since  things  are  so.    Kef  erring  to  the  condition 
of  things  described  in  the  previous  passage. 

Brethren.     In  contrast  with  the  rich  just  addressed. 

Waiteth  (iKSixerai).    "With  expectation.    Compare  Matt.  xiii. 
30  ;  Mark  iv.  27. 

The  early  and  latter  rain  {verov  irpminov  kuI  o^ifwv).  Both 
adjectives  only  here  in  New  Testament.  'Terbv,  rain,  is  rejected 


762  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

by  all  the  best  texts.  The  early  rain  fell  in  October,  Novem- 
ber, and  December,  and  extended  into  January  and  February. 
These  rains  do  not  come  suddenly,  but  by  degrees,  so  that  the 
farmer  can  sow  his  wheat  or  barley.  The  rains  are  mostly  from 
the  west  or  southwest  (Luke  xii.  54),  continuing  two  or  three 
days  at  a  time,  and  falling  mostly  in  the  night.  Then  the  wind 
shifts  to  the  north  or  east,  and  fine  weather  ensues  (Prov. 
XXV.  23).  The  latter  rains,  which  are  much  lighter,  fall  in 
March  and  April.  Eain  in  harvest  was  regarded  as  a  miracle 
(1  Sam.  xii.  16-18).  See  Introduction,  on  James'  local  allu- 
sions. 

9.  Grudge  not  (/a^  o-rem^ere).  Better,  as  Eev.,  mwrmur 
not.     The  verb  means  to  sigh  or  groan. 

Standeth  before  the  doors.    In  the  act  of  entering. 

10.  Example  (vTroSeiyfia).     See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  6. 

Of  suffering  affliction  (KaKOTraSeia^).  Only  here  in  New 
Testament.  The  word  does  not  mean  the  endurance  of  afflic- 
tion, but  affiiction  itself.     Hence,  Rev.,  rightly,  suffering. 

The  prophets.     Compare  Matt.  v.  12. 

11.  Endure  {v'7ro/j,ivovTa<;).  Present  participle.  But  the 
later  texts  read  vTrofieivavTa^,  the  aorist  participle,  which  en- 
dured; referring  to  the  prophets  in  the  past  ages.  So  Eev. 
On  endured  and  j)atience,  see  on  ver.  7. 

The  end  of  the  Lord  (t6  reXo?  Kvplov).  A  peculiar  ex- 
pression. The  happy  conclusion  to  which  God  brought  Job's 
trials. 

Very  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy  {■7rokv<nrXaf^xv6<i  ical  oIk- 

Tlpficcv).  The  former  adjective  only  here  in  New  Testament ; 
the  latter  here  and  Luke  vi.  36.  'Rev.,  full  of  pity  and  merci- 
ful.    no\v(T7rXayxv6<s  is  from  7ro\v?,  frmch,  and  a-irXwyxya,  the 


Ch.  v.],  the  general  epistle  of  JAMES.  763 

nobler  entrails,  used  like  our  heart,  as  the  seat  of  the  emotions. 
Hence  the  term  loweh  in  the  A.  Y.  (Philip,  i.  8 ;  Col.  iii.  12, 
etc.).  Compare  euaifSjor^yvoL,  tender-hearted,  Eph.  iv.  32.  The 
distinction  between  this  and  olKTipfimv,  merciful,  seems  to  be 
that  the  former  denotes  the  general  quality  of  compassion,  while 
the  latter  emphasizes  the  sympathy  called  out  by  special  cases, 
being  the  feeling  which  is  moved  to  pain  at  another's  suffering. 

12.  Any  other  oath.  See  the  common  formulas  of  swear- 
ing, Matt.  V.  35,  36. 

13.  Is  afflicted  {KaKoiraS^ei).  See  on  the  kindred  word  kuko- 
trdSeia,  svffering,  ver.  10.    Only  here  and  2  Tim.  ii.  3,  9  ;  iv.  5. 

Let  him  sing  psalms  {^aXKerco).  The  word  means,  pri- 
marily, to  jpluch  or  twitch.  Hence  of  the  sharp  twang  on  a  bow- 
string or  harp-string,  and  so  to  play  upon  a  stringed  instru- 
ment. Our  word^sa^TO,  derived  from  this,  is,  properly,  a  tune 
played  upon  a  stringed  instrument.  The  verb,  however,  is  used 
in  the  New  Testament  of  singing  praise  generally.  See  1  Cor. 
xiv.  15  ;  Eom.  xv.  9. 

15.  The  sick  (toi»  kcliivovto).  Kev.  gives,  better,  the  parti- 
cipial force,  him  that  is  sick.  The  word  originally  means  to 
worh.     Hence,  "  him  that  is  laboring  under  disease." 

And  if  he  have  committed  sins  {kuv  d/naprlai;  y  irenroi- 
T)Ka}<;).  The  Greek  gives  a  shade  of  meaning  which  can  hardly 
be  transferred  neatly  into  English,  representing  not  merely  the 
fact  that  the  man  has  sinned,  but  his  condition  as  a  sinner. 
Literally  the  words  read,  if  he  be  ha/uing  committed  sins;  i.e., 
in  a  state  of  homing  committed,  and  under  the  moral  or  physical 
consequences  of  transgression. 

They  shall  be  forgiven  (o^e^jjo-erat).  Better,  Eev.,  "■  it 
shall  be  forgiven,"  supplying  the  commission  as  a  subject.  The 
verb  means  to  send  forth  or  discharge,  and  is  the  standard  New- 
Testament  word  for  forgivvng.  Forgi/oeness  {a^eai,<s)  is  a  put- 
ting or  sending  away  of  sins,  with  a  consequent  discharge  of 


764  WORD   STUDIES   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [Ch.  V. 

the  sinner ;  thus  differing  from  -rrapeai,';  (Eom.  iii.  25),  which  is 
&  passing  hy  of  sin,  a  pretermission  as  distinguished  from  a  re- 
mission.    See,  farther,  on  Rom.  iii.  25. 

16.  Confess  {e^oiwkor^el<T^e).  The  preposition  e'^,  forth, 
out,  \xn^\\eB  full,  franh,  open  confession,  and  so  in  every  case  of 
its  use  in  the  New  Testament.     See  on  Matt.  iii.  6. 

Faults  {TrapaTTTcofiaTa).     See  on  Matt.  vi.  14. 

The  effectual,  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  avail- 
eth  much  (ttoXv  tV^uet  Berjai^  BiKaiov  ivepyovfjLevr]).  Lit.,  otmcA 
availeth  {^^^(yei,  is  strong),  tJie  prayer  of  a  righteous  inan  wm^lc- 
ing  or  operating.  The  rendering  of  the  A.  Y.,  besides  being 
unwarranted  by  tiie  text,  is  almost  a  truism.  An  effectual 
prayer  is  a  prayer  that  avails.  The  Kev.  is  at  once  more  cor- 
rect and  more  natural :  The  supplication  of  a  righteous  man 
a/vaileth  much  in  its  working. 

17.  A  man  (avSpwTro?).  The  generic  word;  human  like 
ourselves,  this  thought  being  emphasized  by  the  succeeding 
epithet  of  liJee  passions.     See  the  same  expression,  Acts  xiv.  15. 

Of  like  passions  {6fioio7TaSrj<;).  Only  here  and  Acts  xiv.  15. 
There  is  some  danger  of  a  misunderstanding  of  this  rendering, 
from  the  limited  and  generally  bad  sense  in  which  the  word 
passions  is  popularly  used.  The  meaning  is  rather  of  like 
nature  and  constitution.  Rev.  puts  nature  in  margin,  which 
woidd  be  better  in  the  text. 

He  prayed  fervently  {Trpoaevxv  "n-poa-riv^aro).  Lit.,  he 
prayed  with  prayer.  See  a  similar  mode  of  expression,  Gen. 
ii.  17  (Sept.),  ye  shall  surely  die  {BavaTot  airoSaveia-^e)  ;  lit.,  ye 
shall  die  with  death.  Compare  Luke  xxii.  15 ;  John  iii.  29 ; 
Acts  iv.  17.  The  addition  of  the  cognate  noun  gives  intense- 
ness  to  the  verb. 

Hide — sins.  A  familiar  Hebrew  phrase.  See  Ps.  xxxii.  1 ; 
Ixxxv.  2  ;  Prov.  x.  12. 


LIST  OF  GKEEK  WOBDS  USED  BY  JAMES  ONLY. 


&y€,  go  to,  iv.,  13  ;  v.,  1 
ahiaKpiTos,  without  doubting,  iii.,  17 
aKaTaararoi,  unstable,  i.,  18 ;  iii.,  8 
aKvK6s,  salt,  iii.,  12 
aiiaa,  reap  down,  v.,  4 
aveKeos,  unmerciful,  ii.,  13 
aveiil^m,  to  drive  with  the  wind,  i.,  6 
amelpaa-Tos,  that  cannot  be  tempted, 

or  unversed,  i.,  13 
dirXiSr,  liberally,  simply,  i.,  5 
awoKvea,  bring  forth,  beget,  i.,  15, 18 

anoaKLafTfia,  shadow,  i.,  17 

aixeio,  to  boast,  iii.,  5 

d(f)V(rTepea>,  to  keep  back  by  fraud, 

v.,  4 
fio^,  cry,  v.,  4 
0pvm,  to  send  forth,  iii.,  11 
yeXojf,  laughter,  iv.,  9 
Si^jfvxos,  double-minded,  i.,  8  ;  iv.,  8 
fiKco,  to  be  like,  i.,  6,  23 
cp.(f)VTos,  implanted,  i.,  21 
cvciKios,  in  the  sea,  iii.,  7 
f^eXKo),  to  draw  away,  i.,  14 
im'Krjcrp.ovT),  forgetfulness,  i.,  25 
fma-Trniiov,  knowing,  iii.,  13 
eitiTTibdos,  needful,  ii.,  16 
o  €v'3vva)v,  steersman,  iii.,  4 
ein-eiSijr,  easy  to  be  intreated,  iii., 

17 
finpeirfia,  grace,  i.,  11 
((prjficpos,  daily,  ii.,  15 
tavaTT)(p6pos,  deadly,  iii.,  8 
^prjo-Kos,  religious,  i.,  26 
I6s,  poison,  rust,  iii.,  8  ;  v.,  3 


KOKon-dSfia,  suffering,  v.,  10 

KaT)70Eia,  heaviness,  iv.,  9 

(caTidw,  to  canker,  v.,  3 

KoToiKi^a,  to  cause  to  dwell,  iv.,  5 

Kevws,  in  vain,  iv.,  5 

fiapaiva,  to  fade,  i.,  11 

fierdyai,  to  turn  about,  iii.,  3,  4 

vopoHiTris,  lawgiver,  iv.,  12 

oXoXufo),  to  howl,  v.,  1 

oi/'i/ios,  latter,  v.,  7 

irapaXKayr),  variation,  i.,  17 

mKpos,  bitter,  iii.,  11,  14 

7rolt]<Tis,  doing,  i.,  25 

jio\v<7ir\ay)(yos,  full  of  pity,  v.,  11 

npoa^mTroKrifmTeai,  to  have  reSpect  to 

persons,  ii.,  9 
iTpa>ip.os,  early,  v.,  7 
piTTifo),  toss,  i.,  6 
pmrapla,  fllthiness,  i.,  21 
a-TjiTw,  to  corrupt,  v.,  2 
arjTo^paiTos,  moth-eaten,  v.,  2 
TaXomapem,  to  be  afSicted,  iv.,  9 
Taxis,  swift,  i.,  19 
rpoTTTi,  turning,  i.,  17 
xpo^of,  wheel,  iii.,  6 
Trpvcfjaa,  to  live  daintily,  v.,  5 
vXri,  wood,  forest,  iii.,  5 
^i\ia,  friendship,  iv.,  4 
(jAoyi^o),  to  set  on  fire,  iii.,  6 
(ppiaira),  to  shudder,  ii.,  19 
xaKivayonyia,  to  bridle,  i.,  26;  iii.,  2 
xpri,  ought,  iii.,  10 
XpvcroSaKTvKios,  adorned  with  gold 

rings,  ii.,  2 


ADDITIONAL  NOTE. 


After  the  sheets  of  the  three  Gospels  and  the  Acta  had  been  printed, 
a  careful  revision  of  the  lists  of  words  peculiar  to  individual  writers,  and 
further  examination  of  the  various  readings,  revealed  a  number  of  omis- 
sions and  errors.  The  Usts  are  corrected  in  the  following  additional 
tables. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my  great  indebtedness  to  the 
careful  and  exhaustive  lists  in  Dr.  Joseph  H.  Thayer's  admirable  lexi- 
con, recently  published.  I  only  wish  that  I  could  have  had  the  benefit 
of  it  in  the  preparation  of  the  entire  volume. 

MATTHEW. 

Si'kikB  out 
xiii. ,  48,  from  iyyelov :  t Sw/cds-,  evSia,  3p^f os,   Ktjros,  fiei^ov,  nv\a>v,  vo<r<ria, 

CELiNGE 
rv(f)6a)  to  njCJXii. 

ADD 

ayyos,  vessel,  xiii.,  48 

diJi(j>ip\r)<TTpov,  casting-net,  iv.,  18 

iyKpinToi,  to  hide  in,  xiii.,  33 

tibia,  aspect,  xxviii.,  3 

€Ptsvp.fop.ai,  think,  i.,  20;  ix.,  4 

Scf  (vocative),  O  God,  xxvii.,  46 

KaraSf^anXa),  to  curse  vehemently,  xxvi.,  74 

\afi^avciv  crvp0oi!\iov,  to  take  Counsel,  xxvii.,  1,  7  ;  xxviii.,  12 

oKiyoma-TLa,  little  faith,  xvii.,  20 

TrapuriSeVat  napa^oXriv,  set  forth  a  parable,  xiii.,  24,  31 

7r\T}poiv  TO  pri°!€i/,  to  fulfil  what  was  spoken,  i.,  22 ;  ii.,  15,  17,  23,  etc. 

Tovvopa,  by  name,  xxvii.,  57 

0vyij,  flight,  xxiv.,  20. 

MABK. 

STRIKB   OUT 
oXs,  yaiiio-Koiim,  fietsopia,  &iipa,  npoa-eyyiCai,  irKaXt]^. 


ADDITIONAL  NOTE.  767 

CHANGE 

fvwxov  to  evvvxos  :  neut.,  after  cVi/SdXXo),  to  intrans. 

ADD 

aWaxoi,  elsewhere,  i.,  38 

avaKvKiai,  roll  back,  xvi.,  4 

dri/iaci),  treat  with  contempt,  xii.,  4 

Biapnd^io,  to  spoil,  iii.,  27  / 

ftTfv,  then,  iv.,  28 

«/c3avMdfffl,  to  wonder  greatly,  xii.,  17 

3a^t/3ca>,  to  be  astonished,  i.,  27 ;  x.,  24,  32 

686u  TToifiv,  to  make  a  way,  ii. ,  23 

rpv/uiKid,  eye  of  a  needle,  x.  25. 

• 

LUKE. 

STBIKE  OUT 
avayvaifil^ofiai.,  dv^VTraTevw,  BiKacrrris,  iKarovrapxris,  iffirm\da>^  xiv.,  14,  from 
elcnrrjSdoi  ',  evvTTViov,  eirsKeiva,  emiropeijo^i,  CTTtoratrtr,  ^aoyovea,  ieofia- 
Xf«>,  3paiia),  KarnKkripodoTea),  KaraXoiiros,  KaTaaocjji^oiiai,  KaTatjjpovriTfj!,  i., 
49,  from  iicyaXela;  /ifXiVcrios,  jrXe'o),  TToXtVj/r,  TroXXan'Xao'ia)!',  xxiv.,  33, 
from  crvvaZpoi^a ;   a-varirapdvaa},  Tf)o^o0opt(o,  rpvyaiv,  (j>6pTos,  (j>pvd(T<Ta>. 

CHANGE 
d>'dXi;\//'i?  to  di/dXi7/i\//'ef ;  ec^opdoj  to   eTT^ldov  ',   e^a'^a  to  6^6)366) ;  fTroxeXXoi  to 
67riKf'XXa)  ;   fv^vfxoTfpQV  to  evSv/iO);  ;  XP^^  ^^  '^^XPVI^*'  i  XaKco)  to  XdcrKco  ; 
TrapaxaSi^ra  to  irapaKoSSf^oiiai ;   av^ryrriiTis  to  (TVV^rjTri<ns ;  under  (riveifu, 
X.,  18,  to  ix.,  18  ;  (T<f>vp6v  to  a-<pv8p6v. 

ADD 

'ASiji/alof,  Athenian,  A.  xvii.,  21,  22 

d3poif<»,  to  gather,  xxiv.,  33 

a'vof,  praise,  xviii.,  43 

dfi0td(£)fa),  to  clothe,  xii.,  28 

avdwiipos,  crippled,  xiv.,  13,  21 

aTToSfKaTevo),  pay  tithes,  xviii.,  12 

"Apa\jf,  Arabian,  A.  ii.,  11 

*Apfios  Iliiyos,  Mars'  Hill,  A.  xvii.,  19,  22 

' ApeonayiTrjs,  Areopagite,  A.  xvii.,  34 

'Ao-iaco'r,  of  Asia,  A.  xx.,  4 

'Acriapxris-i  Asiaroh,  A.  xix.,  31 

Avyova-Tos,  Augustus,  ii.,  1 

Bfpoaios,  Berean,  A.  xx.,  4 

TaKariKos,  Galatian,  A.  xvi.,  6 ;  xviii.,  23 


768  ADDITIONAL  NOTE. 

&tayyeX\a>,  proclaim,  preach,  ix.,  60;  A.  xxi.,  26 

Siaxa^aipca,  cleanse  thoroughly,  iii.,  17 

AiotTKoupoi,  Castor  and  Pollux,  A.  xxviii.,  11 

(a,  let  alone,  iv.,  34 

fWi/Saa),  A.  xiv.,  14 

under  t\aLa>v,  xix.,  29  ;  xxi.,  37 

EXa/xiV)js,  Elamite,  A.  ii.,  9 

''EXKrjviaTrjs,  Hellenist,  A.  vi.,  1 ;  ix.,  29 ;  xi.,  20 

eficpavfjs,  manifest,  A.  x.,  40 

'EmKovpios,  Epicurean,  A.  xvii.,  18 

emppliTTa,  to  cast  upon,  xix.,  35 

(vye,  well,  -well  done,  xix.,  17 

'EvpaKvKav,  the  wind  Euraqjiilo,  A.  xxvii.,  14 

ficppoa-ivrj,  joy,  A.  ii.,  28 ;  xiv.,  17 

'E(f>€(Tios,  Ephesian,  A.  xix.,  28,  34,  35 ;  xxi.,  29 

jjUCSavr]!,  half-dead,  x. ,  30 

KorabUr],  condemnation,  A.  xxv.,  15 

KaTf0iVri;/ii,  make  insurrection,  A.  xviii.,  12 

xkivapiov,  couch,  A.  v.,  15 

Xa/iTrpoVijr,  brightness,  A,  xxvi.,  13 

\ap.iTpSss,  brilliantly,  sumptuously,  xvi.,  19 

M^tprlvos,  pertaining  to  a  freedman,  A.  vi.,  9 

AvKaovia-Ti,  in  the  language  of  Lycaonia,  A.  xiv.,  11 

77015(17),  maid,  viii.,  51,  54 

navTaxrj,  everywhere,  A.  xxi.,  28 

TrapafidWoi,  arrive,  A.  xx.,  15 

-irapep-ffdWa,  to  cast  up,  xix.,  43 

nepairepa,  further,  besides,  A.  xix.,  39 

irvtKTos,  strangled,  A.  xv.,  20,  29;  xxi.,  25 

Tvofj,  wind,  breath,  A.  ii.,  2  ;  xvii.,  25 

■jTpoa-KKlva,  lean  to,  incline,  A.  v.,  36 

Trparais,  first,  A.  xi.,  26 

Tiii'iav,  Python,  A.  xvi.,  16 

'Si&avios,  Sidonian,  A.  xii.,  20 

o-iTfUTor,  fatted,  xv.,  23,  27,  30 

o-KonXrjKo^paTos,  eaten  by  worms,  A.  xii.,  23 

SraiKos,  Stoic,  A.  xviii.,  18 

crvpn-apayivop.ni,  to  come  together,  xxiii.,  48 

(TvvaWdaa-oi,  to  reconcile,  A.  vii.,  26 

a-weiTCTi^r]pi,  attack  jointly,  A.  xxiv.,  9 

Svpos,  Syrian,  iv.,  27 

Tpieria,  space  of  three  years,  A.  xx.,  31 

(t>iKri{fi),  female  friend,  xv.,  9 

XoKSdios,  A.  vii.,  4 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


(Figures  refer  to  the  pages.) 


Abba,  161 
Ability,  507 
Able,  383,  534,  684 
Abode  {verb),  444,  511 
Abominable,  661 
Abomination,  138 
Abound,  137 
Abundantly,  683 
Acceptable,  391 
Accomplish,  344 
Accomplished,  564,  670 
According  to,  9,  638 
Account,  393 
Accusation,  144,  409,  716 
Accuse,  284 
Accused,  391 
Add,  679 
Added,  286 
Adding,  634 
Adjure,  143,  187 
Admiration,  730 
Adria,  595 
Adulteresses,  756 
Adulterous,  73,  160 
Adultery,  699 
Adversary,  669 
Afar,  455 
Affirmed,  510,  585 
Afflicted,  757,  763 
Affliction,  762 
Afflictions,  670 
Afoot,  559 
Affrighted,  333 
Aforehand,  336 
49 


Afraid,  86,  370 

After,  717 

Afterward,  334 

Again,  39,  179,  180 

Against,  124 

Age,  276 

Agony,  425 

Agree,  -ed,  40,  104,  339,  468 

Agrippa,  585 

Ah,  332 

Akeldama,  446 

Alabaster,  136 

Alexandria,  591 

Alive,  389 

All,  289,  641,  668,  733 

Alleging,  536 

Allow,  581 

Almost,  589,  590 

Alone,  744 

Also,  53,  87 

Altar,  543 

Altered,  343 

Alway,  150 

Amazed,  159,  197,  337,  278,  394,  303, 

450,  488 
Amazement,  460,  651 
Amiss,  431,  755 
Among.  330,  447 
Ananias,  575 
Andrew,  178 
Angel,  510 
Angels,  416,  484,  691 
Angry,  391 
Anise,  124 


770 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Ankle-bones,  459 

Anoint,  336 

Another,  234,  393,  446,  478 

Answer,  658,  658 

Answered,  66,  208,  467 

Answering,  354 

Antipatris,  579 

Any,  361 

Apart,  99 

Apostle,  57,  637 

Apparel,  428,  511 

Apparelled,  835 

Appeal,  584 

Appear,  366,  409 

Appeared,  31,  434,  437,  480 

Appoint,  433 

Appointed,  349,  545 

Approved,  452 

Aprons,  553 

Aquila,  548 

Arabians,  451 

Areopagite,  546 

Areopagus,  540 

Aristarchus,  557 

Arm  (verb),  631,  658 

Armed,  362 

Armies,  130 

Armor,  363 

Arose,  833,  593 

Arrayed,  511 

Arrived,  333,  559 

Ashamed,  343 

Asher,  376 

Ashes,  351,  693 

B.sia,  450 

Ask,  113,  307,  361 

Ask  again,  815 

Asked,  307,  318 

Asketh,  382 

Asking,  113 

Asleep,  333,  486 

Ass,  114,  700 

Assault,  -ing,  519 

Assembled,  443 

Assembly,  737 


Assented,  581 
Assuredly,  455 
Astonished,  51,  399,  435 
Astonishment,  191 
Astray,  649 
At  hand,  663 
Athenians,  540 
Attentive,  413 
Audience,  573 
Austere,  411 
Authority,  321,  415,  490 
Availeth,  764 
Avenge,  403 
Await,  493 
Away,  439 
Awhile,  671 

Babbler,  539 
Babe,  -s,  641 
Babylon,  673 
Back,  349 
Bade,  379 
Bags,  371 

Band,  331,  319,  568 
Banded,  576 
Bank,  411 
Banquetings,  661 
Baptize,  163,  199 
Baptized,  34 
Barbarous,  597 
Bare,  53,  649 
Bar-Jesus,  515 
Barnabas,  526-538 
Barren,  681 
Barsabas,  447 
Bartholomew,  178 
Baser,  537 
Basket,  85,  91,  494 
Bay,  596 
Be,  681,  706,  743 
Beam,  49 
Bear  (mrb),  35 
Bear  long,  403 
Bear  up,  593 
Bear  witness,  367 


INDEX  OP  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


771 


Beast,  356,  597 

Beasts,  156,  164,  696,  749 

Beat,  156,  318,  533 

Beaten,  223 

Because,  108,  258 

Beckoned,  -eth,  -ing,  257,  298,  510 

Bed,  -s,  170,  182,  197,  243,  495 

Beelzebub,  60,  160 

Before,  84 

Before  day,  168 

Began,  97,  138,  205,  287,  292,  441, 

449,  504 
Begat,  732 
Begin,  282,  379 
Beginning,  162,  253 
Begotten,  629 
Beguiling,  699 
Beheld,  220,  353,  542 
Behold,  6,  383,  620,  645,  746 
Beholdest,  48 
Beholdeth,  734 
Beholding,  574,  734 
Believed,  252 
Believing,  535 
Beloved,  163,  645,  703,  712 
Beneath,  329 
Bernice,  585 
Beseeching,  320 
Beside,  -s,  434,  678 
Besought,  89,  107,  335,  365,  583 
Bestow,  369 
Bethlehem,  19 
Bethphage,  113 
Bethsaida,  339 
Betrayed,  136,  138 
Better,  400 
Bettered,  189 
Bewitched,  488 
Bidden,  119 
Bier,  323 
Bill,  211,  393 
Bind,  96 
Bird,  -s,  348 
Birthday,  83 
Bishop,  620 


Bishopric,  260,  446 

Bits,  746 

Bitter,  752 

Blasphemy,  303 

Blemish,  638 

Blemishes,  698 

Blessed,  33,  312,  629 

Blessing,  653 

Blind,  313,  630,  681 

Blood,  537 

Blotted,  463 

Boanerges,  161,  177 

Boasteth  great  things,, 747 

Boastings,  758 

Boat,  593 

Body,  333,  553 

Boldly,  333 

Bond,  489 

Book,  390 

Books,  553 

Borders,  133 

Born  again,  640 

Borrow,  43 

Bosom,  316,  398 

Bosor,  700 

Both,  575 

Bottles,  55 

Bound,  334,  561,  565,  574,  576,  577, 

599 
Bounds,  545 
Bowed,  375 
Brake,  196,  225,  298 
Bramble,  318 
Branch,  130 
Branches,  314 
Brass,  58 
Brazen,  300 
Bread,  37,  50,  288,  422 
Break,  46,  85 
Break  bread,  558 
Breaking,  457 
Breathing,  491 
Brethren,  445,  477,  574,  653,  671,  683, 

761 
Bride-chamber,  172 


772 


INDEX  OP  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Bridleth,  736 

Briefly,  673 

Bring  forth,  508 

Bringeth  forth,  72,  83,  739 

Bring  to  perfection,  331 

Bringing,  565,  693 

Broiled,  438 

Broken,  119,  131,  170,  187,  415 

Brother,  -s,  317,  673 

Brotherly  kindness,  680 

Brought,  183,  407,  534,  535,  636 

Brought  forth,  183 

Brought  up,  514 

Brow,  393 

Bruise,  -ed,  -ing,  391,  346 

Brute,  696 

Buffet,  143 

Buffeted,  633,  648 

Build,  563 

Burn,  437 

Burned,  553 

Burst,  446 

Bush,  318,  416 

Bushel,  39,  183,  243 

Business,  379 

Busybody,  664 

Buy,  758 

By,  18 

By  and  by,  194,  418 

Canaanitb,  57 

Caesar,  538 

Caesarea,  579 

Calf,  389,  481 

Call  {verb),  15,  18,  119,  456 

Called,  4,  7,  393,  500,  506,  636,  671, 

677,  713,  741 
Callest,  109 
Calm,  185 
Calvary,  430 

Came,  33,  147,  357,  686,  479,  686 
Came  after,  483 
Came  down,  333,  538 
Came  to  himself,  387 
Came  upon,  370,  464,  508 


Camel,  109,  168 

Can,  491 

Candace,  490 

Candle,  183 

Candlestick,  39,  183 

Canker,  345 

Cankered,  759 

Cannot,  378,  380,  392 

Canst,  309 

Captain,  464,  568 

Captains,  193,  432 

Captives,  391 

Carcase,  139 

Care,  668 

Cared,  548 

Careth,  669 

Carpenter,  193 

Carriages,  565 

Carried,  487 

Carry  about,  197 

Case,  109 

Cast,  183,  359,  596 

Cast  away,  343 

Cast  down,  89 

Cast  down  to  hell,  691 

Cast  into  prison,  30 

Cast  out,  49,  478 

Casting,  164,  668 

Castle,  568 

Castor,  599 

Catch,  317,  399,  367 

Caught,  477 

Cease,  699 

Ceased,  86,  185,  338 

Ceasing,  508 

Centurion,  161,  319 

Certain,  331 

Certainty,  353 

Chain,  -s,  186,  691 

Chamber,  -s,  139 

Chamberlain,  511 

Chance,  355 

Charge,  486 

Charged,  169,  176,  204,  301,  340,  470 

Charger,  84 


INDEX  OF  ENGIilSH  WORDS. 


773 


Charges,  566 

Charity,  680 

Chastise,  428 

Cheek,  315 

Cheerfully,  581 

Chief,  -s,  347,  529 

Chief  man,  598 

Chief  priests,  20,  97 

Chief  shepherd,  667    ' 

Children,  33,  6S,  89,  479,  564 

Choked,  181,  330 

Chose,  307 

Chosen,  4,  493,  508,  572 

Christ,  10,  91,  340,  438,  488,  493,495, 

638,  671,  675 
Christian,  -s,  506,  664 
Church,  93,  673 
Circumcision,  477,  503 
Clean,  300,  703 
Clearly,  207 
Cleave,  108 
Cleaveth,  351 
Clemency,  580 
Cloke,  41,  631,  647 
Closed,  78,  390,  293 
Closet,  -B,  43,  868 
Cloths,  433 
Clothed,  667 
Cloud,  345 
Clouds,  701 
Cloven,  448 

Coast,  -s,  88,  107,  519,  550 
Coat,  41 
Cock,  139 
Cold,  137 
Colony,  346,  539 
Color,  595 
Colt,  118,  314 
Come,  181,  348,  406,  496,  583,  587, 

705 
Come  at,  333 
Come  by,  593 
Come  down,  346,  731 
Come  into,  59 
Come  near  or  nigh,  169 


Come  unto,  upon,  73,  759 

Cometh,  101 

Comfort,  314,  495 

Coming,  517,  596,  643 

Coming  {noun),  137,  685 

Commanded,  443 

Commanding,  63 

Commandment,  443,  526 

Commended,  393,  533 

Commit,  664,  743 

Committed,  596,  648,  763, 

Commodious,  592 

Common,  230,  457,  500 

Commotions,  418 

Communed,  583 

Compacted,  624 

Companies,  195 

Companions,  556 

Company,  377,  339,  517 

Comparison,  188 

Compassion,  168,  205, 323,  653,  721 

Compel,  41,  331,  381 

Compelled,  144 

Complalners,  720 

Conceived,  358,  467 

Concourse,  557 

Conditions,  383 

Conducted,  538 

Conferred,  465 

Confess,  61,  368,  764 

Confessed,  553 

Confessing,  24 

Confounded,  449 

Conscience,  647,  653 

Consented,  -lug,  432,  573 

Considered,  509 

Considerest,  48 

Consolation,  373,  313 

Consorted,  536 

Conspiracy,  576 

Constrained,  86,  436,  531 

Constraint,  665 

Consume,  755 

Contained,  643 

Content,  230 


774 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Contention,  528 

Continual,  402 

Continually,  474 

Continue,  757 

Continued,  423,  444 

Continued  all  night,  307 

Continueth,  735 

Contrary,  575 

Convenient,  193 

Conveniently,  226 

Conversation,  637,  688,  650,  693 

Converted,  79,  103,  423,  462 

Convince,  -ed,  550,  742 

Cool,  399 

Corban,  200 

Corn,  70 

Corners,  499 

Corrupt  {verb},  46 

CoTT-apt  (adj.),  317 

Corrupted,  759 

Corruption,  697 

Cost,  381 

Couch,  -es,  302 

Could,  226 

Council,  469,  584 

Councillor,  432 

Counsellor,  233 

Count,  698 

Counted,  472,  553 

Countenance,  147 

Counteth,  381 

Course,  254,  561,  748 

Court,  -s,  325 

Courteous,  652 

Courteously,  590 

Cousin,  260 

Covenanted,  137 

Covered,  368 

Covetous,  395,  699 

Covetousness,  690 

Craft,  547,  554 

Craftiness,  415 

Craftsmen,  554 

Creation,  704 

Creature,  234 


Creditor,  327 

Crept,  712 

Cried,  407 

Cried  out,  210,  884,  555 

Crieth,  760 

Crime,  -s,  586 

Cross,  62 

Crown,  667,  728 

Crucified,  453 

Cry  (i-erb),  89 

Cry  [noun],  131 

Crying,  187,  522 

Crying  out,  296 

Camber,   ed,  357,  874 

Cummin,  124 

Cunningly  devised,  685 

Cures,  377 

Curious,  553 

Curse,  143,  229,  576 

Cursed,  699 

Custom,  102,  273 

Cut,  245,  374,  471,  485 

Cyrene,  451 

Daily,  358,  743 

Damage,  592 

Damnable,  689 

Damnation,  180,  691 

Damned,  235 

Damsel,  84,  510 

Dark,  621,  687 

Darkness,  47,  691 

Daughter,  114,  188,  203 

Daughter-in-law,  62 

David,  13 

Dawn,  621,  687 

Day,  561 

Day  of  the  Lord,  705 

Days,  22 

Day-spring,  265 

Day-star,  688 

Daytime,  698 

Dead,  56,  559,  587,  649,  718,  744 

Deadly,  750 

Dear,  320,  561 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


775 


Death,  87,  486 

Debt,  43 

Decease,  344,  621,  623,  624,  684 

Deceive,  127 

Deceived,  418 

Deceiver,  147 

Deceiving,  734 

Deoeivings,  698 

Declaration,  251 

Declare,  518,  543 

Declared,  839,  494,  498 

Declaring,  525 

Decree,  266 

Deed,  735 

Deeds,  580 

Deemed,  595 

Deep,  318,  335 

Defence,  570 

Defended,  480 

Deferred,  582 

Defiled,  198 

Delay,  496 

Delayeth,  373 

Delicately,  325 

Deliver,  584 

Delivered,  67,  210,  245,  252,  323,  452 

Deliverer,  480 

Deny,  227 

Denying,  689 

Depart,  273,  743 

Departed,  64,  127,  528 

Deputy,  -ies,  246,  515,  548,  557 

Derbe,  523 

Derided,  396 

Descent,  412 

Desert,  85,  129,  490 

Desire,  423,  599,  635,  641 

Desired,  339,  433,  461,  483 

Desiring,  398 

Desolation,  128 

Despised,  404,  740 

Destitute,  743 

Destroy,  39 

Destroyed,  463,  493,  696 

Destroyest,  233 


Devil,  27 

Devilish,  754 

Devils,  165 

Devotions,  542 

Devour,  670 

Devoured,  391 

Devout,  373,  496,  572 

Diana,  554 

Did,  175 

Die,  87,  200 

Difference,  721 

Digged,  117,  318 

Dignities,  695,  715 

Diligence,  712 

Diligently,  549 

Dine,  365 

Dinner,  119 

Disallowed,  643 

Discern,  373 

Disciple,  73,  496 

Discovered,  564 

Discreetly,  330 

Disease,  -s,  31,  334 

Disfigure,  7,  45 

Dish,  138 

Displeased,  511 

Disposition,  484 

Dissolved,  706 

Distress,  418,  419 

Divers,  724 

Divided,  73,  517 

Divination,  531 

Doctor,  -s,  303 

Doctrine,  456 

Doeth,  590 

Dog,  -s,  89,  304 

Dominion,  715 

Done,  236 

Door,  510 

Dorcas,  496 

Double-minded,  736,  727 

Doubt,  451 

Doubted,  -ing,  470,  504,  ^25 

Doubtful,  371 

Dove,  25 


776 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Draught,  201,  399 

Draw,  740 

Drawn  away,  729 

Dream,  -s,  7,  453 

Drew,  556,  568,  595 

Drew  to  shore,  197 

Drive,  593 

Driven  by  the  wind,  726 

Driveth,  156,  163 

Drops,  435 

Dropsy,  378 

Drunkenness,  431 

Dry,  363 

Dull,  78,  600 

Dumb,  56 

Dureth,  79 

Dust,  351 

Dwell,  363 

Dwelling,  157,  186,  449,  694 

Eaglbs,  130 

Bar,  78,  141,  338,  436 

Early,  110,  433,  435,  469,  761 

Earnestly,  435,  574 

Earnestly  contend,  713 

Earthquake,  -s,  332 

East,  30 

Easy,  70 

Easy  to  be  intreated,  755 

Eat,  457 

Eaten,  498 

Edge,  419 

Edified,  494 

Efeeotual,  764 

Egypt,  451 

Egyptian,  569 

Eight,  495 

Eighth,  693 

Elamites,  450 

Elder,  664 

Elders,  97,  436,  523,  560 

Elect,  627 

Elements,  706 

Eloquent,  549 

Blymas,  515 


Embraced,  557 

Emperor,  586 

End,  -ed,  389 

End,  -s  (noun),  424,  762 

End  of  the  world,  6,  150,  179 

Endued,  4-39 

Endued  with  knowledge,  752 

Endure,  762 

Engrafted,  733 

Enoch,  719 

Enough,  338 

Entangle,  131 

Entangled,  702 

Entice,  -ed,  729 

Entire,  724 

Envy,  518 

Envying,  753 

Ephphatha,  161 

Epicureans,  539 

Err,  218 

Error,  147 

Escaped,  678,  703 

Eschew,  653 

Espoused,  12,  267 

Established,  683 

Estate,  571 

Ethiopia,  490 

Euroclydon,  593 

Even  {noun),  146 

Ever,  733 

Everlasting,  683,  714 

Every,  537 

Evidently,  497 

Evil,  -s,  386,  334,  754 

Evil-speaking,  641 

Evil-doer,  -s,  645 

Exact,  -ed,  283 

Exalted,  727 

Examined,  428,  573 

Example,  -s,  15,  648,  666,  693,  714 

Exceedingly,  185 

Excellent,  578,  686 

Excess,  135,  661 

Exchange,  98 

Exchangers,  134 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


777 


Excuse,  380 

Executioner,  161,  194 

Exercise,  583 

Exercised,  699 

Exhorted,  537 

Exhorting,  550 

Exorcists,  553 

Expectation,  430 

Expert,  586 

Expounded,  436 

Eye,  203 

Bye  (of  a  needle),  109 

Eyes,  620,  699 

Bye-witness,  -es,  252,  620,  685 

Fables,  685 

Face,  483,  734 

Fade,  -eth,  630 

Fail,  395 

Failing,  419 

Fain,  386 

Faint  (wrb),  90,  403 

Fainted,  56 

Fair,  90,  479 

Faith,  135,  241,  463,  475, 679,  713, 740 

Faithless,  209 

Fall  (mrb),  224,  331,  353,  683,  734 

Fall  (noun),  375 

Fallen,  559 

Falleth,  363,  738 

Fall  from,  708 

Falling,  722 

False  teachers,  688 

Falsely,  384 

Falsely  accuse,  656 

Fame,  82,  295 

Famines,  333,  418 

Fan,  35 

Far,  88,  97,  316,  224,  414 

Farewell,  349,  537,  579 

Farthing,  -s,  161,  331,  243 

Fashion,  738 

Fashioning,  636 

Fast  (noun),  591 

Fast  (iwJ),  44,  173 


Fasted,  288 

Fastened,  392 

Fastening,  459 

Father,  133,  378,  383,  638,  731 

Fathers,  477,  573,  581 

Father  in  heaven,  6 

Fatlings,  120 

Faults,  764 

Favored,  359 

Fear  (verb),  363 

Fear  (noun),  457,  650,  723 

Fearful,  418 

Feast  (noun),  304,  379,  431 

Feast  (verb),  698 

Feed,  563,  621,  665 

Feeding,  718 

Feel,  545 

Feet,  459,  468,  571 

Feign,  -ed,  415,  690 

Felix,  583 

Fell,  319,  447,  493,  559 

Fell  asleep,  704 

Fell  down,  334 

Fellowship,  456 

Fervent,  549,  662,  764 

Fervently,  631,  640,  764 

Festus,  583 

Fetters,  186 

Fever,  53,  165,  344,  395,  599 

Few,  580 

Fields,  760 

Fierce,  54,  437,  747 

Fiery  trial,  663 

Fig-tree,  115 

Fight,  472 

Figure,  657 

Filled,  38,  85,  305,  381,  381,  386 

Filling,  333 

Filth,  658 

Filthiness,  733 

Filthy,  693 

Find,  69,  106,  807 

Findeth,  63 

Finding,  564 

Finish,  383 


778 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Finished,  564,  739 

Fire,  229,  373,  705 

First,  253,  558,  754 

First  estate,  713 

First-fruits,  732 

Fish,  90 

Fit,  349 

Fixed,  399 

Flax,  71 

Flesh,  212,  656,  714,  759 

Flock,  269 

Flood,  -s,  318 

Floor,  25 

Flower,  727 

Flux,  599 

Foal,  114 

Foaming,  718 

Follow,  235,  648 

Followed,  110,  168,  432,  685 

Followers,  653 

Following,  235 

Pood,  522 

Fool,  369 

Foolish,  131,  646 

Fools,  435 

Foot,  477 

For  iprepos.),  213 

Forasmuch,  251 

Forbade,  25,  701 

Forbid,  415 

Force,  64 

Foreknowledge,  628 

Foreordained,  639 

Foresaw,  453 

Forgave,  327 

Forgetful,  735 

Forgetfulness,  624 

Forgive,  43,  316 

Forgiven,  763 

Forgotten,  682 

Former,  441 

Fornication,  525,  714 

Forsake,  -eth,  383,  566 

For  that,  758 

For  this  time,  583 


Forty,  443 

Found,  271,  290,  389,  427,  547,  ( 

648 
Foundation,  80,  319 
Fountain,  751 
Four,  502 
Fourfold,  409 
Pourfooted,  499 
Fox,  377 
Free-born,  574 
Freely,  454 
Priend,  112,  745 
Friends,  179,  384 
Froward,  631,  647 
Fulfil,  78,  741 
Fulfilled,  6,  517,  745 
Fulfilment,  567 
Full,  156,  196 
Fully,  448 
Furlongs,  434 
Furnished,  120,  227,  432 

Gabriel,  256,  258 

Gain,  98,  341 

Gained,  411 

Gainsaying,  717 

Gains,  558 

Galilaean,  -s,  450 

Gall,  489 

Gallic,  548 

Gamaliel,  571 

Garment,  305,  509 

Garments,  114 

Gate,  50,  376,  398 

Gates,  522 

Gathered,  81,  180 

Gathered  a  company,  537 

Gathered  together,  363 

Gathering,  529 

Gave,  196,  324,  436,  449,  466,  588 

Gave  to  drink,  145 

Generation,  281,  394,  491,  644 

Gentiles,  274,  573 

Gentle,  647 

Gethsemane,  140 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


779 


Ghost,  145,  344,  432,  467 

Gift,  88,  663,  731 

Gird,  373,  631,  635 

Give,  85,  393,  634 

Given,  149,  678 

Giveth,  663,  725 

Giving,  651,  678,  714 

Glad,  663 

Gladness,  355 

Glass,  734 

Glory,  343,  477,  633,  634,  635,  648, 

663,  677 
Gnashed,  -eth,  309,  485 
Go,  331,  538 
Go  to,  757 
Goats,  135 
God,  486,  513,  595,  598,  647,  653,  663, 

745 
Godhead,  545 

Godliness,  630,  634,  676,  680,  707 
Godly,  694 
Goest,  348 
Going,  714 

Gold,  459,  545,  633,  638 
Golgotha,  144 
Gone  out,  133 
Good,  137,  505 
Good-will,  371 
Goodly,  738 
Goods,  72,  180,  457 
Gorgeous,  -ly,  325,  438 
Gospel,  9,  524 
Gotten,  563 
Government,  694 
Governor,  21,  346,  747 
Grace,  341,  359,  550,  639,  728 
Gracious,  292,  642 
Grant,  113 
Granted,  463,  676 
Grapes,  318 
Graven,  545 
Greater,  71,  73,  364 
Greatest,  433 
Great  price,  650 
Grecians,  473 


Greece,  557 

Greedily,  717 

Greeks,  505 

Green,  195 

Greeting,  526,  733 

Grew,  377 

Grieved,  174,  464,  533 

Grievous,  563 

Grind,  119 

Gross,  78 

Ground,  90,  413 

Grow,  183 

Grudge,  763 

Guard  (noun),  7 

Guest,  409 

Guest-chamher,  326 

Guide  (cert),  266 

Guilty,  124,  142,  180,  743 

Gulf,  399 

Habitation,  -s,  395,  446,  713 

Hail  [mrh),  148,  619 

Hale,  374 

Half  dead,  355 

Hand,  466,  481 

Handed,  200 

Handkerchiefs,  552 

Handle,  437 

Haply,  315 

Happened,  663 

Hard,  133,  730 

Hard  to  be  understood,  708 

Hardness,  175 

Harm,  598 

Harmless,  60 

Harvest,  350 

Hasting,  707 

Have,  43,  365,  434,  736 

Have  respect,  739 

Have  respect  to  persons,  743 

Havoc,  487 

Headlong,  293,  446 

Heal,  52,  307,  320 

Healed,  52,  301,  309,  331 

Hear,  314,  579 


780 


INDEX  OP  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Heard,  551,  571 

Hearer,  -s,  733,  735 

Heareth,  79 

Hearken,  453,  789 

Hearkened,  535,  595 

Heart,  88,  318,  524 

Hearts,  447 

Heat,  111,  706,  737 

Heathen,  6 

Heavens,  704 

Heaviness,  633,  757 

Heavy,  337,  345 

Hebrews,  474 

Hedged,  117 

Hedges,  381 

Held,  460 

Hell,  40,  93 

Helm,  747 

Help  {mrb),  399,  358 

Help,  -s  (noun),  589,  594 

Helped,  550 

Hem,  56 

Hen,  135 

Herb,  -s,  184,  366 

Here,  84 

Heritage,  666 

Herod,  507 

Hewn,  433 

Hid,  258 

Hide,  764 

Highways,  130 

Hill,  -s,  430 

Hindered,  651 

Hired,  156,  600 

Hold,  47,  160 

Hold  (ward),  464 

Holding,  198 

Holes,  53 

Holiness,  365 

Holpen,  263 

Holy,  49,  636,  686 

Holy  city,  6,  28 

Holy  One,  165 

Holy  Spirit,  241 

Honest,  331 


Honey,  163 
Honor  (verb),  200 
Honor  (noun),  633 
Honorable,  332,  518 
Honors,  599 
Hook,  103 

Hope  (Twun),  454,  630 
Hope,  -ed,  583,  636 
Hoping,  315 
Hosanna,  115 
Host,  370,  483 
House,  267,  457,  643 
Household,  373 
House-top,  -s,  128 
Howbeit,  66 
Howl,  759 
Humility,  667 
Hundredfold,  78,  110 
Hungry,  498 
Hurt  (verb),  394 
Hurt  (noun),  591 
Husks,  386 
Hymn,  -s,  139 
Hypocrite,  -s,  124 

Idle,  73,  433,  620 
Idolatry,  538 
Ignorance,  646 
Ignorant,  465,  704 
Ignorantly,  543 
Image,  131 
Imagination,  -s,  263 
Immanuel,  18 
Immediately,  364 
Impediment,  204 
Importunity,  361 
Impossible,  400 
Impotent,  519 
Imputed,  745 
In  a  good  place,  739 
Incense,  355 
Incorruptible,  630 
Increased,  181 
Indebted,  359 
I  Infirmities,  301 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


781 


Infirmity,  375 
Informed,  565 
Inheritance,  630 
Iniquity,  700 
Inn,  268,  356 
Inner,  533 
Innumerable,  367 
Inquire,  576 
Inquire  diligently,  31 
Inquired,  634 
Inquiry,  500 
Instant,  439 
Instantly,  330,  587 
Instructed,  83,  84,  353,  571 
Insurrection,  -s,  330 
Intent,  501 

Interpretation,  631,  688 
Is,  748,  756 
Isaiah,  380 
Iscariot,  57 
Israel,  460 
Italian,  496 
Itching,  345 
It  may  be,  414 

jAiKirs,  336 

James,  711 

Jericho,  408 

Jerusalem,  303 

Jesus,  16,  483,  486,  639 

Jesus  Christ,  733 

Jews,  533 

John,  154,  255,  380 

John  Baptist,  33,  553 

Join,  468,  490 

Joined,  386 

Jordan,  380 

Joseph,  478 

Jot,  40 

Journey,  334,  385 

Joy,  663,  733 

Judaea,  303,  450 

Judah,  30 

Jude,  711 

Judges,  739 


Judgeth,  637 
Judgment,  583,  690,  743 
Judgment-seat,  -s,  740 
Jupiter,  530,  531 
Just,  573,  693 
Justice,  597 
Justified,  336 

Keep,  389,  331 

Keeping,  269 

Kept,  271,  279,  570,  584,  631,  712 

Kept  back,  466,  560 

Key,  96 

Kid,  391 

Kill,  423 

Kind  (noun),  749 

Kindled.  426 

Kindleth,  747 

Kindness,  597 

King,  12,  106,  354,  646 

Kingdom,  431,  682 

Kingdom  of  Heaven,  6,  23 

Kingdom  of  God,  310 

Kiss,   ed,  141,  328,  563 

Knew,  436,  478,  597 

Knewest,  411 

Knit,  499 

Know,  50,  353,  430,  553,  716 

Knoweth,  67,  183,  524 

Knowing,  190 

Knowledge,  341,  651,  676 

Korah,  717 

Korban,  161 

Labok,  67 
Lackest,  406 
Lacketh,  681 
Laid,  24,  204,  398,  518 
Lake,  297 
Lamb,  638 
Lamentation,  487 
Lamps,  131 
Lanes,  380 
Language,  450 
Large,  148 


782 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


LasciTiousnes3,  303,  659 

Last,  639 

Lately,  547 

Latter,  761 

Laugh,  -ed,  312 

Launch,  -ed,  297,  332 

Law,  -s,  273,  557 

Lawful,  143 

Lawgiver,  757 

Lawyer,  -s,  243,  336 

Lay,  45,  413,  486 

Lay  hold,  439 

Laying  await,  493,  583 

Lazarus,  397 

Lead,  223,  317,  359 

Leadeth,  50 

Leap,  -ed,  313,  520 

Leaping,  459 

Learning,  589 

Least,  136,  326 

Leave,  160,  454,  474 

Leaven,  80 

Leaving,  648 

Led,  156 

Led  away,  708 

Left,  130,  358 

Legion,  -s,  141,  161,  243 

Lend,  315 

Lepers,  393 

Leprosy,  300 

Let,  311,  454 

Let  {rented),  118 

Let  down,  297 

Levi,  9 

Lewdness,  548 

Liberally,  725 

Libertines,  476 

Liberty,  391,  582 

Licked,  398 

Lie  (Mr J),  467 

Life,  307,  421,  469,  728 

Lift,  375 

Lifted,  245,  309,  573 

Light,  47,  233,  374,  364,  535,  687 

Lighten,  274 


Lightened,  247,  595 
Lightning,  147,  353 
Lights,  558,  731 
Like-minded,  652 
Like-precious,  676 
Liken,  51 
Likeness,  520 
Likewise,  649 
Lineage,  367 
Linen,  338,  397 
Lingereth,  690 
Lion,  156,  669 
Listeth,  747 
Little,  597 
Live,  479,  659 
Lived,  574 

Lived  in  pleasure,  760 
Lively,  481,  639 
Living,  620,  643 
Lo,  518 
Loaves,  197 
Lodge,  184,  339 
Long,  414,  437 
Long  time,  690 

Look,  306,  346,  430,  459,  630,   631, 
635,  707 

Looked,  314,  355,  497,  572,  598 

Looketh,  734 

Looking,  707 

Loose,  96 

Loosed,  375,  595 

Loosing,  592 

Lord,  113,  133,  393,  586,  641,  676,  689 

Lording,  666 

Lords,  193 

Lose,  98,  341 

Lost,  58, 384 

Lot,  354,  489,  517 

Love,  713 

Love  {verb),  315 

Love-feasts,  698 

Low,  281 

Low  degree,  737 

Lowering,  90 

Lowest,  379 


DTDBX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


783 


Lowly,  68 
Lucius,  513 
Lucre,  665 
Luke,  154 
Lunatic,  31,  101 
Lust,  678,  729 
Lusts,  181,  755 
Lycaonia,  530 
Lydda,  495 
Lydia,  530 
Lying  in  wait,  367 

Mad,  589 

Made,  131,  133,  379,  436,  463,  644 

Made  light,  120 

Made  low,  727 

Made  toward,  596 

Made  whole,  86 

Made  with  hands,  484,  544 

Madness,  307,  701 

Magdalene,  146 

Magistrate,  -s,  532 

Maid,  6,  338 

Mainsail,  596 

Majesty,  685 

Make,  588 

Make  a  noise,  56 

Make  of  none  effect,  88,  300 

Make  perfect,  671 

Mammon,  394 

Man,  764 

Manger,  368 

Manifested,  183,  620,  639 

Manifold,  632 

Mankind,  750 

Manner,  186,  524,  578 

Manners,  517 

Many,  127,  427,  591 

Mark  {proper  name),  153,  674 

Market-place,  65 

Marriage,  119,  133 

Marry,  121 

Martyr,  572 

Marvelled,  317,  357,  275,  450 

Mary,  445 


Master,  89,  343,  298,  593 

Masters,  123,  746 

Matter,  489,  747 

Matthew,  9,  154 

Mayest,  393 

Mean(a(^-.),  344,  570 

Meaning,  590 

Measure,  -s,  393,  393 

Meat,  -s,  201,  438 

Medes,  450 

Meek,  87 

Meekness,  733,  753 

Meet,  132 

Melt,  706,  707 

Men,  196,  574 

Mending,  31 

Merchandise,  690 

Mercies,  518 

Merciful,  406 

Mercury,  520 

Mercy,  341,  363,  365,  743,  763 

Michael,  715,  716 

Might,  695 

Mighty,  668 

Mighty  power,  347 

Mighty  works,  66,  191,  193 

Milk,  641 

Mill,  130 

MiUstone,  103 

Mind,  319,  658 

Minded,  13,  596 

Minister,  -s,  112,  210,  252,  393,  515 

Minister  (««r6),  583,  635 

Ministered,  514,  683 

Ministration,  357,  474 

Minstrels,  56 

Mint,  134 

Miracle,  -s,  453 

Mire,  703 

Mischief,  516 

Miserable,  118 

Miserably,  7, 118 

Miseries,  759 

Mist,  516 

Mite,  -s,  231 


784 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Mock,  -ed,  382,  546 

Mocking,  451 

Moisture,  345,  330 

Molooli,  482 

Moment,  288 

Money,  103,  220,  466 

Money-otangers,  6,  115,  215 

Moreover,  398 

Morrow,  758 

Mote,  49 

Moth-eaten,  759 

Mount,  686 

Mountain,  33,  343 

Mourn,  36,  66,  130,  757 

Mouth,  104 

Moved,  115,  230,  453,  688 

Multiplied,  473 

Multitude,  141,  175 

Murderer,  -s,  461,  569 

Murmurers,  730 

Murmuring,  473 

Muse,  -ed,  286 

Music,  390 

Must,  96,  279,  380 

Myrrh,  331 

Mystery,  78 

Nain,  332 

Name,  7,  103,  105,  127,  149,  489,  503 

Named,  408 

Napkin,  243,  411 

Nation,  501,  644 

Nations,  135 

Natural,  696,  734 

Naturally,  717 

Nature,  748 

Naughtiness,  733 

Nazarene.  -s,  23,  580 

Nazareth,  571 

Near,  500 

Need,  171,  173 

Needed,  545 

Needful,  713,  744 

Needle,  6,  109,  213,  344,  407 

Neglected,  474 


Negligent,  683 

Neighbor,  43 

Nests,  53 

Net,  31,  81,  398 

Nevertheless,  143 

New,  55,  138,  146,  541 

New-born,  641 

Next,  518 

Nigh,  412 

Ninth,  145,  433,  458,  503 

Noised,  169,  364,  449 

Noon,  571 

Northwest,  593 

Not,  130,  132 

Notable,  453 

Nothing,  735 

Nought,  160,  473,  554 

Now,  514,  705 

Number  {noun),  445 

Numbered,  445,  447 

Oath,  84,  763 

Obedience,  620 

Obedient,  636 

Obey,  471 

Obeyed,  473 

Obeying,  639 

Observation,  401 

Observed,  193 

Obtained,  446,  675 

Occupy,  410 

Offence,  98,  623 

Offend,  41 

Offended,  64 

Offer,  643 

Offered,  482,  744 

Offerings,  417 

Officer,  41,  374,  556 

Of  herself,  188 

Of  like  passions,  533,  764 

Oft,  198 

Often,  304 

Oil,  338,  356 

Old,  565 

Once,  713,  713 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


785 


On  foot,  85 

Open,  557 

Opened,  156,  163,  390,  437,  491 

Openly,  207 

Opportunity,  585 

Opposed,  548 

Oppress,  -ed,  503,  740 

Oracles,  662 

Oration,  511 

Orator,  579 

Ordained,  176,  523,  713 

Order,  253 

Orderly,  566 

Ordinance,  646 

Other,  47,  286,  404,  405,  430 

Others,  404,  451 

Ought,  402,  435,  471 

Outer,  53 

Oven,  371 

Over  against,  333 

Overcame,  553 

Overcharged,  420 

Overcome,  702 

Overflowed,  705 

Overhearing,  190 

Overseers,  561 

Overshadow,  -ed,  345 

Oversight,  620 

Owed,  106 

Owest,  107 

Own,  444 

Pain,  -s,  343,  453 
Palace,  136,  228,  362,  579 
Palms  (of  the  Tiands),  142,  329 
Palsy,  -ies,  303,  488 
Parable,  74,  130 
Paradise,  431 
Part,  446,  489 
Partaker,  665 
Partakers,  678 
Parthians,  450 
Partial,  739 
Partiality,  755 
Partner,  -s,  399 

50 


Passed,  197,  310,  355,  543 

Passing,  538 

Passover,  325,  508 

Past,  346 

Paths,  280 

Patience,  679 

Patient,  760 

Patriarch,  -s,  454 

Paul,  515,  526 

Paulus,  515 

Peace,  185,  190,  294,  350,  639,  743 

Peacemakers,  38 

Pearl.  49 

Peculiar,  644 

Pence,  106,  357 

Penny,  111 

Pentecost,  448 

Penury,  417 

People,  374,  512,  517,  644 

Perceive,  337,  541,  591 

Perceived,  170,  465 

Perdition,  624 

Perfect,  353,  317,  734,  731,  735 

Perfect  manner,  571 

Perfected,  115,  378 

Perfectly,  549,  577 

Perhaps,  489 

Perish,  489,  518,  697 

Pernicious,  690 

Perplexed.  193,  338 

Person,  317 

Persuade,  148 

Persuaded,  400,  414 

Persuadest,  589 

Perverse,  101 

Perverteth,  438 

Pestilences,  418 

Pestilent,  580 

Peter,  91,  153,  177,  424,  627 

Philip,  178,  487 

Phylacteries,  132 

Physician,  -s,  393 

Piece,  305 

Pieces,  137,  384 

Pigeons,  273 


786 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Pillow,  185 

Pinnacle,  28 

Pit,  378 

Pitcher,  226 

Pitiful,  652,  762 

Place,  447,  491,  751 

Place  where  two  ways  met,  214 

Plagues,  175,  324 

Plain  (noun),  308 

Plain  (adj.),  204 

Plaiting,  650 

Platter,  125,  365 

Pleasure,  584,  698 

Pluck,  172 

Plucked,  306 

Point  of  death,  188 

Poison,  750 

Pollutions,  525,  702 

Pollux,  599 

Pondered,  271 

Poor,  36,  739 

Porch,  229 

Portion,  385 

Possess,  -ed,  335,  405,  418 

Possession,  -s,  457,  477,  483 

Pot,  -s,  161,  200 

Pound,  -s,  410 

Pouring,  356 

Power,  149,  171,  177,  415,  488,  695 

Praetorium,  7,  161,  230 

Praise,  -s,  633,  644 

Prayed,  497,  534 

Prayer,  530,  662 

Prayers,  304,  457 

Preach,  30,  291 

Preached,  169,  286,  463,  558,  657 

Preacher,  692 

Preaching,  23 

Precious,  624,  642,  643,  678 

Prepared,  256 

Presence,  377,  463 

Present,  597,  683 

Present,  -ed  {verb),  272 

Presently,  116 

Preserve,  -ed,  402 


Press,  -ed,  -eth,  175,  396,  316,  3i 

547 
Presumptuous,  695 
Prevail,  -ed,  429 
Prevented,  102 
Pricked,  455 
Pricks,  588 
Pride,  203 
Priest,  355 
Prince,  462 
Priscllla,  548 

Prison,  82,  469,  470,  509,  533,  657 
Prisoner,  577 
Private,  688 
Privily  bring  in,  689 
Proceed,  -ed,  508 
Profane,  580 
Profess,  51 
Profit  (verb),  743 
Promise,  443 
Promised,  84,  422 
Proof,  -s,  442 
Prophecy,  686 
Prophet,  325 
Prophetess,  276 
Prophets,  22 
Proselyte,  -s,  518 
Proud,  668 
Proverb,  702 
Providence,  580 
Proving,  493 
Provoke,  367 
Prudent,  67,  515 
Publicans,  282 
Publicly,  536 
Pull,  378 

Punish,  -ed,  466,  694 
Punishment,  646 
Purchased,  446,  562 
Pure,  703 
Purged,  682 
Purging,  201 
Purification,  373 
Purified,  639 
Purify,  756 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


787 


Purple,  896 
Purpose,  505 
Purse,  -s,  350 
Put,  134,  304,  518 
Put  away,  657 
Put  forth,  80 
Put  off,  683 
Put  to  death,  430,  511 
Put  to  silence,  631,  646 
Putteth,  183,  305 
Putting  off,  621,  634 
Putting  on,  650 

Quarrel,  193 
Quaternions,  508 
Question,  534 
Questioned,  165 
Quickly,  160,  393 
Quicksands,  594 
Quiet,  557 

Kabbi,  133 

Rage,  466,  718 

Rahab,  745 

Railing,  716 

Raiment,  562 

Rain,  -s  (noun),  522,  597,  762 

Raise,  587 

Ran,  187,  247,  335,  388,  533,  717 

Ran  round,  197 

Ranks,  196 

Ransom,  113 

Rash,  557 

Rather,  683 

Read,  290 

Ready,  133,  565,  633,  661 

Reaped,  759 

Reason,  474 

Reasoned,  414 

Reasoning,  170,  347 

Rebuked,  700 

Receipt  of  custom,  55 

Receive,  697 

Receive  sight,  573 

Received,  79,  339,  313,  857,  534,  551 


Received  up,  348 
Receivedst,  899 
Receiving,  634 
Recommended,  523 
Redeemed,  638 
Redemption,  420 
Refrain,  473 
Refresh,  591 
Refreshing,  463 
Regeneration,  110 
Reject,  -ed,  336,  341 
Rejoice,  633,  727,  758 
Rejoiceth,  748 
Relief,  507 
Religious,  518,  785 
Remained,  467 
Remember,  146 
Remembrance,  683,  684 
Remission,  380 
Rend,  50 
Rent  {noun),  805 
Rent  (verb),  583 
Repent,  23 

Repentance,  163,  281,  560 
Repented,  116 
Repetitions,  43 
Report,  474 
Reproaohest,  366 
Require,  -ed,  869 
Rescued,  578 
Reserved,  681,  692 
Resist,  -eth,  484,  668,  670 
Respect  of  persons,  736 
Respecter,  503 
Rest  (noun),  67 
Rest  (verb),  453 
Resteth,  664 
Restitution,  463 
Resurrection,  464,  546,  575 
Return,  371 
Returned,  433 
Revealed,  273,  630 
Revelling,  -s,  660 
Reverence,  118 
Revile,  -ed,  648 


788 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Eevilest,  575 

Reward,  43,  697 

Rhoda,  510 

Rich,  740 

Right,  489,  516,  699 

Eight  (hand),  135,  306 

Righteous,  241 

Righteousness,  241,  265,  582 

Ring,  389,  738 

Ringleader,  580 

Riot,  661,  698 

Riotous,  -ly,  385 

Rise,  73,  363,  364 

Risen,  437,  727 

Rising,  275 

River,  163 

Roaring,  419,  621,  669 
Robbers  of  churches,  557 
Robe,  -s,  144,  389 
Rocli,  91,  623 
Roman,  -s,  532 
Room,  -s,  133,  416,  583 
Root,  -s,  245 
Rose,  213 
Royal,  741 
Rubbing,  306 
Rudder-bands,  596 
Rue,  365 
Ruin,  319 
Rule,  20 
Rulers,  247 
Rulers  of  the  city,  537 
Rumor,  -s,  223 
Run,  661 

Runneth,  -ing,  316 
Rushed,  -ing,  448 
Rust,  46 

Sabaoth,  760 
Sabbath,  333,  394 
Sabbath-day's  journey,  444 
Sackcloth,  351 
Sad,  44,  312,  434 
Sadducees,  575 
Safe,  390 


Said,  142,  190,  194,  429,  451 

Sail,  557,  591 

Sailed,  347,  590 

Saints,  587 

Saltness,  311 

Salute,  350 

Saluted,  564 

Salvation,  465,  632 

Samaria,  489 

Sanctification,  628 

Sang,  534 

Saron,  495 

Sat,  30,  228,  323,  327,  357 

Sat  down.  82,  137,  293 

Satan,  353,  376 

Saul,  486,  515 

Saved,  458,  693 

Saviour,  262,  676 

Savour,  38 

Savourest,  98 

Saw,  176,  206,  303,  498 

Say,  115 

Saying  (,pa/rtidple),  148,  396 

Scales,  493 

Scarce,  591 

Scarlet,  143 

Scatter,  -ed,  56,  505,  628,  733 

Scoffers,  703 

Scourge,  7,  161 

Scourging,  573 

Scribes,  97,  171,  343 

Scrip,  350 

Scripture,  317,  491,  643 

Scriptures,  708 

Sea,  30 

Sea-side,  497 

Sealing,  147 

Searched,  634 

Seared,  245 

Season,  131,  357,  289,  373,  633 

Season  {verb),  311 

Seasons,  443 

Seat,  -s  123,  379 

Second  after  the  first,  305 

Secret,  364 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


789 


Sect,  -s,  580,  581,  634 

Secure,  148 

Security,  538 

See,  64,  130,  188,  335,  420,  563 

See  (clearly),  49 

See  afar  off,  681 

Seed,  79,  640 

Seeing,  620,  694 

Seek,  505 

Seeking,  377 

Seem,  -ed,  -eth,  333,  735 

Seen,  122,  443,  480 

Seize,  -ed,  384,  556 

Self-willed,  695 

Senate,  469 

Send,  62,  89,  439 

Send  forth,  57,  59,  176,  350,  751 

Sensual,  721 

Sent,  196,  414,  427,  646 

Sent  out,  746 

Sentence,  429 

Separate,  721 

Sepulchre,  -s,  125 

Serjeants,  535 

Servant,  112,  210,  363,  330,  395,  711, 

723 
Servants,  388,  410,  647 
Serve,  265 

Set,  33,  114,  375,  331,  340,  480,  511 
Set  forth,  251,  564,  714 
Setter-forth,  540,  543 
Setteth  on  fire,  748 
Setting,  295 
Settle,  672 
Seven,  564 

Seventy,  105,  849,  353 
Several,  133 
Seweth,  172 
Shadow,  733 
Shake,  59 
Shaken,  316,  430 
Shame,  718 
Shed,  138,  227 
Sheep,  58 
Sheet,  498 


Sheol,  94 

Shepherds,  369 

Shew,  323,  336,  453,  583,  644 

Shewbread,  173 

Shewed,  263,  364,  416,  443,  503,  553, 

568,  684 
Shewing,  266 
Shine,  -ed,  81,  493 
Shineth,  139 
Shining,  308,  364,  433 
Ship,  -s,  397,  747 
Shoe,  -s,  350,  889 
Shooteth,  184 
Shore,  73,  564,  596 
Shorn,  548 
Shortened,  138 
Shortly,  688 
Shoulders,  383 
Shrines,  554 
Shunned,  561 
Sick,  53,  193,  599,  763 
Sickness,  31,  396 
Sift,  423 

Sight,  -s,  418,  480 
Sign,  306,  599 
Signs,  139 
Signify,  634 
Silence,  122,  570 
Silvanus,  672 
Silver,  384,  459,  688 
Silversmith,  554 
Simon,  178,  675 
Sins,  18 
Sincere,  641 
Sing  psalms,  763 
Single,  46 
Singleness,  458 
Sink.  299 
Sinner,  327 
Sinners,  315,  874 
Sit,  52,  82, 110,  305,  377,  379 
Sitting,  114,  278 
Sixth,  482 
Slack,  705 
Slaughter,  491,  760 


790 


INDEX  OP  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Slay,  411 
Sleep  (mun),  19 
Slept,  131 
Slothful,  134 
Slow,  435 

Slumbered,  131,  691 
Smite,  575 
Smote,  426 
Snatching,  732 
So,  39 

So  much,  468 
Sober,  635,  663 
Sojourners,  627 
Soldier,  -s,  383,  578 
Son,  11,  461,  674 
Son  of  David,  6 
Son  of  God,  146,  232 
Son  of  man,  312 
Soothsaying,  533 
Sopater,  557 
Sorcerer,  515 
Sorcery,  488 
Sores,  244.  398 
Sorrow,  -s,  233,  435 
Sought,  277,  279,  634 
Soul,  219,  263 
Sound  (OK^'.),  245 
Soundness,  463 
South,  489 
Southwest,  592 
Sow,  76,  411 
Sowed,  80 
Sower,  76 

Spake,  148,  197,  439 
Spare,  388 
Sparrows,  61 
Speak,  569 
Speak  against,  645 
Speak  evil,  697 
Speaker,  531 
Speaking,  700 
Spearmen,  578 
Special,  553 
Speechless,  121 
Spend  time,  560 


Spent,  336,  436 

Spies,  415 

Spikenard,  235 

Spirit,  86,  363, 273,  561,  576,  656, 663, 

721 
Spirits,  657 
Spoil,  179 
Spoken,  6 
Spoken  against,  275 
Sporting,  698 
Spot,  -s,  638,  698,  717 
Spotted,  732 
Sprang,  77,  181,  245 
Spread,  412,  465 
Sprinkling,  623,  638 
Sprung,  339,  330 
Stablish,  635,  672 
Stafie,  58 
Stairs,  569 
Stanched,  336 
Stand,  673 
Stand  forth,  174 
Standing,  405,  485,  704 
Stars,  224,  718 
Stature.  279,  370 
Steadfast,  670 
Steadfastness,  708 
Steep,  54,  188 
Stephen,  474,  487 
Steward,  -s,  329,  391 
Sticks,  597 
Stiff-necked,  484 
Stirred,  476,  538,  567 
Stirreth,  -ing,  427 
Stocks,  533 
Stoics,  539 
Stone,  50,  146 
Stone,  -ed,  414,  485,  519 
Stones,  231 
Stony,  77 

Stood,  289,  295,  404,  409,  572 
Stoop,  -ed,  -ing,  163,  433 
Store,  705 
Storm,  185,  332 
Straight,  376,  492,  539 


INDEX  OP  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


791 


Straightway,  133,  160 

Strain,  125 

Strait,  50,  376 

Straitened,  378 

Straitly,  340,  470 

Strake,  594 

Strange,  303,  540,  663,  714 

Stranger,  102,  434 

Strangers,.  451,  541,  627,  645 

Strangled,  526 

Strawed,  134 

Street,  493 

Streets,  198,  380 

Strength,  459 

Strengthen,  -ed,  433,  635,  673 

Strengthening,  435 

Stretch,  -ed,  507 

Stricken,  354 

Strife,  423,  754 

Stripes,  623,  649 

Stripped,  354 

Strive,  376 

Strong,  73 

Strong  drink,  256 

Strove,  576 

Subject,  279 

Subjection,  650 

Submit,  646,  756 

Suborned,  476 

Subtilely,  478 

Subverting,  526 

Such,  137,  184 

Suddenly,  308,  846,  431 

Suffer,  109,  347,  426,  454,  473,  518, 

589 
Suffered,  189 
SufEereth,  597 
Suffering,  715 
Sufficient,  382 
Sum,  574 
Sumptuously,  397 
Sun.  588,  737 
Superfluity,  733 
Superscription,  131,  231 
Superstition,  585 


Superstitious,  541 
Supper,  379 
Supplied,  634 
Supply,  634 
Suppose,  -ed,  338,  673 
Sure,  686 
Surely,  392 
Surfeiting,  420 
Snrnamed,  177 
Sustenance,  478 
Swaddling,  268 
Swallow,  125 
Swear,  6 
Sweet,  752 
Swelling.  702 
Swift,  690 
Swine,  49,  386 
Swollen,  598 
Sword,  276,  424 
Sycamine,  401 
Sycamore,  408 
Synagogue,  321 
Synagogues,  514 
Syro-Phoenioian,  203 

Tabbbnaclb,  -s,  100,  345,  483,  6 

624,  688 
Tabitha,  496 
Table,  -s,  300,  474 
Tackling,  595 
Take,  113,  338,  393 
Take  account,  106 
Take  in  the  arms,  211 
Take  thought,  47 
Taken,  31,  130,  244,  295,  335,  696 
Taken  in  hand,  351 
Taken  up,  596 
Taketh,  28,  99,  309 
Talent,  106 
Talitha,  161 
Talked,  559 
Tanner,  497 
Tare,  347 
Tartarus,  634 
Taste,  -ed,  343,  643 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Taught,  33,  51,  310,  528 

Taxed,  267 

Taxing,  267 

Teach,  149 

Teareth,  309 

Tedious,  580 

Tell,  104,  208 

Temperance,  583,  679 

Tempest,  53,  701 

Tempestuous,  593 

Temple,  29,  125,  143,  315,  278,  367, 

567 
Tempt,  468 

Temptation,  -s,  43,  633,  724 
Tempted,  728 
Ten,  410 

Ten  thousand,  720 
Tent-maiers,  547 
Terrified,  418 
Testament,  138 
Testified,  -eth,  561 
Testify,  -ing,  456,  673 
Tetrarch,  82 
Tliaddaeus,'178 
Thanks,  90,  276 
Thank  (serJ),  66 
That  {conj.),  142,  176 
Theatre,  556 
Their,  -s,  132 
Then,  569,  705 
Therefore,  318 
Thief,  143,  705 
Thieves,  115,  315,  354 
Thine,  134 
Thing,  105,  371 
Things,  353 
Think,  517 
Think  it  strange,  663 
Thu'd,  453 
Thomas,  178 
Thongs,  574 
Those,  133 

Thought  (verb),  330,  489,  500 
Thought,  s,  88,  303,  361,  437,  739 
Threatening,  -s,  491 


Throat,  106 

Throne,  511 

Throng,  -ed,  336,  337 

Through,  633 

Throughly  purge,  35 

Throughout,  338 

Thrown,  331,  394,  400 

Thrust,  397 

Thyatira,  530 

Tidings,  370 

Tiles,  303 

Time,  70,  164 

Times,  443,  533 

Tithe  {rerb\  134,  865 

Tittle,  40 

Together,  439 

Toil,  -ed,  398 

Toiling,  196 

Token,  328 

Told,  107,  437,  579 

Tomb,  7 

Tombs,  53,  186 

Tongue,  570 

Took,  97,  136,  847,  378,  459,  479, 585, 

579 
Took  by  the  throat,  106 
Torment,  31,  396,  884 
Tormented,  399 
Tormentors,  107 
Torn,  165 
Tossed,  86,  726 
Touch,  244,  337,  866 
Touched,  323,  590 
Tower,  117,  381 
Town,  168 
Town-clerk,  556 
Traded,  133 
Tradition,  638 
Trance.  498,  573 
Transfigured,  99 
Transformed,  99 
Transgress,  86 
Transgression,  447 
Transgressor,  742 
Travelling,  138 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


793 


Treasure,  45,  490 

Treasury,  230 

Treatise,  441 

Tree,  430,  633,  649 

Trees,  306 

Tremble,  -ed,  480,  583,  695,  744 

Trench,  413 

Trespasses,  44 

Trial,  633 

Tribulation,  80 

Tribute,  7,  101,  103,  121,  161,  248, 

415 
Tried,  633,  728 
Trimmed,  132 
Trodden,  339,  419 
Trophimus,  558,  568 
Trouble  (verb),  337,  525,  559 
Troubled,  223,  358,  658 
Troublest,  190 
Truly,  243 
Trumpet,  42,  180 
Trusted,  434 
Truth,  219 
Try,  663 
Trying,  724 
Turn,  50,  418,  522 
Turn  about,  747 
Turned,  98 
Turning,  732 
Turtle-doves,  273 
Twelve  tribes,  586 
Twice,  718 
Two,  338 
Two  and  two,  192 
Tychicus,  558 

Unawakes,  713 
Unbelievers,  372 
XJncircumcised,  484,  504 
Unclean,  294 
Uncleanness,  694 
Uncondemued,  536 
Uncovered,  170 
Undefiled,  630,  736 
Under,  714,  739 


Undergirding,  594 

Understandeth,  -est,  80,  490 

Understanding,  219,  258,  378,  438 

Understood,  136 

Unfeigned,  639 

Unfruitful,  630 

Ungodly,  730,  721 

Unjust,  393,  408 

Unknown,  543 

Unlawful,  501,  694 

Unlearned,  465,  708 

Unleavened,  335 

Unloose,  163 

Unprofitable,  401 

Unrighteousness,  394,  697 

Unruly,  750 

Unstable,  699,  708,  737 

Untoward,  456 

Upper,  550 

Upper  room,  444 

Uppermost,  123,  330 

Upright,  530 

Uproar,  569 

Using,  646 

Usury,  134,  411 

Utter,  80 

Utterance,  449 

Uttermost,  334,  583 

Vagabond,  552 

Vain,  744,  756 

Valley,  281 

Vanish,  -ed,  436 

Vapor,  758 

Variance,  63 

Variableness,  781 

Vehemently,  427 

Veil,  145 

Vengeance,  418,  715 

Verily,  243 

Vessel,  493,  651 

Vessels,  300 

Vex,  -ed,  89,  808,  508,  693,  694 

Victuals,  339 

Vigilant,  669 


794 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


Vile,  739 

Vinegar,  145 

Violence,  64,  383 

Violent,  64 

Virgin,' 18 

Virtue,  190,  337,  635,  677,  679 

Vision,  -s,  453 

Visit,  786 

Visitation,  630,  645 

Visited,  136 

Voice,  34,  163,  361,  588,  686 

Void  of  ofEence,  583 

Vomit,  703 

Vow,  548,  566 

Wages,  385 

Wailing,  191 

Wait,  443 

Waited,  -eth,  -ing,  357,  761 

Walk,  171,  303,  366 

Walked,  460,  659 

Walkest,  -eth,  566,  669 

Walking,  306 

Wall,  494 

Wallowing,  703 

Wandering,  718 

Want,  386 

Wanting,  735 

Wanton,  760 

War,  -s,  383 

War  {verb),  755 

Ward,  509 

Ware,  519 

Warn,  -ed,  31,  381,  563 

Was,  357,  569,  573 

Wash,  86,  199,  337 

Washed,  535 

Washing,  -s,  397 

Waste,  -ed,  -ing,  385,  393 

Watch  (guard),  147,  196,  369 

Watch  (verb),  334,  335,  563,  663 

Watched,  144,  174 

Watchful,  631 

Water,  504,  634,  657,  704 

Wave,  -s,  419,  726 


Wax  (verb),  137 

Waxed,  78 

Way,  -s,  493,  700 

Wayside,  77 

Wealth,  554 

Wear,  339 

Weary,  403 

Wedding,  373 

Week,  334,  558 

Weep,  313,  336 

Well  (noun),  701 

Well  (adverb),  88,  300,  318,  319,  503, 

584 
Well-doers,  646 
Well-doing,  664 

Went,  107,  163,  173,  434,  447,  657 
Went  about,  494,  503 
Wept,  413 
Whale,  73 

What,  131,  140,  579,  758 
Wheat,  433 
When,  734 
Whence,  377 
Whereas,  645 
Whereby,  356,  677 
Wherefore,  141 
Wherein,  707 
Whereupon,  583,  588 
Which,  133,  751 
White,  344 
Whited,  135,  575 
Whole,  171,  304 
Wicked,  693 
Wickedness,  -es,  303 
Widows,  230 
Wilderness,  33,  163,  383 
Will  (noun),  104,  656 
Will  (verb),  65,  89,  112,  187,  144,  341, 

653 
Willing,  13,  354 
Willingly,  665,  666,  704 
Wind,  448 

Window,  558  ■ 

Wine,  144,  356,  451 
Wine-press,  117,  316 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


795 


"Winked,  546 

Wisdom,  256 

Wise  ifldj.),  60,  753 

Wise  men,  19 

Wisely,  393 

With  a  great  noise,  706 

With  one  eye,  6,  311 

Withdrawn,  434 

Withdrew,  175,  301 

Withered,  -eth,  174,  640,  718 

Within,  401 

Without,  160,  181,  744 

Without  fear,  718 

Without  respect  of  persons,  631,  687 

Without  water,  718 

Withstood,  515 

Witness,  392,  447,  630,  665 

Woe,  313,  717 

Woman,  651 

Women,  493,  536 

Won,  650 

Wonder,  460 

Wonders,  139,  452 

Worderful  works,  451 

Wondering,  460 

Word,  260,  368,  502,  641 

Word  of  God,  640 

Words,  580 


Work,  593,  724,  735 

Worketh,  724 

Works,  746 

Workman,  58 

World,  128,  266,  543,  705,  748 

Worms,  513 

Worship,  483,  581 

Worshipped,  148,  500,  545 

Worshipper,  556 

Worthy,  321,  580,  740 

Would,  176 

Wound  up,  467 

Wounded,  855,  414 

Wrest,  631,  708 

Write,  525 

Writing  (noun),  108 

Writing-tahle,  364 

Written,  6,  38,  673 

Wrought,  745 

Ybar,  291 
Yet,  715 
Yoke,  67 
Young,  486 

Zacchaeub,  408 
Zealous,  571 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


(Figures  refer  to  the  pages.) 


ajStio-tros,  335 
dyadoTTOita,  664 
dyaBonows,  646 
oyaBos,  505 
dyaXXiacris,  255 
dyaWidat,  632 
dyaTrdw,  315 
dydiTTjf  680,  698 
dyaTTrjTos,  645 
dyyapeufi),  41,  144 
ayyfXof,  484 
Sye,  757 
dyuKTfios,  628 

Syiot,  49,  587,  636 
ayKiarpov,  102 
dyvaffios,  55 

ayi/i'f",  639,  756 

ayvoeo),  543 
dyvataia,  646 
ayvaaros,  542 
dyopd,  65,  198 
ayopafo),  133 
ayopatoff,  537,  557 
aypa,  299 
dypd^^aros,  465 
aypeuo),  217 
aypios,  718 
dypvTTVea,  224 

^yo),  223.  288,  407,  435,  557 

aytavin,  425 

aSeXi^of,  445,  682 

dSf\<j)dTrs,  671 


adrjXns,  366 
aS^f,  93 
dStaKptToj,  755 
aSiKia,  697,  748 
58oXof,  641 

dSvvaros,  519 
derdff,  130 
Sfu/ios,  225 
dBepnTos,  501,  661 
adtcrpos,  693 

ddfTfw,  326 
uiyw^of.  73,  564,  596 

aiiStor,  714 
alviypa,  74 
atpeaiSf  689 

mp<»,  112,  315,  338,  429,  592 

alcrxpoKepdas,  665 
alaxivq,  718 

aiVeo,  112,  361,  461,  483 
aiVm,  109,  144,  586 
alcjiviSios,  421 
at;^^dX(ijTOff,  291 

ala>v,  127,  150,  265,  463, 722 
alamos,  682 
aKaT-dn-aua-Tor,  699 
aKaTatTTairia,  418,  754 
aKaTaoTaTor,  727,  750 
dKaTatrxf'os,  750 
'A/CfXSa/id,  446 
dxepaios,  60 

a™^,  82,  295,  319 
d/cou'o),  169,  525,  571 


798 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


axpaaia,  125 
aKpi^fia,  571 
OKpi^etTTCpov,  549,  577 
aKpifioa,  21 

dKpi^i,!,  21,  253,  549 

aKpoarrjs^  733,  735 

Skpov,  224 
aKvpoa,  88 
oKa^atTTpov,  136 
aXa^oveta,  758 
aXaXa^o),  191 
dX^^fia,  219,  243 
dXTjdoic,  243 
aXi<Ty7]p.a,  525 
dXXo/xat,  520 
axXot,  47 

aWoTploeTTLtTKOTTOS)   664 

dXXorptoff,  102 
dWoipvXos^  501 


aX* 


'V^' 


dXuKof,  752 
aXvcrtff,  186,  568 
a.\a)(TLs,  696 
dp.aOqSy  708 
dfiapavToSj  680 
d/iaprdvo),  18,  584 
dp.dpTTjpa,  180 
afxapria,  18,  44 
d^aprcoXo?,  315,  406 
afMiiat,  759 
djucXfO),  120 
dp.epifjLV05,  148 
dp.r)v,  243 
d/iiayroff,  630,  736 
d/xi^ro/xai,  480 
dM0i|3(iXXm.  164,  298 
d^0l/3Xl;oTpoi',  31,  298 
apipoSov,  214 
afltapos,  638 
dl/d,  111 

dva(3aiVoi,  458,  479 
di/a/3dXXo/iai,  582 
di/a^Xeira),   572 


d(/ayyeXX6),  553 
dvayeuvdat,  629,  640 
dpayivaxTKio,  290,  490 
dvayxaioc,  500 
deayKaoTwr,   665 
drayxi;,  380,  418,  712 

drayw,  156,  332,  482,  508,  511,  535, 

557,  590,  595 
dvaSeiKwfii,  349 
dxaSfi^is,  266 
di/adidiu/it,  245 
dva^tiTe'to,  277,  505 
dva^avwfit,  635 
dvdQe^ia,  417 
dvaBenaTiCm,  229,  576 
avaBcaptai,  542 
dvddr]p.a,  417 
di^aiSetu,  361 
dvaipeiTis,  487 
dratpfo),  422,  430,  479 

dvaKaBi^ai,  323 
di/aKfi/iat,  137 
di^aKXiVo),  52,  377 
dvaK/^d^u,  157,  333 
dvaKpivo),  428 
di'OKiJTrra),  375 
dvaXa/x/3di/co,  579 
di'dX7;|U>^ir,  348 
dfaXOco,  371 
di'aTraiJco,  67,  664 
dvaire'lima,  427 
di/aTTT^Sdo),  213 
dvaTTlTTTai,  205,  379 
avaTrXiypoQ),  78 

dvaTSTVIT(T(i>,  290 

dvdnru),  747 
di/aerei'a,  230,  284,  427 
di/aiTKeudfrn,  526 
draCTTao-if,  275 
dvaaTpo<l>f),  637,  693 
dvuTdaa-oiiai,  251 

di/oTeXXo),  233,  727 
di/aroXi],  20,  265 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


799 


dvatftaivofiat,  409.  564 

dva<f,€pa,  643,  649,  744 

ava(l}<ovea,  261 
dvdxva-is,  661 
dvaxapew,  301 
dvd^^n,  463 
Aj-Spcai,  178 
dve/jLi^o/iat,  726 
dvevScKTOv,  400 
avfais,  582 
dwrafm,  573 
axfu^eror,  592 
dvevp'uTKo),  271,  564 
dvfxoiiat,  347 
ai/ij^ov,  124 
avijp,  196 
avBitTTfjixi,  670 
dvBoiioKoyioixai,  276 
^fv^or,  727 
dvBpannvos,  646,  750 
&v0pa,7ros,  106,  322,  764 
dvSvwaTos,  246,  515,  557 
(zviXetuf,  742 
dvlaTTjiJii,  73,  213,  364 
di/oijTos,  435 

avoia,  307 
avolyio,  156,  290 
avopos,  694 
dvop66a>,  376 
diraXXa-yjua,  98 
dvTe)(opat,  47 
dvri',  213,  758 
avri^dXXoj,  434 

aVTldlKOS,   669 

dvriKap^dvopai,  263 
diTiXeyo),  275 
di/nXoyi'a,  717 
ajTtXotfiopeo),  648 
dvTVTTapipxopai,  355 
dvTm'iiTTto,  484 
arrtrdairo/iat,  548,  668 
diTtVfwoi',  657 
dvTO^OoKpia,  593 


awhpos,  362 
awnoKpiTos,  639 
avaOev,  253 
dvuTcpiKor,  550 
d|io'tu,  599 
OTrdyiu,  50 
aTruiTco),  315,  369 
diravrtjins,  132 
dTra^,  712,  713 
dirapveopai,  227 
airapTKTpos,  382 
dnapxrj,  732 
dTrdn;,  698 
OTTetX^,  491 
dnelpaa-Tos,  728 
dTrfXcy/iOE,  554 
dn-eXTrifw,  315 
direp'iTpriTos,  484 

dmpxopai,  107,  133,  188,  384,  714 

dne'xfh  228 

dTrexo),  43,  88,  313 
amaros,  209,  372 
dTrXoOff,  46 
dTrXir,  725 

dffd,  217,  234,  400,  728 

aTTo/SaiVo),  418 
diroyfvopevos,  649 
dnoypa(j)Ti,  267 
dnoypa(t)co,  267 
diToSeUvvpi,  452 
(iTroSfKaTda),  124 
dnoSexopai,  524 
dnoSripea,,  133,  216,  385 
dtro&fjpos,  224 
diroSlSmpi,  392,  466 
diroStopifo),  721 
diroSoKipa^m,  341,  642 

ditoettns,  621,  657,  683 
dmeXi^a,  337 
diroKaXv^K,  274 
dffo/caT-dirTao-is,  463 
dTTO/coTrra),  245 
dnoKveo),  729,  732 


800 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


drroXafi^ava,  399 
aTToXXu/it,  58,  341 
diroXoyfOiiai,  586 
diroKoyla,  570,  653 
aTToXouft),  297 
aitoKvTpacns,  4:20 
oTToXuci),  273,  316,  oId 
diTO^tTcraif  297 
aTroW/io),  651 
ajroTTiVTa),  493 
diroifKia,  247,  590 
dvoirviyai,  330 
anopeay,  193 
d7ro(riC€uafojiiat,  565 
dnoaKiaa'fj.a,  732 
anotTTrdio,  424,  563 
diTOfTTaala,  566 
aTTOOTeydftw,  170 

<ij70(7TaXo.,  59,  176,  183,  291 

aTrdoToXoff,  57 
dTTOtTTOfiarl^Q},  367 
anoiTTpecfia),  428 
dTTordtrfro/xai,  196,  349,  383 
dTTOTeXe'tw,  729 
dnoTldriui,  82 
dno(jievya),  678,  702 
ano<t)6€yyoixai,  449,  451,  589 
d7ro\//u;((B,  419 
d7rpo(7"K07roy,  582 
dTrpocrwTroX^/iTrrtBy,  621,  637 

aTTTaUTTOS,    722 

aTrioSeopaLf  518 
d7ra)X«a,  489,  689,  691 
apa,  215 
dpyea,  690 
dpydf,  73,  681 

ipyOpiov,  137,  459,  688 

dpyUpOKOTTOS,   554 

dpfo-Tot,  474 
aper^,  625,  644,  677 
dpi(rrdoj,  365 
apujTov,  119 
dpitd^a,  64 


app(otTTOSj  192 
dprefiaVf  596 
dpri,  56 
dpTiyevvTjTOS,  641 

SpToj,  27,  50,  288,  422 
dpTiio),  211 
dpp^aio;,  565 

dpxi?,  162,  252,  415,  499,  704,  713 
dpxTjyos,  462 
dp)(t7roifn]v,  667 

3pxo;iiat,  138,  287,  441 

dtre^eiO)  721 

dcj-f^vf;  720 

do-eXyfia,  203,  659,  690,  693 

Sarjpos,  244,  570 

daQiveia,  301 

Aa-idp)(T]s^  556 

dcTKeo},  582 

dtTKOff,  55 

do-Trdfo/iai,  557 

atTTrtXo?,  638 

dacrdpLov,  243 

do-Tftoff,  479 

dfTTrjp,  224 

d(TTr)piKTOS,  699,  708 

doTpanri,  364 

dorpaTTTto,  433 

d(r0uX«a,  253 

datfidKo)!,   455 

dtrwrta,  661 

dcrtoTCBf,  385 

drfi/t'f«),  292,  459,  497 
drt^dfo),  472,  740 

aTOTTOS,  431,  598 
avdd^Tjs,  695 

aiXij,  136,  228,  362 

avXrjTTjSs  56 
auXi'^opnt,  421 
av(TTTjp6s^  411 
avTop-aros,  183 

aVTOTTTr^S.   252 

6  airor,  670 

airoj,  194,  671,  678,  729 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


801 


avxuripos,  621,  687 
utpavt^a,  45,  46,  518 
acfxuvTos,  436 
dtfjfSpmv,  201 
d0f\dTi;r,  458 
n0e<T«,  280,  763 
a<f>dapTos,  630 

d<j>lr,^,l,  43,  104, 109,  145,  817,  763 
(l^io-Tijui,  472,  528 
aipo^as,  718 
n0p(o»,  369,  646 

d^uTrvdm,  332 
d)(Kis,  516 
d;KPfiOf,  401 
a;^pt,  axpis,  558,  596 

^aQvvut,  318 

^a5l;f,  433 

jSaio^  214 

^aXKduTLov,  350,  371 

0dAX(o,  62,  134,  182,  204,  398,  592 

fianTiCa,  162,  199 

^drrncrfia,  162 

^ape'tB,  345,  420 

^apetos,  78 

Bapo-a/Sar,  447 

fiapiis,  562 

fiaaavl^w,  196,  296,  334,  694 

^aaavi(Trr}',-,  107 

^dfravoi;,  32 

ffaaiKfUi,  6,  23,  310 

^atriKeiov,  325 

^actXe-ds,  106 

iSatrtXtKOf,  741 

^dcris,  459 

0a(TTdCco,  53,  459 

(Sdror,  o,  392 

|3<i7-of,  ^,  218,  318,  416 
^aTToKoyiw, .  43 
/3SeXuy/*o,  128 
)3f/3a(of,  686 
BffXff/Sot)X,  60 
l^e^ri\6(0,  580 
51 


BeXdi/ij,  244,  407 

B7,50ay^,  113 

(Sij^ia,  477 

jStdfo/iat,  64 

y3i|3Xi'o.',  108,  211,  290 
(Sido),  659 

^tUTlKOf,  421 

^XawTo),  294 

/3Xacr0ij/iE'(B,  697 

j3Xao-qb7,/iia,  203,  716 

^Xf'pMa,  694 

/SXeVo,,  48,  206,  420,  459,  592 

Boan/pye'f,  177 
fioi,0i,a,  594 
|3df,/3opor,  703 

;3ouXfvopai,  596 
^ovXopat,  12,  470 
^ouwif,  430 

fipabvvm,  705 
^pabxmKoia,  247 
|3paSur,  435 
^paxvs,  472 
/3p£0of,  479,  641 
^pf;(a>,  327 
Ppvxto,  485 

/3pum,  751 

Sptio-t^of,  438 

^paxTls,  46 

/3u(9ifm,  299 
/3^0-o-of,  397 
fiapos,  642 

•ydyypnu'o,  245 

ydf ,,  490 

yd^os,  119,  133,  372 
ydp,  110 
yeema,  40,  95 
ye/iifo.,  381,  386 
ye^fd,  394.  522 
yevecTia.  83 
yeveais,  734,  748 
yci^i/do),  696 
ycwij/iii,  281 


802 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


yevoSf  G44: 
y€pov(TLa^  469 
yevofim,  498,  642 

y;,  90 

yiVoM"',  108,  185,  234,  293,  357,  373, 
406,  415,  425,  464,  572,  574, 
590,  644,  663,  678,  688,  742 

ycvaiaKa,  136,  420,  490,  552,  569 

yXevKOSy  451 

yvatats,  241 

yvaiarJjs,  586 

yoyyv(Tfi6s,  473 

yoyyvarrjs,  720 

FoXyoda,  144 

ypciufia,  393,  589 

ypup^areuSf  243 

ypa(t>n,  6,  217,  643 

ypa^M,  6,  28,  673 

yprjyopfio,  224,  669 

yvfivd^ai,  699 

yuvatKcto?,  651 

datp-ovi^opai,  89,  335 
datjudi/toi',  165 
datp.ovLa>dTji,  754 
dalfiav,  165 
Saw/f",  42,  315 
dai/ei(TTr}s,  327 
SaTraram,  566,  755 
6a7rai/77,  381 
AauelS,  12 
Se'ijirtf,  304 

Sfl,  97,  140,  279,  402,  435,  471 

Selyixa,  714 
deiyp-aTi^co,  15 
Setva,  137 
Sf  iTTvoi/,  379 
dei(ridaLp.ov€(rTepoSi  541 
B€t<TL8aip.ovLay  585 
8«n,  410 

SeXfdfo.,  699,  729 
8fV8po]/,  206 
8E|lo^d^o^,  578 


8€|6o's,  135,  306 

SfOiinl,  335 

8€><B,  223,  426 
8f(T^€vcii,  334 
SeV^iof,  577 
dfafitoTTjpLOv,  470 

SfCTTTOTrjS,    689 

8eSpo,  406 
devTepoTrptoTos,  305 

S/o.,  96,  499 
8>7,  514 

8j)\ocfl,  634,  684 
drjfjLrjyopeWi  511 

8^Mos-.  512 

br,mpiov,  106,  111,  243 

Siu',  18,  218,  407,  632,  640,  657,  704 

8ia/3dX\o/iai,  391 
8iaP\i7ru>,  49,  206 
Siu/3oXos,  27 
8ta'yye'XXa),  348 
diayivaxTKUi,  576,  582 
8ia8e'xo/ia',  483 
8td8o;^of,  583 
SiaSqKT],  138 
dlaKadapi^Qif  25 
hiaK.aTekey^op,ai,  550 
biaKoveu),  635 
8iaKoi/i(i,  474,  507 
Sidrai/of,  112,  210 

diaKovop^ai,  579 

Smxpivw,  504,  721,  725,  739 

8iaKa>Xiim  25 
8iaXaX€'Q),  264 
8taXe'yo/xat.  558 
StaXetVo),  328 
8idXeKTnf,  450,  570 

bcaXoyiCuum,   170,  286 

8iaXo7io-Mo'f,  88,  202,  347, 437,  739 

SiafiapTvpofiai,  456,  561 
8tap.€vai,  423 
8lap.fpi(a>,  448 
8iavip.np.iUy  465 
Siui'eu'u,  257 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


803 


Siavoriiui,  361 

Sidvoia,  219,  263,  703 

Siavoiyio,  437 
biavvKTepfva,  307 
Siavva,  564 
Siairoveo/im,  464,  532 

dtaTi-opeo,  338,  451,  470 

SiairpaynaTftionai,  411 

Sianpio/iai,  471 

8ta/)7rdfa),  179 

Siappritra-o),  Siappi/yvu/ii,  298 

8ta(ra(l>eai)  107 

diacreio),  283 

SiatTKopniCw,  134,  385,  392 

Siacmeipa),  505 
Swo-TTopd,  628,  723 

SiaaTeXKopat,  204,  526 
SiaaTpefjjw,  101,  428 
Smo-ufo),  86,  309 
fitaray)7,  484 
Stardcrtro},  63 
dioTr/peo),  279 
biaTi6(p.ai,  43S,  463 
biaTpi^a,  511 
Smt/ydfo),  621,  687 
fita<^i'\dTTa),  289 
fita;^€tpifojLtat,  471 
8m;(Xfudfa),  451 
Siaxcopi^ofiai,  345 
SiSdo-KoXos,  746 

SiSdo-Ko),  33,  51,  210 

dldpaxpov,  101 

8/30,^1,  223,  323,  449,  452,  454,  503, 
518,  725 

Stc-yeipoj,  333 
dievSvpeofxai,  500 
SifioSos,  120 
8iepp.Tjvev(a,  436 

bUpxap-ai,  271,  301,  496,  502,  542 

Sifptordo),  500 

8ir,yiop.ai.,  208,  336,  339,  494 
Sijjyrjo-ts,  251 
8u(T\vpl^op,ai,  510 


8tKai09,  241,  693 
S(Kaio(n;i'i;,  241,  265 
SiKi),  597,  715 

SlKTWOK,   298 

8(opi'0"(T&),  46,  131 
SivX/fo,,  125 

di;(d^ci),  62 

8ii^vxos,  727 

86ypa,  266 

So/ce'o),  332,  735 

8oK£^d^((),  373,  633 

8oKLpLov^  633,  724 

86Kipos,  728 

8o((df,  49 

8d^o,  635,  663,  695,  715 

8o|afa),  634 

86a'iSf  731 

fioOXo?,  112,  210,  320,  410,  711,  723 

SouXoo),  702 

8oxv^  304,  379 

hpaxi^r},  384 

dpofioSi  561 

5uVa/iai,  209,  392 

Swva/xts,  66,  190,  191,  337,  452,  695 

SvvdcTTrjs,  490 
SvaevrepLa,  599 
8v(tv6t]T0S)  708 
StodeKacf^vKoVj  586 
8a>fxaj  128 
Smpeoi,  676,  678 
8a)pT}p,aj  731 
boipov^  88 

e'auToO,  107,  410,  412,  744 
e'do),  596,  597 

ffiSopriKovTaKis,  105 
'E/3pmof,  474 
iyyi^ic,  662 

fV">",  174,  363,  437,  587 

syKaSeros,  415 
fy/ca/ce'<w,  402 
eyKaraXeiVct),  454 
lyKaToiKta,  694 


804 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


tyKitfifioo/iai.,  667 
cyKi'iTTTOi,  580,  651 
ryKi/aTfuiy  679 
eyKVoSf  267 
e8a(j>iCa,  413 

€6iCo>,  273 

iOvtKOSf    6 

Wvos,  135,  215,  274,  644 

Woi,  273,  524 

?i9a),  273 

ti,  505,  589 

e'tSea,  147 

Abw,  480,  716 

flKOiV,    121 

fiXtKpiVfia,  703 

(ikLKplVrji,  703 
6tXt(TO"aj,  290 
trn-o./,  112,  429 
eipiji/v.  190,  629,  743 

elpTJVOTTOlOS,   38 

eiV,  105,  108,  181,  212,  280,  328,  631, 

632,  634,  657,  673,  681,  734 
€ls,  221 
flaaKovfOj  255 
eto"€/3;^Ofiat,  59 
elaTTriBaoj,  522 
€La(f)€pa3^  359 
«,  f^,  111,  400,  640 
eKarovraTrAao'iciJV,  110 
eKarovTaf>xT]S^  161,  319 

«(3aXX<^,  49,  57,  72,  82,  156,   163, 

350,  746 
fK^oX^,  247,  595 

eK8€)(Ofjiat,  761 
fVSiSaJ/ii,  118 
fKSiriyeofiai,  518 
inStKew,  402 
iKdiKrja-iS)  418,  646 

€)cSoTOr,  452 

fVflTOs,  60,  132,  234,  461,  498,  726 

eK^Tjreo),  634 

cK6ani3ia,,  159,  208,  294 
eKdufi^us,  460 


eKBavpaia,  217 
ckSitos,  478 

€KK\TJ(Tla,  93 
CKkKlVO},  653 
(KKOTTTa,  374 

eicKpefiafiai,  413 
ixXafjiirQ),  81 
eKXetVo),  395 
exXf^roff,  627 
iicKoyr],  492 
f/cXt'o},  90 
eKp.a(TO-o>,  297 

eKfiVKTTJpi^fO^   396 

eKOUfj/o)?,  665 

CKTToXat.   690 

fKnivTw,  708,  728 

€KTt\t]p6ciJ,   517 

cK7rX^(Ta"(i),  51,  278 

€K7TV€Ui^     432 

eWopveuQj,  714 

?K(rTao-i9,  191,  303,  498,  572 

(KTeivw,  596 
6/CTeXea),  382 

€KT€V€La,   587 

CKTevea-Tfpov,  425 

cKTE^-Vs.  508,  662 
cKT-fvir,  621,  640 

eKTivdcra-ai,  59 

e'/cxfVo),  138,  227,  717 

f(Cl/ru;(a),   244,  467 

eXatov,  328 
eXc-y^w,  700 
eXeyx<",  104,  742 
eXfe'm,  721 
?Xeor,  241,  263 
iXKoopai,  244,  398  , 

eXfcm,  568,  740 
'EXXtj./,  505 
EXXT^ftoTjj?,  473 
eXTT/fw,  434,  583,  636 
fXTTcy,  454,  630 

fp^aivio,  188 
e>/3Xejra),  206 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


806 


ifi^piiuioixai,  169,  301 
'Efliiavovr}\,  18 
(liiraiyiiovr),  703 
ffinaiKTai,  703 
«/ijr\«<o,  702 
ilinXoKTj,  650 
ffiirvfrn,  491 
ilinoptvojiai,  690,  758 
i'finpocrStv,  124 
efKJiavfis,  503 
f/KJioPos,  583 
ffitjivTos,  733 

cV,  164,  478,  632,  678,  679 
fV  o^s,  582,  588 

evayKaXl^ofiat,  211 
evSe^frai,  378 
fvSvdis,  650 
fVdu'id,  511 
f've'Spa,  583 
evedpevQj,  367 
€veipi,  365 
eVfdy,  492 

iv(pyi(o,  192,  764 

ive\a>,  192 

cw  for  ci'ecrrt,  731 

fviauroff,  757 

€Via-)(y(Oj  425 

evvaros,  502 

fuvfia,  264 

cvvoia^  658 

evmxov,  168 

fra^of,  142,  180,  742 

evreAXo/iai,  442 

giTt/ior,  320,  642 
e'lToXij,  741 
cvrpiTrw,  118 
eVTpop.os,  480 
ivTpv(j}da>,  698 
ivvTtviov,  452 
ivamiov,  377,  433 
cvaTi^oiiat,  452 
i^ayytWa,  644 
f^aiTeo/uu,  423 


e^aitfiVTis,  346 
i^aKoXovdea,  685,  699 
t^a\ti<fia,  462 
c|dX\o/xa(,  459 
cfavarAXo),  245 
f'iami/a,  208 
e^an-ooTcWo),  439 
i^apTi^w,  564 
e'^aur^f,  194 

€$€\KOIiai,   729 

t^epana,  703 
e^ip\opm,  528 
e^ea-Ti,  454 
i\r,ydopai.,  437,  498,  525 

e'^Vnj^i,  197,  435,  450,  488 
?|oSor,  344,  621,  622,  684 

f^oKodpeioiiai,  463 

e|o/io\ovfV<".  24,  66,  422,  553,  764 

e^opKKTTrjS,  552 

i^opVTTQl,   170 

i^ovdfvfco,  404 

f|ou<7i'a,  149,  171,  415 

?|a.,  181 

f^arepos,  52 

fOpTTj,  421 

enayyeXla,  443 

fjrdyytXfta,  678 

(Ttayo),  693 

cirayavi^opai,  712 

iiraBpoi^Ofiai,  363 

irTaia)(yvopm,  342 

fnaKoKovBcoD,  235,  648 

eTravdyoi,  297 

CTravXt;,  446 

eiia(j>pi^w,  718  ' 

eVeiSijTTfp,  251 

iiTepxop.ai,  759 

fneparda,,  207,  218 

fneparqfia,  658 

fViJpfnfo),  656 

eVi',  29,  108,  127,  197,  222,  298,  435, 

447,  519,  584 
im^aiva,  114,  583 


806 


INDEX  OP  GREEK  WORDS. 


im^aK\<o,  172,  230,  349,  507 
eVt^XfVw,  346,  739 

fm0\r]iia,  305 

im^ovKrj,  493 

intyaix^peva,  121 

tniyi.va>(T«i>,    50,    67,    170,    190, 

436,  465 
eirlyvoimi)  676 
imypcKftrj,  121 
fTTlbrifieu),  451,  541 

eVi8i8<B/ii,  436,  593 

tTTteiKeLa,  580 
fTTieiKrji;  647 
eni6viJ.eo>,  386,  398,  635 
fTTtOvp-ia,  181,  721 

fTTlKaSl'fo),   114 

eviKaXeoiiai,  584,  741 

(TTlKaXvfJLfJLa,    621,   647 

eiriKfLimi,  296,  429 
eviKovpia,  589 
eniKpivw,  429 

iiriKapL^dvopxii,  206,  347,  429 

e7rtXei;^<»,  398 
e7n\rf(Tp.ovr],  735 

CTrtXoiTTOff,    659 

tTTiXua-tf,  621,  688 
imfiapTvpeco,  673 
€7rt/zeX€tn,  591 

fTTLVOia,  489 

eTTtoucrtof,  358 

fVijriTiTo),  175,  498 

tmnodew,  641 
firtppd-TTTu),  172 
CTTipplttTa,  668 

flVKTLTKTtlOS,   339 

tTHtTKeTrrojiai,  136,  736 
eTTttrKtafo),  345 
cTna-Konfi,  446,  645 
iiritTKonos,  561 
eirtairelptOj  80 
eVio-Td^ai,  552 
fTTiai-aTijt,  243,  298 

fVnTTtXXffl,  525 


253, 


eTTUTTripLav,  752 

fVto-rpe(^a.,  79,  423,  462,  522,  527 

f7ri(TXva),  427 

CTTircXfOJ,  670 

eViT^Setof,  744 

iniTi6jip.t,  177,  355 

eViTt^Kim,  176,  340 
fjriVporror,  329 
emcjiavfjs,  452 
eTntpcov^ay,  429 
emx^tpeai,  251,  494 
e7n;^€co,  356 
eiTfxppryyitii,  679,  682 
eTToVnjf,  252,  685 
inoTTTevat,  645 
fpya^opai,  742 

?py<Jv,  724,  746 

€p€vyoixaif  80 
tpriiios  (noun),  23 
(prjp.05  (adj.),  85 
epTjpaicns,   128 
ipiBcia,  754 
epi<piov,  135 
epKpoif  391 
fpxpp-ai,  182 

epioTautf  89,  320,  365 
eV(9ijt,  428,  738 
eaoTTTpov,  734 
C(T;(aror,  639 
€V;^armr,  161,  188 
eratpos,  112 

cTfpof,  47,  234,  286,  343,  893,  404, 

446,  449,  451,  478 
?7-i,  256 

eroi/xoff,  133,  632 
cToijuwff,  565,  661 
euayyfXifo),  270,  286 
fiayyeXtoi/,  9,  524 
cv^utpovla^  35 
ciSi'a,  90 
fiSoKia,  271 
fuflerof,  349 
(iflews,  133,  160 


INDEX  OP  GREEK  WORDS. 


807 


tievSponfto,  247,  529 

fvOvjiirrejiov,  581 
(v6iva>,   747 

(vdis,  489,  699 

fiiKaipca,  541 
fHKatpos,  193 
fiKaipias,  226 
fi\a0rjs,  273 
euXoyeo),  652 
fiiKoyriTos,  629 
(vvoea>,  40 
einftBrjs,  755 

(VTTOptOlial,   507 
tVTTOpia,  554 

fimpincia,  728 
'EwpaKiJXwi/,  593 

fvpiaKw,  63,  69,  633,  648 

fvtT(0el.a,  676 
fiae^rjs,  694 
cutTTrXay;^*'©?,  652 
fv(T-)(riixu>v,  232,  518 
tirdfcar,  427 
€v<l>patv(a,  397 
(^■qpepia,  '254: 
f<firiiifpos,  743 

i<jii<TTTip.i,  270,  357,  464,  508,  572, 
597 

ecjiopda^  258 

r^w,  583,  646,  684,  736 
raf,  276,  296,  410 

fcim,  629 

^eVKTTjptaf  596 

Zew,  521 

ff'ffl,  549 

f^Xot,  518,  753 

^i^Xo'o),  755 

fijXwT^js,  571  , 

(rjiiia,  592 

^rjfiLoco^  98,  342 
fTjr/o),  225,  339,  408 
Cv'rrifia,  524 
fdc^os,  691,  701 


fuyof,  67 
fu'/xi),  80 

fmyp/m,  299 
fcBoyoi-eo),  402,  479 

fioi',  696 

fjyefiav,  246 
fjyeopat,  521 
^SovT],  755 
rihvotjpov,  124 
ijXiKia,  279,  370 
ijfiepa,  150,  435 
^fitdtivrjSf  355 
^(rv^iay  570 

ffTTUOflaL,  702 

TOf'<»i  419 
VXos.  295 

ddXaira'a,  30 
Saii^iopai,  294 
5d;t^or,  294 
6avaTri(f)6pos,  750 
^dvaTOf,  87,  200 
flai/ftafo),  450,  720 

^rao/iat,  64,  120,  122,  303,  325 

5fios,  545 

e/Xij^ta,  104,  656 

e«X<«,  12,  65,  89,  112,  137,  144,  341, 

354,  652,  656,  704 
dfjufXido),  672 
6eopA\os,  472 
etds,  479,  595 
Bfparreia,  372 

Oepairevw,  52,  301,  307,    545 
depiafios,  350 

^tcBpcto,  188,  220,  233,  353,  382,  498, 
541,  663,  591 

6r]peva),  367 

Sripiov,  597,  749 

6ria-avpi^u>,  45,  705 
^Xtx/^tf,  80 
Bnpv^a^ai,  358 

6opvfiiopai,  56,  559 


808 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


6pava,  291 
6pT]VfQ3f  326 
SprjuKos,  735 

6pii,  163 

Spoeofiai,  222 

Bpoti^os,  425 
Svydrpiov^  188 
6vp.tda>f  255 

3vfJL0fia)(€tiif    511 

^v/3a,  376 

*ao;iat,  52,  309,  321,  495 

tatrtf,  377 

tBios,  120,  133,  444,  677,  688 

IdniiTTJS,   465 

tSou,  6,  518 

(Vpoi.,  29,  127,  214,  567 

iepoavKos.,  557 

'I?/(Toi}ff,  16,  483 

lKa„6s,  148,  230,  321,  427,  519,  538, 

591 
iKpds,  245,  330 
iXacTKOjLiai,  406 
tXfojff,  97 
iVaf,  574 

i^aT-ioK,  41,  114,  509 
ira,  142,  176,  188 
tor,  750 
iffayyfXoff,  416 
^l(TKapia)TT]Sf  57 
i'o-os,  505 
i(rort/A09,  676 

?<rT7;fii,  137,  336,  404,  405,  409,  486 

i(T)(vp6s,  72 

la-^vs,  695 

jVx'^'".  171,  304,  382,  392,  524,  593, 

764 
iVcr,  414 
txdvdiov,  90 
imra,  40 

Kadapi^a,,  201,   300 
Ka6api(Tp6s,  272,  682 


Ka5.'8pa,  122 
(caflf^^s,  253 
KaSevdwf  131 
KaBrjyriTrjs,  123 
KaBrjpai,  30 
KaSrjpfpivos,  474 
(ca^/fco,  33,  110 

KaBnTTaa),  538,  748,  756 

KaBoirXi^ofiaij  362 

Ka6(i)iy  478 

Ka/,  52,  87,  366,  374,  524,  757,  758 

Kaira;,  138,  146 
Kaivorepos,  541 

Kacpo'f,  70,  131,  164,  257,  289,  443, 
479,  507 

Kaio),  437 
KaKta,  733 
KaKoirdOem,  762 
KaKOTrad^'w,  763 

KaKOTTOlOff,  645 
KaKOf,   118 
KaKOO),  508 

KaKws,  89,  755 

(caXfo,,  18,  119,  264,  379,  408,  636, 
677 

(caXXloi',  584 

(caXos,  137,  740 

(caXir,  88,  200,  218,  219,  502,  739 

xd/iTjXof,  109,  163 

Kappva>,  78 

Kaplfdi,  763 

Kai/avaTos",  57 

rapg/a,  218,  479,  639 

Knp8ioyva>iTTr)s,  447,  524 
Kdp<pos^  49 

Kard,  9,  527,  592 

KaTa^aivd},  332.  731 
Kara^apitvoi,  227 
KQTa^oX^,  80 
Kai-ayyeXeur,  540,  543 
KaTayyf'XXw,  543 
(caTayaj,  590 
KaraStfdKco,  168 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


KaraSwacTTeiSoi,  503,  740 
KaraKaiu),  553 
KaTaKaV)(doiJ,m,  743 
KaTaKtifiai,  165,  327 
KaraxXdo),  196 
KaraKKv^ofiat,  705 
KaraKpriiivi^a,,  293 
KaraKpivo),  235 
KOTaicupifua),  553,  666 
KaTaXaKeo),  645 
KUToXaXia,  641 
ACaraXa/i^aKoi,  209,  465 
KaraKfiira,  358,  474 
KaraXiffd^co,  414 
KardXvfia,  226,  268 

(caraXuM,  39,  221,  339,  409,  472 

KaraiMfva,  444 
KaravadfiiaTi^a),  143 
Karawevw,  298 
Karavofa,  48,  734 
Karai/T-da),  587 
KaTavv(T(T<o,  455 
Kara^ido/uai,  472 
Karamvo),  125,  670 
(caTaTrXeci),  333 
KaTairoveoixai,  693 
Kardpa,  699 
Karapyio),  374 
KaTapiBufo/iai,  445 
(carap7-iX<B,  31,  115,  317,  671 
Karaa-eioi,  284,  510 
icaTaa"Kevdf(U,  256 
K.aTa(TKj]v6a>,  184,  453 
KaTaa-Krjvaxris,  53 
KaTaao<^L^op.aL,  478 

KaTOCTTfXXo),  557 

KoratTvpta,  374 
KUTaacjidTTai,  412 
KaT-d(7-xf("f,  477,  483 
Karariffripi,  583 
KaTa(j>ipa>,  559,  588 
KaTa(j>i\ea>,  141,  328 
KaTayjfiix(>>,  399 


feaTeiSmXof,  538 
(caTfpydfo/iae,  724 
Karipxafiai,  346 
KaTea-dla,  391 

KOTeufluj/O),  266 

KarevXoyEd),  212 
KaTf'xa),  331,  596 
KarrjtJKia,  757 
Kanjp^fM,  253,  565 
kqt'  iSmi/,  99 
Karido/iai,  759 
(caTtcr^t'o),  429 
KoroKceo),  363,  449 
KaroUija-ts,  157,  186 
KaTOpdoDfia,  580 
KaucrdiB,  706 
Kava-wv,  111,  727 
Kavnjptd^o/im,  245 
Kau;(doMat,  727,  758 

K»/xa(,  24,  275 

KeKOf,  744 
KfVTvplmv,  161 
Kfvms,  756 
Kcpaia,  40 
Kepdjiiov,  226 
Kepdnov,  386 
Kspbalvoi,  98,  341,  650 

KecfydXaiov,  574 

K^j/o-of,  7,  102,  243 

Kj)pv^,  692 

KT)pva-a-ro,  30,  61,  291,  657 

K^roy,  73 
KU/CW,  244 

AcXdSof,  130,  184,  214 
icXaio),  36,  312,  326,  413 
xXdo-jf,  457 
xXei's,  96 
(cXcn-TT^f,  215 
KK.r}povotiea>,    517 
KKrjpovop,La,  630 

(cXvpos,  446,  447,  666 
liKl^avos,  371 
KKivdpiov,  303 


810 


DTOEX  OP  GKEBK  WORDS. 


kXi'm;,  182,  200,  302 
KKiviStov,  302 
K\ivco,  339,  436 
K\t(ria,  339 
K\i8<ov,  726 

Kvfjdo),   245 

KoSpdvTT,!,  221,  248 
Koifiaojiai,  486,  704 
Koirar,  198,  457,  500 

KOIVOO),   500 

KoiviDvla,  299,  456 
Koivui'ds',  299,  665 

KOITO)!',  511 
KOKKIVOS,   143 

KoXafo/iai,  466,  694 
Ko\aCJ)lim,  142,  648 

KoXXd<B,  108,  386,  468,  490 
KoXKv^iiTT^s,  6,  115,  161,  214 
KoXo/3oci>,  128 
Ko'Xn-of,  316,  596 
KoXffli'ia,  529 
Kop.iC<o,  634,  697 

KOl^lao),  125 

KOVlOpTOS,     351 
KOTTafo),   86,    185 
KOnfTOS,  487 

KOTTtdw,  67,  298 

KOTTTa,   66,    130 

Kopdcriovj  6,  84,  161,  191 

Kop^a.-,  200 

Kopos,  393 
Koap-etOy  132 

KoV^os,  543,  705,  739,  748 

KouoTtaSta,  7,  147 
KOv(pi(a>,  247 

KO^tVOS^  85 

Kpafi^aro!,  161,  170,  197,  243,  302 
Kpafo,,  187,  210,  407,  522,  555,  760 

Kpmrra\ri,  420 
Kpaviov,  430 
Kpd(nre8ov,  56 
Kparatdp,  668 
Kpario),  198,  460 


KpaTKTTOS,  578 

Kpaxjya^io,  89,  296 
Kpavyt),  131,  261 
Kprjfivrs,  54,  188 
Kpifia,  690 
Kpiais,  715 

KpiTTjpiOV,  740 
KpLTTjS,    739 
KpVTTTrj,    364 

KToofiai,  405,  418,  446 

KTTJpJl,   457 

KT^i'off,  356,  578 
(CT-iVif,  234,  646,  704 

Kv^epvrjTris,  592 

KuXitT/XOff,  703 

kC/xo.  726 

KvpiVOV,   124 

Kvvdpiov,  89 

Kvpiosy  113,  133,  586,  676 

KVpWTTjS,  715 
KO)Xl^cO,    701 

Ko)/id7roXty,  168 

K^/xof,  660 
Kta(ji6sy  56 

Xayxdi/B,  254,  446,  675 

XalXax/^,  185,  701 
XaKEm,  446 

XaXe'o),  148,  169,  437 

\ap,pdva,  682 
Xa/X7rdr,  131 

Xa^iTTpdr,  428,  738 

Xa/i»rpaif,  397 
Xai-^dvcu,  704 
Xa^fDrdf,  432 

Xads,  270,  274,  517,  644 
Xarpfuo),  265,  482,  581 
Xdp^aKoi',  184,  366 
XEyfMC,  243 
Xc'y-B,  7,  115,  148,  210 
XeiVo),  406,  725,  743 

\etTovpyea>,  514 
XfiTOupyw,  257 


INDEX  OP  GREEK  WORDS. 


811 


Xen-tr,  493 

XflTTOV,  221 

XfvKos,  344 

Xij^,  682 

XjjKo'r,  117 

X^por,  433 

XnoTijf,  115,  142,  215,  354 

\ieos,  50,  642 

XiK/tda),  119 

Xilivt],  242,  297 
Xiyjr,  592 

Xoyifo^at,  672,  745 
XoyiKoj,  641 
Xoyioi/,  662 
Xdyioy,  549 

Xriyos,  106,  253,  260,  441,  489, 
502,  524,  640 

XotSopeu,  575 

\otfi6si  580 
XoiTTOf,  404,  405 
Xov'o),  297,  535 

Xv/xatVojuai,  487 
Xv7r6(i>,  632 
XucriTeXei,  400 

\vTp6a,,  434,  538 
Xtirpmrijf,  480 
\vxvia,  39,  182 
XupfKOf,  182,  687 
XuDi,  96,  706 

MaySaKrjvrj,  146 
^aycvo),  488 
fiayos,  19,  515 

■  fta5ijT6vo),  82, 149,  523 

finSrjTfjs,  73 
liaBrjTpw,  496 
fiaKiipios,  33,  586 
fiaKpodeu,  187 
IJ,aKpodvp,ea>,  403,  760 
fiaxpos,  455 
fiakaKia,  31,  296 
/^aXXof,  682 
fiafiavas,  394 


501, 


fiavla,  589 
liaVTfioiMii,  532 
liapyapiTtjs,  49 
Itdprvp,  /JLiiprvs,  447,  665 
liaprvpia,  474 

M"o-Ti|,  175,  324,  573 

Mar^aior,  9 
pfyaXai;;(£'<»,  747 
fifyaXfla,  451 
^fyaXeioVi/r,  347,  685 
IteyaXojrpfTTTjt,  686 
/ifyoXwm,  264 

/ic'yas,  244,  295,  590 

fieyicTTdves,  193 
/le'^;;,  421 
pfi^wv,  71 

pe'Xfi,  48,  669 

pe'XXo,,  535,  575,  590,  683 

/xe/ii^i'potpof,  720 

flivTOl,  715 

fie'r-u,  157,  467 
lUpifiva,  668 
li.fpip.vaa>,  47 
lifpiCw,  72 
pe'por,  88,  550,  554 

p.e(njpfipia,  489 
fieaos,  84,  330 
/«ra,  234,  357 
pfTayto,  747 
)ifTa\ap0dva>,  457 
jtlfTn/ieXopal,  116 
fi€Tapop(f)6opnL,  99 
pfTavoew,  23,  116 
p.€Tdvoia,  116,  162 
fiiTa^v,  518 
p€T€(i)pl^upaly  371 
fifToxm,  299 
,ii7,  120 
p,rj8afiS>s,  499 
pi;8eis,  301,  341,  725 

fir/irore,  132 

/iijTi,  138,  317 
oil  ^17,  98,  103 


812 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


lirjKvvofiai,  183 
lirima,  416,  579 
fila,  558 
fiiatT^ia,  702 
fitaa-fios^  694 
liiKpds,  -oTcpos,  326 
liifitjTris,  653 
^lados,  697 
^ivdafia,  600 
fiva,  410 
jui/dofzac,  146 

fJLV^fUlf   186 

(ivrjjieiov,  53 
fivrifiT],  684 

flV7J(TT€V0fiaij   12 

fioyiXdXof,  204 

fio'Siof,  39,  182.  243 
HoixaXi'r,  73,  699,  756 
/idXir,  591,  593 
ftoXi'i/o),  630 

HOVoffiBaXiios,  6,  161,  211 
liop(^r),  99 
fio<T}(Oiroi€a>,  481 

^iv^os,  685 
/xuXof,  103,  130 
/liupms,  367,  720 

fivpi^a,  226 

livpov,  328 

fiva-Tr}pLoi'f  78 
^vmn'd^oj,  681 
pwKcoyjr,  649 
li&pos,  698 
liapaiva,  38 
p,a>p6s,  38 

Nafiopator,  571 
vai,  102,  243 
TOdr,  29,  126,  143 
rapSos,  225 
vfaymr,  486 
veKpos,  559 
wor,  138 
Kfco/cdpos,  556 


w/o-Tfua),  44, 172,  288 
vTjcfxo,  636,  662 

VlTTTtOj  535 

vop.i^Q>j  530 

i/o/wico'f,  243,  302,  326 

vopLupa,  121 
i/o/noStddo-KoXb;,  302 
vop.o6€Trjs,  757 
v6fiOs,  156 
roo-or,  31,  324 
fotrordf,  272 
focr^ifo/xat,  466 
vovBcTtai,  562 
vovve)(Qif,  220 

i/oiJff,  438 
vijUfn),  62 
wp(j)a)V,  172 
i/Cj/,  583,  705 
l/uo-rrifo),  131,  691 

leWfo),  540,  663 

§evo!,  663 
If'oTijr,  200 
irjpatva,  174,  640 

^uXoj;,  430,  534,  622,  649 

dSijyeo),  317 
oSds,  444,  492 
oSuraojuat,  244,  399 
d^di-v,  498 
o66mov,  499 
oiVfTiys,  395,  647 

OlKTIpa,  509 
OlKIJTlJploI/,    713 

olKobopica),  562 
oiKoi/d/xor,  391 

oricof,  367, 457 

oiKovpivr],  128,  266 
oiKTippLaiv,   762 
OKfeo),  496 

oXiyof,  589,  590,  632,  671,  673 

oXi'yur,  702 

dXoicXijpia,  462,  724 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


813 


SKoxKripos,  724 
oXoXvfo),  759 
ofuXia,,  559,  583 

6lii){Krj,  701 
Ofivvai,  6 
onoBvfiaSov,  448 
oiioionaOrjs,  522,  764 

OjUOlOCO,   520 

6/ioicos,  649 

OfioXoyeo),  51,  61,  84 
ofioTexvos,  547 
Ofto^paiv,  652 
^yap,  7 
OVlKOf,   103 

Si/o^ia,  103,  105,  149 
giToir,  702 
3|of,  145 
ojTij,  751 
ojricre),  849,  714 

oTrXifo/ioi,  621,  658 

OTTT-aKojuai,  443 

STTTOfim,  424,  437,  480 

OTTCOS,  463 

opa/na,  101,  480 
Spaais,  452 
opyi^Ofiai,  391 
op^OF,  520 
op^pifffl,  421 
opBpivos,  435 
Sp^por,  433,  469 
op(95s,  204 
Spia,  107,  519 
6pKiC<o,  161, 187 

OpKOS,  84 

opfiaajf  187,  335 

opMi  519,  747 
gpi/if,  126 

6po6ca-ia,  545 
Spor,  33 
6pvir(rco,  117 
Of,  108 

do'IOTT/S',  265 

o<Tos,  336,  496, 525 


So-Tif,  82,  119,   182,  218,  368,  429, 

484,  503,  645,  689,  758 
Srav,  216,  724 

Stc,  112,  169,  219,  258,  262,  320 
oi,  50,  120 
ova,  232 
oiaL,  717 
ouSei's,  750 
oipdvios,  6 
ovpavos,  23 
o^Toy,  528 
ovTaii,  39,   140 

oex',  292,  317 
ot^fiXfVi/f,  106,  374 

6(peiXripa,  43 
3^eiXa>,  107,  124 
o(^eXoff,  743 
d0(?aX^dj,  203 

o0pus,  293 

d;(XeOjLtat,  308 
d;^Xo7rote'a),  537 

SxXos,  220,  445 
o^jrdpLov,  285 
o-\jfifios,  761 
dyjrwviof,  285 

TraytSfu'a),  121 
iradrjTos,  589 
7rai8Ei;«,  428,  571 
ffaiSiov,  65 
naiSliTKrj,  510 
TTaTf,  22,  263,  338,  461 
TrdXtw,  29 
jrapw\r]6ei,  429 
7rai/5o;^eToi',  356 
Trai'OTrXi'a,  362 
Ttavovpyla,  415 
TrdvTG)?,  292 

TTopd,  42,  642 

napa^aivoi,  86,  447 
Trapa/SdXXo),  559 
TTapd^acns,  44 
wapa^dTrjs,  742 


814 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


•napa^ia^ofiai,  436 

irapa^okij,  14l 

TrapayyeXiaf  470 

TrapayyAXo),  301,  443,  470 

napayivofiai,  23 

•7rapdd€i(T0Sj  431 

jrapaSi8ti)/ii,    30,   67,    136,    138, 

252,  648 
Trapdbo^os^  303 
■jTapaOeapecOf  474 
7rapaiT€0p.aLy  380 
TrapaKade^opai,  357 
jrapaKaXco),  107 
7rapdK\r](riSi  313,  495 
TrapaKXijros,  314 
napaKoKovBeai,  235,  258 
TrapaKovcij,  190 
TrapaKviTTO),  635,  734 
TrapaXa/x^at/ci),  28,  99,  535 
TTapaXeyo^ai,  247 
TrapaXXay^,  731 
TrapaXoyifo/Liat,  734 
TrapaXuo/xai,  302,  488 
TrapaXuTiKOf,  302 
Trapavofieo},  575 
•^rapauopla,  700 
TrapaTropevop,ai,  \l'2i,  210 
Trapanrtapa,  44 
irapaTt]peo),  174 
7rapaTr]pr}(rts,  401 
TrapaTiOripi,  340,  528,  536,  664 
7rapa(ppovLa,  701 
Ttapaxpfipa,  116,  264 
7rap«/i(,  141,  681,  683 
Trapeio-ayo),  689 
irapeicraKTos,  689 
irapeia-Svva,  712 
napfia-fjjepoi,  678 
irapf/i/SoX^,  568 
7rapevo)(\etti,  525 
7rap€7ri.dT]poi,  627 
Trdpetrtp.  764 
napi^a,  570 


188, 


Trapdeuos,  18 
irapitTTrifU,  442 

TrapOLKiU),  484 

rrdpoiKoSf  645 
Trapoipia,  74 
irapo^vvopxii,  588 
napo^vtrfios,  528 
napovaia,  127,  685 
napo'^is,  125 
irapprjfTLa)  454 
ji-as,  289,  641 
TracTX",  225 
7ra(r;^a).  189 
7rar,;p,  123,  279,  750 
TTaTpidpxqs,  454 
TrarpoTTaptiSoros,  688 
Trarpwos,  581 
TraxvvD^ai^  78 
nedrif  186 
TTcSti/ds,  308 
rrfffuo),  559 
'Tffni  85 
ir^iOapx^a,  471,  595 

TTfMo,,  148,  414,  472,  589 

Trnpa^m,  468 

7r«pa(rpOT,  48,  632,  663,  724 

n"€jU7ra>,  646 

TTiVrjS,  36 

TTfi/flfo),  36,  757 
7rei'i;)(pdff,  36 
fffpi,  517,  578 
Treptatpeo),  596 
TreptdTTTO),  426 
irepiao-TpdnToi,  492 
nepipXinm,  190 
ncpUpyos,  553 
TTcptepxopaij   552 

71-ept/x",  299,  578,  643 
nepiKeifim,  599 
TtepiKpaTrjs,  593 

nepiKpVTTTO),  258 

irepipeva,  443 
'  TTCpioxri,  491 


INDEX  OP  GREEK  WORDS. 


815 


ircptTrareo,  171,  303,  366,  460,  669 

TrepiTriVro),  724 
TrepiTTOuopai,  562 

7r€pt7rOlT](TlSf  644 

wtpippriywiu,  298,  583 
Trepurndoiiai,  357 
7repitr<reta,  783 
7Tcpi(T(Teva>,  388 
nepuraos,  197 
TTCpilTTfpa,  25,  272 
irepiTl6rjp.i,  117 
irepiTpenio,  589 
ircpKJlepia,  197 
TTfreivov,  848 
TTfVpa,  91 
HeVpov,  91,  627 
TTijyai'oi',  365 
JTTjyij,  701 
TTiySaXioK,  747 
irfipa,  350 
TTldftO,  459 
TTtefo),  316 

irip.npaiiai,  598 
irivaxidiov,  264 
niva^,  84,  365 
n-.Vro),  224,  819,  353,  362,  398 

TTtOTfUQI,   535 
TTlOTtKOS,   225 

TT.Vr.s,  125,  241,  462,  475,  679 
TrXai/affl,  127,  218,  649,  699 

TrXaw;,  147 
TrXai/os,  147 
TrXaoTof,  690 
TrXareta,   380 
TrXficov,  73,  364 
TrXfioToy,  114 
n-Xeofff  a,  690,  699 
n-Xijy^,  175,  355 
n\r)6iva>,  127,  473 
jrX^(9a),  120 
irkrjpjxipa,  318 
TrXj?!/,  66,  142,  412 
7rKr]po(l)ope<o,  252 


TrXijpdo),  6,  344,  745 
7r\rjpo)fia,  196 
7rXi;a-toi',  42 
TrXotdptoi',  297 
nXoiov,  297 
ffXoucrioJS,  682 
TrXuKo),  297 

OT-eO^ia,  241,  262,  657, 663 

nviya,  106 

TTVO^,  448 

irodev,  377 

TTou'o),  133,  172,  176,  184,  226,  263, 
712,  742,  757,  763 

nolrjo-is,  785 
7ro«iXor,  632,  724 
TToifiaivm,  20,  562,  665,  718 

noip,vrjj  269 

■^oUs,  122,  131,  218,  315,  434,  484, 

579,  648,  758 
»roXirdp;(?)s,  247,  537 
TToXiTevofiai,  574 
TToXXot  (ol),  127 
TToXiJs,  220 
■iro\v(T7r\ayxvos,  762 
7ro\vTe\rfS)  650 
TTOvripia,  202 
iTovj]pAs,  286,  324 
TTOpeia,  728 

TTopfuofim,  7,  64,  234,  657,  659 
nopBiio,  498 
nop<f)vpa,  396 

TTOTlfo),  145 
TTOTOr,  661 
Trpaypa,  105 
Trpayfiarfvofjuiif  410 
jrpaLToipiov,  7 
irpaKTiop,  374 
irpatriai,  196 
7rpda"0"6),  283 
TTpavs,  37 

wpea-^VTfpiov,  426,  571 
Trpca-^irepos,  523 
irprjvrjs,  446 


816 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


Trpoaya,  148 
irpoavKwv,  229 
npo^aivm,  254,  276 
irpo^aTov,  58 
7rpo(3i/3afiB,  84,  556 
jrpo^'Kripa,  74 
7rpoyivunTK(ti)  639 
7rp6yvQ)(TtS)  628 
7rpoypd(f)a},  713 
Trp66fcnt,  173,  505 
7rpo6vp.Q>S)  666 
irpoKiifxai.,  714 
TrpoKrjpijaa'to^  463 
7rpo\ap^dva>,  226 
■trpopapTvpo/iai,  634 
jrpovota,  580 
Trpoopdco,  453 

TTpOTrejUTTO),  524 

irpoTreTTjs,  557 
npos,  108 
irpotrd^^arov^  232 
TTpotral/aXiVKo),  336 
npofrhiopai^  545 
TrpoaSexPH'^h  ^81 
wpoo-SoKdo),  598,  707 
TTpoaBoKta,  420 
jrpoo-eyyifo),  169 
irpocrepyd^ofuu,  411 
Trpoaep^opai,  7,  642 

npoaev^n,  457,  530,  662,  764 
wpoirevxopm,  534,  764 
7rpo(r^XuToff,  518 
npocTKaipos,  79 
npocr<aK€opm,  456 
wpocTKapTfpea,  444,  474 
7rpo(r/cf0aXaiov,  185 
7rpo<TK\rjp6opaif  536 
TrpotTKVveo},  148,  500 
irpotrXap^dvco ,  97 
jrpoa-pevw,  205 
npoiTOpfii^opai,  197 
STpoVireiKor,  498 
Trpoanrjywfu,  453 


rrpoCTTriVro),  333 
7rpo(nrot€Opai,  436 
TTpoa'pTjyvvpt,  298,  318 
wpoa-Tldripi,  286,  414,  508,  518 
npotTfjidTms,  547 
7rpoa<j>aiV€(i>,  429 
Trp6(ryjfa\ja),  244,  366 
7rpo(Tai7ro\T]p7rTe<o,  742 

7rpO(TCii7To\r]p7TTTJS,    502 

npoaainoXrjyjfia,  736 

)7p<5<rcon-ov,  217,  463,  483,  517,  720, 

728,  734 
irpoTdatTop.ai,  545 
TTpOTeivoi,  574 
irpoTpinop.ai,  550 
7rp6(j)a(ris,  595 
irpotjiriTrjs,  325 

TrpotprfTLKOSf   686 

■jTpo(f>rjTis,  276 
npo(f)&dvijj  102 
irpo)(ei.pi(opaL,  572,  588 
7Tpoj(^eipoTOV€op.ai,  503 
Trpwt,  110 

TTpOiipOS^    761 

TrpuTOKXttria,  123,  220 

jrpfflTof,  234,  441,  529,  598 

7rpQ)TO(TTaT7;v,  580 

TTTaio),  682,  746 

TTTepuyioi',  28 
Trn/TOi',  348 
TTToeopaL,  418 

TTTOIJlTir,   651 

wri5(T(r<i),  290 
ffTi^a,  129,  233 
rrrojcrtr,  275 
TTTooxos,  36,  221,  739 

iTvypfi,  198 

nu'^oji/,  531 

TTUKVO^',   304 

TrijXi;,  50 

ffuXti./,  398,  522 
TrOp,  747 
TTupyor,  117 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


817 


wvpeo-crto,  52 
TTvperos,  295,  599 
mpuxTis,  663 
TTapaxTis,  175 

pa(3/3i,  123 
pa^bliw,  533 
pathos,  58 
pa^hov)(os,  535 
pabiovpyloj  516 
pavTKTpos,  622,  628  ' 
pairl^O),  142 
pdmcrpa,  161,  229 

pa(^«,  6,  109,  161,  212,  244 

Pe/ic^df,  488 
peo),  6 
prjyfui,  319 
priywiJ.1,  50 

p^/ja,  260,  271,  416,  502,  641 

p7]ITtTa>,   209 

prjTiop,  579 
p<Ta,  245 
piiri^opat,  726 

pi'TTTco,  56,  89,  294,  400 

'Po'St;,  510 
poL^rjdoVf  706 
pop<f)aia,  276 

puMiy,  380,  492 

pvnaptaf  732 
pvrrapos,  739 
piinos,  658 
pavwiMaLj  527 

ad^ffarov,  o-d/3/3ara,  294,  444,  558 
crayrjvr],  81 

(TOKKOS,  351 

o-aXfi^o),  420,  453 
o-dXos,  419 
{raXmy^,  130 
fToKiri^ai,  42 
o-arrpos,  317 
<rd/a|,  759 

V^iVWpi,    132 

52 


tri^aapa,  542 
Sf^acTToy,  586 
tri^opni,  518 
Cfipos,  691 
0"ei(r/idy,  53 
creiu,  115,  284 
o-iXrfvia^npaL,  32,  101 
aqp^lov,  129,  206 
afjpepov,  90,  561 
(Ti)7ro,,  318,  759 
o-j/To/SpcoTor,  759 
o-^fwa),  672 
(Ttnycoi/,  315 
criKiipLos,  569 
(TiKspa,  256 
SiXouai/d?,  672 

VlpiKtvOiOV,  552 

(TW'fia)!',  228,  432 

(TLVld^W,  423 
cnrtordi-,  120 
(TiToperpiov,  372 

(TITOS,  423 

o"((07rdQ),  185 
o-KavSaKi^a,  41,  64 
crxdi'SaXoi',  41,  98 

(T/cdTTTCi),  318 

(rKd<f)7],  593 

ITK€Vrj,  595 

o-KeCof,  72,  180,  492,  594,  651 
o-Kiji-^,  100,  395 
(rKT;po7roid?,  547 
o-KTjvaipa,  483,  683 

<rK\r,p6s,  133,  720,  747 

fTKKriporpd-)(rjKos,  484 
o-KoXidr,  456,  621,  647 

(TKOTeiVOS,   74 

UKvdpanros,  44,  434 

(TKijXXa),  56, 190 

tTKaXrjKo^pmTos,  512 
irpvpvi^opai,  231  • 

aopos,  323 
o-di,  134 
o-ouSdfiioc,  243,  411 


818 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


(To^i'^ci),  685 
€ro<f)6sy  752 
o"7rapao"(ro),  165 
a"irapyav6(o^  268 
CTraTaXao),  760 
(rndpa,  231,  319,  568 

<T7Tf'ipa>i  76,  79 

aireKovhaTOip,  194 
cTTrfp^oXo-yos,  539 
CTTev&iMi  707 

OTTlXaf,  717 

ffTTtXoff,  698 
<rfl'iXaa>,  722,  74S 
trirXayxva,  265 
o'7rXayx>"X°^'"i  205,  323 
<r7rofio5,  351 
trnopa,  640 
viTopipa,  70 
<rrrdpos,  183 
airovdaitoif  320 
<r?rou$jy,  712 
(Twvpis,  85,  494 
VTorrfp,  102 
oraupdff,  62 
■(rTa<j>vKi],  318 
■orevd^Q),  762 
<TTev6s,  50 
uTfpeos,  670 

o-Tfpedo),  459,  528 
<TT((jiavos,  667,  728 

ST€<^ai/os,  487 
CTTrjpiypos,  708 

<TTTipi(a,,  423,  625,  672,  683 
oTt/3df,  214 

OTiy/jij,  288 
o-T-i'XjSu;,  208 
crroi)(eiov,  706 
(TToixfio,  566 
(TToXij,  389 
o-TOfia,  104,  419 
fTTpdrevfia,  120 
(rrparfvopai,  283,  755 
o-rpaTijyds,  246,  422,  532 


arparia,  270 
i7TpaTii>Tr)s,  578 
aTp(^\6a,,  621,  708 
(rrp€(t>ai,  50,  103 
arpovBioVf  61 
(TTpavwfjLi,  227,  495 
o-Tuyi/dfo),  90,  212 
(ruyyev^ff,  260 
(TvyKaBriixm,  228 
fftry/caXvTTTo/iai,  368 
(TvyKaTaTi6ep.M,  432 
<TvyKarw\rT}<^i^oyuu,  4A7 
avyKivea,  476 
(TvyKopi^to,  487 
avyKvnTo),  375 
(TvyKvpia,  355 
(n;yx«<»,  567 
(rvy;fui'a),  449 
<rv(rjTe'o),  165 
avKOfiopeaf  401,  408 
(TVKOipavTeo),  284,  409 
(rvWap^dva,,  258,  299 
(TvXXoyi^o^ui,  414 
(TuXXvfffO/iiai,  174 
a-vp^aivo},  569,  663 
iTvpfidWrn,  271,  382,  550 
o-i/(ij3i/3cif<i),  493 
avpva6r]s,  652 
trvpiriiTTai,  319 

cu/jTrXijpdo),  333,  348,  448 

(TvpTTviyu),  181,  336 
avpiropevopat,  434 
trvpiroa-uif  195 
avpirpecr^ijTcpos,  664 
<rvp<f)vopai,  245,  330 
(Tvp^aveo),  104,  468 
(Tvpf^tovia,  390 
(TvpylrT}(l3i^a)  J  553 
(Tuv,  434,  481 
(rui/dyw,  136,  180,  369 
(Turayoiyij,  321,  737 
irwaipw,  106 
cruraKoXovdciu,  432 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


819 


<rvva\i^ofxai,  443 
mivavriKanffavofLai,  358 
avvairdyoiiai,  708 
fruvapwa^a,  333,  477,  556 
<rvv8e(rfios,  489 
(Tvvebpiov,  469 
<rvveiSov,  509 
trvvtiSriais,  647,  653 
(rui/cK^ij^af,  556 
miveKavvai,  480 
(nivepyito,  745 
trCve^is,  219,  278 
iTweTos,  67,  515 
(TVVfvdoKfai,  867,  573 
(Tvvevoi^eoputf  698 

<rvv('x<".  32,  244,  295,  335,  485,  547, 
599 

o-wvflXao/jai,  119,  415 
irvvirifu,  80 
avviarriju,  704 
avvohia,  277 
avvoxTj,  419 
ffViTtXeta,  6,  150 
o'UiTeXf  CD,  289 
<rvvTTjpetit,  193,  271 

<TVVTL6r]fllj  581 

{TVVTOfues,  580 

avvrplfia,,  187,  291,  346 
(rivrpocjios,  514 
frviTuyxffi'M,  332 
{TwapotTla,  576 
uvpTis,  594 
irvfTirapaatTw,  347 
(rv<TiTrjfiou^  228 
<ruoTa<ria(jT^s,  230 
crucrTcXXoj,  467 
rvarpo^j],  557,  576 
(Tvcrxil^oTl^oiiai,  99,  636 
<T(f)ayfi,  760 
(r(f>payt^a),  147 
(Ttjyvpovj  459 
o-XWO)  99 

(Txife  156,  163,  305 


o-fflfo),  309,  458 

(Toin/pia,  465 
trci<Ppov€iij,  662 

TOKTOf,    511 

raXatTrojpcQ),  757 
raXaiTTupia,  759 
ra/xctov,  43,  368 
raTTMi'ds,  68,  727 
Ta7r€ivo<l>poavvTj,  68 
TajTciv6<l)paiV,  652 
Taireiuaais,  727 

TiipdtTfTUi,  653 

TapTapotOi  691 
Ta'cro-o),  321 
TO^or,  7,  125 

ToxiKos,  683,  690 
reixof,  494 
TfKpfjpiOV,  442 
TSKVOV,  636 

WXfior,  724,  735 
TfXetdo),  378 
reXeioij,  636 
Tf\e<T(l)opfa>,  331 
T-eXfurdo),  56,  87,  200 
T-eXfO),  741 

reXos,  102,  402,  424,  762 
rcXd>i/i;s,  282 
reXdiKtoi',  55 
Te'pof,  129,  452 
T«r<rapdKOVTa,  443 
TfTapros,  502 
Terpdnovs,  499,  750 
T€<f>p6a>j  693 
Tf^"''''?!,  554 

rriKoiiat,  707 
TijXauyms,  207 

r77pe<D,  144,  584,  631,  692,  694 
Tr)pr)(ns,  464,  469 
tMij^j,  183,  467 

t'iktio,  729 

riXXifl,  172,  306 
rtft^',  599,  643 


820 


INDEX  OF  GREEK   WORDS. 


TLfiLos,  561,  678 
Tis,  732 

TOKOS,  134,  411 
roX/idw,  233 

ToXflrjTTjS,  695 
TOTTOS,   585 

Toa-ovTos,  468 
t6t€,  705 
rpanc^a,  411 
rpaire^LTTjSj  134 
TpavfJLaTl^at,  414 
rpfficn,  695 
Tpi/3of,  280 

TpOTTT],  732 
TpOTTO<pOpe(Of  517 

Tpo-)(6s,  748 

rpi^Xiov,  138,  227 

TpvTTrjp,a,  109 

Tpvcfyda^f  760 

Tpu^i7,  325,  698 

Twyxo"'".  355,  552,  591,  597 

Ti/TTOff,  578,  666 

TUTTTtU,   575 
TXI0\oS,    681 

TV^oojiai,  245 
TvcjxaviKos,  593 

v^pl^a,  366 

f;/3pts,  591,  595 
iryialvai,  245,  304 
vSpamiKos,  378 
vSfflp,  504 
itrdf,  597,  761 
vi'ds,  11,  172 
a,,  747 
viivia^  534 
iirdyoi,  743 
VTTnKOTI,  636,  639 
vmtp^is,  457 

iTrdpx".  325,  459,  485,  681,  743 

iiTrfpfi'Sci),  546 
inreprjcjiavia,  203 
iiwipoynos,  702 


vrrepaov,  4AA 

vnexat,  715 

VTTTjpeTeuif  582 

imrip^rris,  41,  252,  292,  515 

ivrd,  189,  331,  686,  714 
irTTo/SuXXo),  476 
VTToypa/zudy,  648 
UTrdfietyfia,  693 
VTroSeiKWULj  282,  563 
VTrode^ofiat^  357 
VTTO^CyiOV,  114,   700 
v7ro^(ovvvp,ij  694 

XJTTOKpLVOpXLlf   415 
VTTOKpLTTjS,    124 

VTroXafi^dvo),  328,  354 

UTToXljytOI',  216 

v7ro\tp7rdvQ3,  648 
VTTopevai,  762 
mopLOvfi,  679,  761 
{movoia,  517,  595 
ijroTrXf'm,  247,  591 
iiTroo-Tt'XXco,  560 
VTroa-Tperjio),  432 
viTOo-Tpoyvvvpi,  412 

in-oTdo-o-m,  279,  646,  650,  756 

ii7ro;^a)p£m,  301 

UTTWTTtdfa),  402 

varepetM3,  386 
ia-Tepripa,  417 
varrepav,  234 
^^;'o^,  727 

^aiVm,  21,  129 
0ai/fpdm,  182,  639 
(jlauepas,  497 
<pdvTao-pa,  86 
(^.ipnyl,  281 
(pdrvij,  268 
<l>av\ot,  754 

qieyyof,  223,  364 

<^fpo,  448,  593.  636,  686,  688 

*^Xi^,  588 

*ijoTos,  583 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


821 


<l>6avu>,  72 
»f>eiyyofLai,  700,  702 
(jieetpa,  697 

tpBlVOTTtopiVOS,   718 

<t>eop<i,  696,  697 

<j)i\ade\(liia,  680 
(t)t\dSe\<pos,  652 
(f>iKav6pwnia,  597 
<f>CKav6pima>s,  590 
<j>CKa.pyvpos,  395 
<i>iKea>,  315 
*iX4mros,  178 
<i>CKoveiitia,  423 

(^i^do),  121,  122,  165, 185,  294,  621, 

646 
^Xoyi'fo),  748 
<^o/3f'o;uai,  263 

CJiO^TJTpOV,    418 

^d^oy,  457,  650 
^oi/fOf,  461,  570 
(j)6vos,  491 
^dpos,  243,  415 

(pOpTL^OD,    67 

(^payfXXdai,  7 
<l>payfi6sf  117,  381 
<l>p€ap,  378 

<ppL(T(T(a,    14Ai 

^poveo),  98 
^povritTis,  256 
ippovifios,  60 
(fipovifias,  393 
<f)povpea,  631 
<l)pvd(r(7cOi  466 
(fipvyauov,  597 

<^u\aK^,  82,  269,  509,  657 

<f)v\aKTripiov,  122 

^uXdb-o-o),  269,  334,  692 

<j)V(nK6s,  696 

^v(rtKS)s,  717 

(^uVis,  749,  750 

^ilo),  245,  329 

0(<>Xcdf,  53 

^(01/^,  162,  449,  686 


(^Sf,  229,  274,  535,  731 
(j)a)(T(j)6pos,  688 
<l>ayrfiv6s,  47 

Xaipe,  ;(aipeT€,  ;(aipE(i',  148,  526,  619, 

723 
xaXdo),  297, 594 

;^aXf7rdt,  54 
;^aXii/a'ya)y6a),  736 
;^aAii/o'f,  746 
Xa\Kiuv,  200 
XaX/cdf,  58,  220 
X«P«.  723 
Xdpaypa,  545 

xaplCofim,  324,  327,  462,  584 
X<ipw,  241,  259,  292,  683,  629 

Xdpia-pa^  662 
XapiTOm,  259 
Xdap-a,  399 
XeLp-OiVf  90 

Xfi'PonoitjTos,  484,  544 

XfipoToveo},  523 
Xiypa,  221 
;(tXtdSfr,  382 
X^Xiapxas,  193,  568 

XtTOHV,   41 

XKapvs,  144 
;^XEUofa),  546 
XoipoSj  49 
X0X.7,  489 
Xoprjyeo},  663 
Xoprd^to,  38 
Xdpracrpa,  478 

xpm"'  466 

XPVP-ari(a>,  21,  273,  506 

XP^<tt6s,  70,  642 

XP^TTOTrjS,   70 

XpttTTiai'df,  506 
Xpio-rdt,  10,  438 
Xpovos,  443 
Xpovorpi^ecOt  560 
Xpvtriov,  459,  638 
;^/3ucro6aKruXtos,  738 


822 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 


p^poif,  552 

Xa)pa,  760 
^aipeo),  705 
X-Jopis,  744 
xi>pos,  592 

i^dXXto,  763 

\jffv8a8M(TKa\os,  688 
^evSop.ai,  467 
yfrtj^acpaca,  437 
^jfTjipiCa),   381 
\(rrj(llos,  588 

(/fl^X'j.  98,  219,  262,  307 


^frixo/tM,  127 
^a>ya>,  306 

&8c,  84 
ASi'i/,  223,  453 
wpvonai,  621,  669 
'Gcravvd,  115 

io-f/,  25,  449 
&<TTf,  732 
urdpiov,  228 
in'oK,  141,  426 
<2>0eXea),  294 


