Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


unniiiiiiiiii 

.IDS  aiS   7Ii 


v- 


tu 


@ 


WORD   STUDIES 


IN  THB 


NEW  TESTAMENT 


BY 


MARVIN  R.  VINCENT,  D.D. 


•ALBwnr  raorsnoB  op  sacsb>  utbkatukb  oc  union  niaoLOGiCAL  ssMWiiBV 

NBW  YOBK 


VOLUME  IT. 

THE  WRITINGS  OF  JOHN 

THE  GOSPEL 

THE  EPISTLES 

THE  APOCALYPSE 


-  •■     •" 


■ 
■  • 


>•  •  • 

■ 


'*11ie  toorit  thit  I  hste  tpokfln  onto  yon  an  iplrlt,  and  an  Ufs.* 


NEW  YORK 
CHARLES   SCRIBNER'S   SONS 

1905 


•     •     • 
I  • 


1/773 


•  **  CorVUGHT,    iteB     BY 

,•»:  CHARLES  SCRIBN£R*S  SONS 


•  ••••     ••••. 

•  ■  •      ..  .. ' 


•  «  •   •      •  •  •  •  • 

•  •   •   •        ••< 


• 


•      •• ••  • 


•  •• 


•  •• 


•      .>«..     ••••• 


•  •••  • 


•  ■ 


•••   • 
•     ••,    •     • 

.    :  • 


•••••  ••••• 

•        •• *•  • 

•••••  ••••• 

•        •  • 

•• •  ••_ 


• 


•  ••• 

•  •  •• 


•  •  •• 


•  ••• 

•        • 
•••• 

•  •  •• 


LIST  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITIOlfS, 


Ackermanii,  C  :  The  ChriBtian  Element  in  Plato  and  the  Platonic 
Philosophy,     Tranfilated  by  S,  R.  Asbury.     Edinburgh,  1661. 

Alexander,  W.  ;  Co  m  in  en  tar j  on  the  Epistles  of  John,  Speaker's 
Commentary.     New  York. 

Bigg,  Charles  :  The  Clirifltiau  Platoniats  of  Alexandria.  Biuuplon 
Lectures  for  1886.     Oxford,  1886. 

Bleek,  Friedrich :  An  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament. 
Trauslflted  by  W.  Urwick.     2  voIh.     Edinburgh,  1883. 

Bleek,  Friedrich  :  Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse.     London,  1875. 

Crowe,  J,  A.,  and  Cavaicaselle,  G.  R  :  The  Early  Flemish  Paint- 
era.     2d  edition.     London,  1872. 

Curtius,  Oeorg ;  Principles  of  Qreek  Etymology.  5tli  edition. 
Translated  by  A.  S.  Wilkins  and  K  B.  England.     London,  188G. 

Cumming,  John  :  Lectures  on  the  Seven  Cliui'chea  of  Asia  Minor. 
London,  1852. 

Delitzsch,  Franz :  Bin  Tag  in  Capernaum.     Leipzig,  1873. 

Duffield,  8amuel  W. :  English  Hymns,  their  Authors  and  Historjr. 
New  Tork,  1886. 

Duaterdieck,  Friedrich :  Rritisob  Eiegetiaches  Haudbucb  Ubei 
die  Offenbarung  Johannis.     Giittingen,  1859. 

Ebrard.  John  H.  A.  :  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  John. 
Translated  by  W.  B.  Pope.     Edinburgh,  1860. 

Elliott,  E.  B, :  Uorte  Apocalyptics;.  5th  edition.  4  vols.  Lon- 
don, 1862. 

Ewtvld,  Heinrich :  The  History  of  Israel.  Translated  bj  J.  E. 
Carpenter.     5  vols.     London.  1874-78. 


%?.(oZ0 


tr  UST  OF  AUTHORS  AJSm  BDITION& 

Field,  Frederick :  Otium  Norvicense.     Oxford,  1881. 

Forbiger,  Albertus :  P.  Yirgilii  Maronis  Opera.  3  vola.  Leipsi(\ 
1852. 

Fisher,  George  P. :  Beginnings  of  Christianity.    New  Tork,  1877. 

Ford,  James :  The  Gospel  of  John  illustrated  from  Ancient  and 
Modem  Author&     London,  1852. 

Ginsburg,  Christian  D. :  CoheletL     London,  1861. 

Godet,  F. :  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St  John.  Translated 
by  Crombie  and  Cusin.     3  vol&     Fdinburgh,  1876. 

Holtzmann,  Heinrich  Julius :  Die  Pastoralbriefe.    Leipzig,  1880. 

Huther,  John  Edward :  Kritisch  Exegetisches  Handbuch  aber 
die  drei  Briefe  des  Johannes.     Gdttingen,  1855. 

Lee,  William :  The  Revelation  of  St  John.  Speaker's  Commen 
tary.     New  York. 

Luthardt,  Christoph  Ernst :  St  John  the  Author  of  the  Fourth 
GospeL  Bevised  and  Translated  by  Caspar  Ben^  Gregoiy.  Edin- 
burgh, 1875. 

Macdonald,  James  M. :  The  Life  and  Writings  of  St  John. 
New  Tork,  1877. 

Milligan,  William  :  The  Bevelation  of  St  John.  Baird  Lecture 
for  1885.     London,  1886. 

Milligan,  William :  Commentary  on  the  Bevelation  of  John. 
SchafTs  Popular  Commentary.     New  Tork,  1883. 

Milligan,  William,  and  Moulton,  William  F. :  Commentary  on 
St.  John's  GospeL  SchaflTs  Popular  Commentary.  New  Tork, 
1880. 

Meyer,  Heinrich  A.  W. :  Critical  and  Exegetical  Handbook  to 
the  Gospel  of  John.  Translated  by  Urwick  and  Crombie.  Edited 
by  A.  C.  Kendrick.     New  Tork,  1884. 

Milman,  Henry  Hart :  History  of  Latin  Christianity.  8  vols. 
New  Tork,  1860. 

N&gelsbach,  Carl  Friedrich  von :  Homerische  Theologie.  Ntlm- 
berg,  1884. 

Neale,  J.  M,  and  Littledale,  B.  F.:  Translations  of  the  Primitive 
Liturgies.     3d  edition.    London. 


UBT  OF  AUTHORS  AND  EDITION& 

Pltunpiare,  E.  H. :  The  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Ohnrches  of 
Expositor.    First  Series.    Vols.  II,  IH 

Flumptre,  R  H. :  The  Commedia  and  Canzoniere  of  Dante  Ali- 
ghierL    A  New  Translation.    2  vol&    Boston,  1887. 

Bitter,  Heinrich:  History  of  Ancient  Philosophy.    Translated 
by  A.  J.  W.  Morrison.    4  voLs.    London,  1846. 

Sears,  Edmund  H. :  The  Fourth  Gospel  the  Heart  of  Christ 
Boston,  1874. 

Sophodes,  R  A. :  Greek  Lexicon  of  the  Boman  and  Byzantine 
Periods,  from  &a  146  to  jljk  1100.    Boston,  1870. 

Spiess,  Edmund  :  Logos  Spermatic6s.    Leipzig,  1871« 

Trench,  Bichard  0. :  Ck>mmentary  on  the  Epistles  to  the  Seven 
Churches  in  Asia.     New  York,  1864 

Yaughan,  Bobert  Alfred:   Hours  with  the  Mystic&    London. 
2  vols.     3d  edition.     1879. 

Westcott^  Brooke  Foss :  Commentaiy  on  the  Gospel  of  John. 
Speaker's  Commentary.    New  Tork,  1880. 

Wetstein,  John  J. :  Novum  Testamentum  Grseoum,  with  various 
readings  and  oommentaxy.    2  vols.    Amsterdam,  176L 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


A.  V.     Authorized  Version. 
Apoc.     Apocalypse. 
Cit     Cited. 
=     Equivalent  to. 
Expn.     Explanation. 
Lit     Literally. 

Rev.     Revised  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
Rev.  O.  T.     Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament 
Sept     Septmigint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament 
Sqq.     Following. 
Synop.     Synoptist& 
Tex.  Rec.     Received  Text 

Tynd.     Tyndale  s  Version  of  the  New  Testament 
Vulg.     Vulgate  or  Latin  Translation  of  the  New  Testament 
Wye.    Wycliffe's  Version  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  phrase  ''only  here  in  New  Testament"  refers  to  Ghreek 
words  only. 


WRITINGS  OF  JOHN. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  life  of  John  covere  a  period  from  near  the  beginaing  of 
the  first  ceaturj  to  tlie  begitming  of  the  second.  He  was  a 
native  of  Gahlee,  and,  according  to  tradition,  of  the  town  of 
Betlisaida,  which  was  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Lake,  not 
far  from  Capernaum  and  Chorazin.  Ilis  father  was  Zebedee. 
His  mother,  Salome  (Mark  xvi.  1 ;  Matt.  xx.  20),  wat,  among 
the  women  who  supported  the  Lord  with  their  substance  (Luke 
viii.  3),  and  attended  Ilini  to  His  crucifixion  (Mark  xv.  40). 
The  family  was  not  wichont  world!)'  means.  Zebedee  was  a 
fisherman,  and  had  hired  servants  in  his  employ  (Mark  i.  20). 
Salome  ministered  to  Jesus,  and  John  seems  to  have  had  his 
own  house  (John  xix.  27).  He  was,  apparently,  one  of  the  dis- 
ciples of  John  the  Baptist ;  and  while  engaged  in  hia  father's 
craft,  was  found  and  called  by  Jesus  (Matt,  iv,  21 ;  Mark  i.  19). 
Of  the  two  mentioned  in  John  i.  35,  only  one,  Andrew,  is 
named  (John  i.  40) ;  the  other  is  commonly  supposed  to  have 
been  John,  who  suppresses  his  own  name,  as  in  other  instances 
where  he  refers  to  himself  (John  xiv.  23 ;  xviii.  15 ;  xix.  36  ; 
XX.  3,  4,  8  ;  XX!.  20).* 

As  soon  as  Jesus  was  made  known  to  him,  he  became  Hia 
enthusiastic  disciple.     His  peculiar  intimacy  with  our  Lord  ia 

*  That  he  namen  himself  in  the  Apocalypse,  nud  not  la  tba  Ootpel.  i*  anS- 
cieotlj  eiptuned  b;  th«  fact  that  the  Gospel  ia  hiHtorical.  inteoded  to  bring 
Chriat  Into  prominenoe  and  to  keep  the  writer  ont  of  view.  The  Apooaijpse, 
DD  the  other  hand,  ia  prophetic,  and  the  name  of  the  author  ia  required  aa  a 
Tonoher  for  (he  rcveUliona  gruited  him.     Compare  Dan.  vil.  IS ;  viii  ST. 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

marked  by  the  phrase  ^^  the  disciple  whom  Jesns  loved/'  and 
also  by  the  fact  that  he  was  one  of  the  three  chosen  to  be  with 
Ilim  at  certain  special  and  momentous  crises.  He  was  admitted 
to  the  death-chamber  of  the  raler^s  daughter  (Mark  v.  37)  and 
witnessed  her  restoration  to  life  ;  he  was  present  at  the  Trans- 
figuration (Luke  ix.  28),  and  with  Peter  and  James  was  chosen 
by  the  Master  to  bear  Him  company  during  His  agony  in  Geth- 
semane  (Mark  xiv.  33).  He  accompanied  Jesus,  after  His  ar- 
rest, into  the  palace  of  the  High  Priest,  and  secured  entrance 
for  Peter  (John  xviii.  15,  16).  He  stood  by  the  cross  with  the 
mother  of  Jesus,  and  to  his  care  Jesus  committed  her  (John 
xix.  25-27).  With  Peter  he  ran  to  the  sepulchre  on  tlie  morn- 
ing of  the  Besurrection  at  the  summons  of  Mary  Magdalene^ 
entered  the  empty  tomb,  and  saw  and  believed  (John  xx.  2-8). 
After  the  Resurrection  he  appears  engaged  in  his  former  em- 
ployment on  the  Lake  of  Galilee.  He  is  the  first  to  recognize 
the  risen  Lord  standing  upon  the  shore  (John  xxi.  7),  and  is 
the  subject  of  Peter's  inquiry,  ^^  Lord,  what  shall  this  man 
do  ? "  when  he  is  seen  by  Peter  to  be  following  Jesus  (John 
xxi.  20). 

His  apostolic  activity  was  in  the  first  thirty  years  after  the 
Ascension.  In  Jerusalem  his  position  among  the  apostles  was 
not  exceptionally  prominent.  At  the  time  of  the  Stephanie  per- 
secution he  remained  with  the  other  apostles  at  Jerusalem  (Acts 
viii.  1) ;  but  when  Paul,  three  years  after  his  conversion,  came 
to  that  city  (Gal.  1.  18),  he  met  there  only  Peter,  and  James 
the  Lord's  brother.  From  this,  however,  it  does  not  follow 
that  the  remaining  apostles  had  permanently  departed  from 
Jerusalem  and  settled  elsewhere.  In  Gal.  ii.  9,  Paul  alludes  to 
John  as  having  been  present  in  Jernsalem  at  the  time  of  the 
council  (Acts  xv.).  The  narrative  in  Acts  does  not  mention  him 
in  connection  with  the  council,  but  Paul,  in  the  Galatian  letter^ 
refers  to  him  as  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  church  with  Jamea 
and  Cephas. 

The  commonly  received  tradition  represents  him  as  closing 
his  apostolic  career  in  Asia  and  at  Ephesus.  An  old  tradition 
affirms  that  he  left  Jerusalem  twelve  years  after  the  death  of 
Christ.     In  no  case,  therefore,  did  he  go  immediately  to  Ephe- 


INTRODDCTnON.  3 

BUS.  Definite  notices  as  to  his  abode  in  the  interval  are 
wliolly  wanting.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  lives  of  so 
many  of  the  world's  leaders  include  spaces  which  remain  a 
blank  to  the  most  careful  biograplier,  and  into  which  the 
world's  cnriosity  can  never  penetrate,  Snch  is  the  period  of 
Paul's  retirement  in  Arabia,  of  Dante's  exile,  and,  to  some  ex- 
tent, of  Jesus'  temptation  in  the  wilderness.  Some  later  tra- 
ditions assert  that  he  visited  Parthia,  and  Jerome  gronndJessly 
conjectures  that  he  had  preached  in  Judiea.  Thei'e  is  some 
plausibility  in  the  supposition  that  he  may  have  betaken  him- 
self to  Antioch  at  the  time  of  Paul's  first  miesionary  journey. 
It  is  certain  that,  ranch  later,  John  was  a  successor  of  Paul  at 
EphesuB.  Neither  at  the  departure  of  Paul  to  Hiletus  (Acta 
zx.)  Dor  during  the  composition  of  the  Epliesian  letter  is  there 
ft  trace  of  John's  presence  at  Ephesus. 

Tradition  is  also  agreed  "that  John  was  banished  to  the  isle 
of  Patmos  by  the  Roman  authority.  Irenseus  says  that  he 
was  banished  in  the  reign  of  Domitian  :  another  tradition  as- 
signs the  exile  to  the  reign  of  Nero,  From  this  exile  he  was 
permitted  to  return,  it  is  said,  under  Nerva  (a.d.  96-98).  The 
date  of  his  death  is  unknown.  Jerome  places  it  sixty-eight 
years  after  the  death  of  Christ. 

The  dominant  characteristic  of  John^s  nature  is  contempla- 
tive receptivity.  Every  word  of  his  Lord  is  taken  into  his 
deepest  heart,  held  fast  and  pondered.  "Ho  does  not  ask, 
'  Wliat  shall  I  do  ? '  but '  What  does  lie  do  ) '  "  Hence  it  is 
clear  why  the  finest  and  subtilest  flavor  of  Jesus' personality 
has  been  caught  by  him.  With  this  receptiveness  goes  a  powf  r 
of  iinpartation.  "  Ei-ery  man,"  says  Ebrard,  "  can  see  the  fiun- 
aet-glow  on  an  Alp,  but  not  every  one  can  paint  it,"  John, 
like  a  mirror,  not  only  received  but  reflected.  While  the  other 
Evangelists  perceived  that  element  of  Jesus'  teaching  and  work 
which  produced  the  most  immediate  and  striking  outward  re- 
sults, as  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  for  instance,  John  discerned 
the  meaning  and  the  bearing  of  less  prominent  incidents,  such 
as  the  conversation  at  Jacob's  well.  Paul,  like  John,  has  the 
quality  of  inwardness,  hut  Paid  reasons  where  John  contem- 
plates.    John  is  tenacious  and  intense;   Paul  equally  so,  hul 


M 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

more  deft  than  Jolm.  John  broods  over  his  tbouglit;  Paul 
thrusts  and  parries  with  it. 

Vet  John  is  do  seDtimentalist.  He  is  not  the  lovely,  efFem- 
inate  youth  of  picture.  His  mental  and  moral  fibie  ia  atrong. 
lie  received  the  title  "  Son  of  Thunder  "  from  One  who  never 
misread  character.  Not  irascible,  as  some  have  too  hastily  in- 
ferred from  Luke  ix.  54,  he  illiistrales  the  peculiarity  of  many 
affectionate  and  contemplative  natures,  which  flash  into  a  start- 
ling impetuosity  on  occasions  which  appeal  to  their  more  radi- 
cal view  of  truth  and  to  their  longer  range  of  vision.  John 
was  incapable  of  haif-enthuaiasras  and  of  suspended  faith.  To 
whatever  he  addressed  himself,  he  was  totm  in  iliis.  In  his 
own  way,  he  is  no  less  plain-spoken  and  severe  than  Paul.  He 
ia  direct  where  Paul  is  sometimes  ironical.  He  is  neither 
gentle  nor  vague  in  his  language  concerning  those  who  deny 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  (1  John  ii.  22),  nor  concerning  the 
lineage  of  him  that  committeth  sin  (1  John  iii.  8)  and  the  moral 
quality  of  him  that  hateth  his  brother  (1  John  iii.  15  ;  iv.  20). 
In  the  Apocalypse  he  enters  with  profoundest  sympathy  into 
the  divine  indignation  against  evil,  and  conteniplatea  with  un- 
feigned joy  ita  wholesale  and  crushing  defeat  and  punishment. 
He  seema  to  cheer  the  progress  of  the  Conqueror  upon  the 
white  horse.  The  issues  between  truth  and  falsehood,  life  and 
death,  light  and  darkness,  love  and  hatred  are  stated  by  him 
with  a  stern  and  deeiaive  sharpness,  and  as  absolute  finalities. 
The  quality  of  sin  is  conceived  according  to  the  scale  of  his 
adoring  love  for  Christ.  He  deals  with  it  as  wickedness  rather 
than  as  weakness,  though  not  overlooking  the  latter.  For  him 
the  victory  of  the  Gospel  is  not  a  prophecy,  but  an  accom- 
plished fact.  Faith  oven-ometh  tlie  world.  The  overcoming 
Christ  is  already  present  in  every  believer. 

Such  a  character  would  not  have  been  adapted  to  Paul's 
work.  It  was  not  sufficiently  versatile  and  many-sided.  John 
had  not  Paul's  pioneer  instinct,  his  pushing  activity,  and  his 
executive  power,  lie  was  fitted  to  raise  the  superstructure 
rather  than  to  lay  foundations  ;  to  be  a  teacher  rather  than  an 
evangelist.  It  was  his  to  complete  the  teaching  of  the  other 
apostles  by  unfolding  the  speculative  mystery  of  the  incama- 


INTBODDCnON.  8 

tioD  and  iLe  secret  of  the  inward  union  of  the  believer  with 
Christ ;  to  puige  the  Cluirch  from  speculative  error,  and  to 
bold  up,  over  against  the  Gnostic  caricature,  the  true  image  of 
the  Son  of  Man. 

The  writings  ascribed  to  John  are  the  Gospel,  three  £pi»- 
tles,  and  the  Apocalypee  or  Ilevelation. 

THE  GOSPEL, 

The  nearly  unanimous  tradition  of  the  Church  BBsigns  the 
fourth  Gospel  to  John.  It  is  unquestionably  the  work  of  a 
Jew,  ati  eye-witness,  and  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  It  was  probably 
written  toward  tlie  close  of  the  first  century,  and  therefore  later 
than  the  other  three  Gospels.  According  to  the  earliest  evi- 
dence, it  was  composed  at  Ephesus,  at  the  request  of  John's 
intimate  friends,  who  desired  to  have  his  oral  teaching  recorded 
for  tlie  permanent  use  of  the  Church. 

There  are  three  theories  as  to  the  motive  of  its  composition. 
According  to  the  first,  known  as  the  "  supplementary  "  theory, 
John  wrote  the  fourth  Gospel  as  a  supplement  to  its  predeces- 
iors,  in  order  to  supply  what  was  wanting  in  the  synoptic 
narrative.  This  Gospel  is  indeed  supplementary  in  fact,  but 
not  in  motive.  It  is  supplementary  in  tliat  the  writer  con- 
stantly assumes  that  certain  facts  are  already  known  to  hia 
readers,  and  adds  other  facts  from  his  own  special  information. 
But  the  Gospel  itself  expressly  disclaims  all  intentiDii  to  be 
complete  (xxi.  25),  and  is  an  original  conception,  both  in  form 
and  substance,  having  a  distinct  plan  of  its  own,  and  present- 
ing a  fresli  aspect  of  the  person  and  teaching  of  our  Lord.  "It 
is  the  picture  of  one  who  paints,  not  because  others  have  failed 
to  catcb  the  ideal  he  would  represent,  but  because  bis  heart  ia 
full  and  he  mnst  speak." 

The  second  theory  is  that  the  Gospel  is  "  polemical "  or 
controversial,  designed  to  oppose  the  errors  of  the  Nicolaitanea 
and  of  Cerinthus.  But  the  Gospel  is  polemical  only  incident- 
ally, as  the  presentation  of  the  positive  truth  suggests  particu- 
lar points  of  error.  The  point  of  view  is  not  controversial. 
The  writer  is  moved  by  the  pressure  of  his  great  theme  to  set 


i 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

it  forth  in  its  positive  aspects,  and  not  with  special  reference  to 
the  errors  of  his  time. 

The  third  theory,  known  as  the  "irenic"  or  conciliatory, 
maintains  that  the  Gospel  was  intended  to  reconcile  divergent 
religious  views,  and  to  bring  into  their  right  relation  truths 
which  heresy  perverted.  The  Gospel  is  conciliatory  in  fact, 
not  from  definite  intent,  but  from  the  very  nature  of  the  sub- 
ject— the  Word  made  flesh,  in  which  all  religious  controversies 
are  reconciled.  ^^  Just  as  it  rises  above  controversy  while  it 
condemns  error,  it  preserves  the  characteristic  truths  which 
heresy  isolated  and  misused.  The  fourth  Gospel  is  the  most 
complete  answer  to  the  manifold  forms  of  Gnosticism,  yet  it 
was  the  writing  most  used  by  the  Gnostics.  It  contains  no  for- 
mal narrative  of  the  institution  of  sacraments,  and  yet  it  pre- 
sents most  fully  the  idea  of  sacraments.  It  sets  forth  with  the 
strongest  emphasis  the  failure  of  the  ancient  people,  and  yet  it 
points  out  most  clearly  the  significance  of  the  dispensation 
which  was  committed  to  them.  It  brings  the  many  oppositions 
— antitheses — of  life  and  thought,  and  leaves  them  in  the  light 
of  the  one  supreme  fact  which  reconciles  all,  the  Word  became 
fteah  ;  and  we  feel  from  first  to  last  that  this  light  is  shining 
over  the  record  of  sorrow  and  triumph,  of  defeat  and  hope  " 
(Westcott). 

The  object  is  distinctly  stated  in  the  Gospel  itself.  ^^  These 
are  written  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  and  that,  believing,  ye  may  have  life  in  His 
name"  (xxi.  30,  31).  The  last  of  these  three — life  in  Christ 
through  faith— is  the  key  to  the  two  others.  The  readers  were 
already  disciples ;  and  in  vindicating  the  two  propositions  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ  and  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  ob- 
ject was  not  to  lead  to  the  acknowledgment  of  Uis  divine  mis- 
sion, but  to  exhibit  these  as  the  ground  of  a  living  communion 
of  believers  with  God,  and  of  a  richer  spiritual  life.  The  char- 
acter of  the  Gx)8pel  is  predominantly  historic.  Even  the  doc- 
trinal portions  have  a  historic  background  and  a  historic  em- 
bodiment. The  doctrine,  for  instance,  of  the  essential  antago- 
nism between  light  and  darkness,  it  set  forth  in  the  narrative 
of  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  Jews  toward  Christ ;  and  the  dis« 


IITTRODDOTIOTI. 


cuBsiona  with  tlieiii  have  their  root  and  material  in  this  same 
aEitagoiiism.  The  historical  material  is  carefully  selected  with 
a  view  to  its  bearing  on  the  particular  conception  of  Christ's 
person  and  work  which  is  announced  in  the  Prologue.  The 
history  is  the  practical  exhibition  of  the  Logos-doctrine  in  the 
person  and  eartJily  life  of  the  Man  Jesus.  The  miracles  are 
invariably  termed  signs,  and  are  regarded  as  expressions  and 
evidences  of  the  divine  personality  of  the  worker. 

The  Gospel  is  characterized  by  the  profuse  employment  of 
symbolism.  This  accords  with  its  Hebrew  fibre,  and  also, 
largely,  with  the  nature  of  its  subject.  For  not  only  was  John 
a  Jew,  familiar  with  the  symbolic  economy  and  prophecy  of 
the  Old  Testament,  but  Jesns,  the  central  ligure  of  his  Gospel 
was,  pre-eminently  the  fulfiller  of  the  Law  and  of  the  Prophe- 
cies. Christ's  own  teaching,  too,  was  largely  symbolic ;  and 
John's  peculiar,  profound  spiritual  insight  detected  in  His  or- 
dinary acts  that  larger  meaning  which  belonged  to  them  in  vir- 
tue of  Jesus'  position  as  the  representative  of  humanity;  and 
that  unity  of  the  natural  and  spiritual  worlds  which  was  as- 
sumed in  the  utterances  of  our  Lord  in  which  the  visible  was 
used  as  the  type  of  the  invisible.  "John,"  says  Lange,  "givea 
UB  not  only  a  symbolism  of  the  Old  Testament  word,  of  Old 
Testament  institutions,  histories,  and  persons  ;  he  givea  also  the 
symbolism  of  nature,  of  antiquity,  of  history  and  of  personal 
life  ;  hence  the  absolute  symbolism,  or  the  ideal  import  of  all 
real  existence,  in  significant  outlines," 

The  relation  of  the  Gospel  to  the  Old  Testament  is  pro- 
nounced. The  centre  of  the  Old  Testament  system  is  the  man- 
ifestation of  tlie  glory  of  God — the  Shekinah.  John  declares 
that  this  glory  appears  essentially  in  Christ.  lie  recognizes  the 
divine  preparation  among  tlie  nations  for  Christ's  coming, 
and  the  special  discipline  of  Israel  with  a  view  to  the  advent 
of  the  Messiah.  In  the  Jews  he  discerns  the  special  subjects 
of  the  Messianic  economy.  Xatitanael  is  an  Israelite  indeed : 
the  temple  is  the  Father's  house  :  salvation  is  from  the  Jews: 
the  Jewish  Scriptures  testify  of  Christ :  the  testimonies  to 
Christ  are  drawn  from  the  three  euccessive  periods  of  the  peo- 
ple'straining — the  pacriarclial,  [he  theocratic,  and  the  tnuiiarchi- 


INTRODDCTI  ON , 

cal :  tlie  Serpent  in  tlie  wilderness  prefigures  Christ's  "  lifting 
np,"  and  tlie  Passover  His  own  sacrifice  as  the  Lamb  of  God. 

The  fourth  Gospel  is  tlie  only  one  of  the  four  which  ia  de- 
veloped according  to  a  prearranged  and  systematic  plan.  This 
plan  may  be  generally  described  as  the  exhibition  of  "  the  par- 
allel development  of  faith  and  unbelief  through  the  historical 
presence  of  Christ."*  The  Gospel  accordingly  falls  into  two 
general  divisions :  the  Prologue  (i.  1-18) ;  the  Narrative  (i. 
19-xxi.  23).  The  narrative  consists  of  two  parts :  the  self- 
revelation  of  Christ  to  the  world  {i.  19-xii.  50) ;  the  self-revela- 
tion of  Christ  to  the  disciples  {xiii.  xxi.).  In  the  development 
of  this  plan  the  author  dwells  upon  three  pairs  of  ideas :  wit- 
ness and  truth ;  glory  and  light ;  judgment  and  life.  "  There 
is  the  manifold  attestation  of  the  divine  mission;  there  is  the 
progressive  manifestation  of  the  inherent  niajeety  of  tlie  Son  ; 
there  is  the  continuous  and  necessary  effect  which  this  mani- 
festation produces  on  those  to  whom  it  is  made  ;  and  the  nar- 
rative may  be  fairly  described  as  the  siranltaneous  nnfolding 
of  these  three  themes,  into  which  the  great  theme  of  faith  and 
nnbelief  is  divided  "  (Westcott).  The  plan  is  foreshadowed  in 
the  Prologue.  He  who  was  the  Word,  in  the  beginning  with 
God,  by  whom  all  things  came  into  being,  was  life  and  light — 
the  light  of  men.  To  llim  witness  was  borne  by  John,  who 
was  sent  to  testify  of  Iliin  that  all  men  might  believe  on  Him. 
But  though  He  was  made  desh  and  dwelt  among  men,  though 
He  came  unto  His  own  home,  though  He  was  full  of  grace  and 
truth,  the  world  knew  Him  not,  and  His  own  people  refused 
to  receive  Him.  Tliere  were,  however,  those  who  did  receive 
Him ;  and  to  such  He  gave  power  to  become  sons  of  God 
through  faith  in  His  name.  They  became  such,  not  in  a  physi- 
cal sense,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God. 
They  received  of  His  fulness. 

Accordingly  the  Gospel  treats  of  the  nature  of  Christ,  and  of 
the  witnessbornetoChrist  by  John,  by  the  disciples,  and  by  mir- 
acles. It  goes  on  to  describe  the  conflict  between  the  eternal 
Light  and  the  darkness  as  embodied  historically  in  the  persist- 

*  I  follow  the  geneikl  uTBngement  of  WeatcotL 


IKTRODUCnON.  9 

ent  oppoeition  of  the  Jews  to  Jcbub.  lie  came  to  tliein  and  they 
received  ilim  not.  Then  the  other  aspect  is  preeented — the 
bleeaiiig  of  thoBe  who  did  receive  Him,  tlie  iinpartation  of  son- 
Bhip  and  the  consequent  privilege  of  cutnmunion  with  tlie  di- 
vine nature.  From  the  thirteenth  to  the  end  of  the  seven- 
teenth cliapter  is  described  Christ's  revelation  of  Himself  to 
Hie  disciples  in  ministrieB  of  love  and  in  confidential  discouree. 
The  darkneBB  did  not  overcome  the  light.  The  apparent  de- 
feat througli  death  was  converted  into  victory  through  resur- 
rection. This  victory  of  the  light  is  unfolded  from  the  eigh- 
teenth to  the  end  of  the  twentieth  chapter,  in  the  story  of  the 
betrayal,  the  passion,  and  tlio  resnrrection.  The  twenty-first 
chapter  forms  an  Epilogue  in  which  the  divine  light  again 
shines  forth  in  miracle,  ministry,  and  counsel,  before  the  ^nal 
departure  to  the  Father. 

BBLATION  TO  THE  8TN0PTI0  GOSPELS. 

The  fourth  Gospel  exhibits  marked  differences  from  the 
others  both  in  chronological  arrangement  and  in  the  selection 
of  material.  As  regards  the  tatter,  it  contains  much  that  is 
peculiar  to  itself,  and  falls  in  with  the  SynoptistB  only  in  a  few 
sections. 

But,  while  independent,  it  is  not  contradictory  of  the  Synop- 
tic Gospels,  All  the  four  Gospels  are  consciously  baaed  upon 
the  same  great  facts  ;  and  the  author  of  the  fourth  owns  and 
confirms  the  first  three.  The  incidents  common  to  the  fourth 
Gospel  and  all  the  Synoptists  are,  tlie  baptism  of  John  ;  the 
feeding  of  the  five  thousand;  the  triumphal  entry  into  Jern- 
Baleni ;  the  last  supper  and  the  passion  and  resurrection.  John, 
with  Matthew  and  Mark,  relates  the  walking  on  the  sea  and  the 
anointing  at  Bethany, 

John's  Gospel  also  implies  acquaintance  with  incidents  which 
lie  does  not  relate.  Such  are  the  circumstances  of  Christie 
baptism;  the  position  and  character  of  Simon  Peter;  Christ's 
early  home  at  Nazareth  and  later  residence  at  Capernaum  ;  the 
number  of  the  disciples;  the  date  of  the  Baptist's  imprison- 
ment; the  Ascension,  etc.  The  same  imagery  appears,  in  tlie 
figures  of  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom,  the  harvest,  the  ser 


10  INTRODUGTION. 

vant,  the  vine.  The  same  sayiags  occar,  and  verbal  and  other 
coincidences  are  frequent.* 

The  inner  coincidences  are  still  more  striking.  John^s  por- 
trait of  Jesus,  for  instance,  is,  in  many  particulars,  unique.  It 
is  fuller,  more  subtile,  and  indicates  a  closer  intimacy.  John 
deals  with  His  pei*son,  where  Matthew  and  Luke  deal  with  Uis 
offices.  In  Matthew  He  is  the  f nlfiller  of  the  law ;  in  John 
lie  foreshadows  the  grander  and  richer  economy  of  the  Spirit. 
Nevertheless,  John's  Christ  is  the  same  figure  which  appears  in 
the  lines  of  the  Synoptists.  In  both  He  is  the  teacher,  the 
meek  and  lowly  one,  the  worker  of  miracles  of  power  and 
mercy.  In  both  He  is  plain  of  speech  toward  those  who  would 
become  His  disciples,  the  hater  of  hypocrisy,  the  reader  of 
men's  hearts. 

Similar  coincidences  appear  in  the  portraits  of  prominent 
disciples,  notably  of  Peter.  Though  appearing  in  some  scenes 
not  noted  by  the  Synoptists,  the  Peter  of  their  Gospels  is  easily 
recognized  in  the  portrait  by  his  fellow  disciple.  He  is  the 
same  combination  of  impulsive  boldness  and  cowardice ;  of  af- 
fectionateness  and  brusqueness ;  as  quickly  responsive  to  love 
as  to  anger  ;  as  prompt  to  leap  into  the  lake  at  the  sight  of  his 
Lord,  as  to  smite  Malchns. 

The  inner  coincidences  are  also  to  be  discerned  in  John's  as- 
sumption of  facts  recorded  by  the  other  evangelists,  so  that 
the  coincidence  sometimes  appears  in  what  he  does  not  record. 
Giving  no  details  of  the  birth  of  Christ,  like  Matthew  and 
Luke,  he  tells  us  that  the  Word  became  flesh.  The  childhood, 
with  its  subjection  to  parental  authority  appears  in  the  story 
of  the  wedding  at  Cana.  While  the  Synoptists  dwell  upon 
the  event  of  the  incarnation,  he  dwells  upon  the  doctrine.  The 
sacraments  of  Baptism  and  of  the  Eucharist,  the  institution  of 
which  he  does  not  relate,  are  assumed  as  familiar  in  the  con- 
versation with  Nicodemus  and  in  the  discourse  at  Capernaum. 
The  ascension  is  not  described,  but  is  predicted  in  Christ's 
words  to  Mary.    Similarly,  the  work  of  Jesus  in  Galilee,  which 


*  For  a  Ust  of  these  coinoidenoe^  see  WestooU^s  Introdaotion  to  his  Conk 
mentary  on  the  Ooepel,  in  the  Spe«ker*8.  Commentary. 


INTBODUCnOS. 


11 


John  does  not  narrate,  is  presupposed  in  the  sixth  and  seventh 
chapters.  The  anointing  at  Bethany  is  assumed  to  be  known, 
as  is  the  hearing  of  Jesns  before  Caiaphas. 

With  these  coincidences  luiirked  differences  appear.  Setting 
aside  the  omission  by  Marlf  of  the  Gospel  of  the  infancy,  ihe 
Synoptic  narrative  falls  into  three  parte :  1,  The  ministry  of 
the  Baptist,  the  baptism  and  temptation  of  Jesus.  2,  The  re- 
turn of  Jesns  to  Galilee,  followed  by  a  series  of  connected  nar- 
ratives concerning  Ilis  teaching  and  miracles  in  tliis  and  sur- 
rounding districts,  without  any  intimation  that,  during  this 
time,  He  also  visited  Judssa  and  Jerusalem.  3,  Hereupon  all  tlie 
three  pass  at  once  from  the  last  journey  of  Jeans  to  Jerusalem 
to  the  Passover,  at  which  He  was  crucified.  Hence,  as  Dean 
Alford  remarks,  "had  we  only  their  accounts,  we  could  never, 
with  any  certainty,  have  asserted  that  He  went  to  Jerusalem 
during  His  public  life,  until  His  time  was  come  to  be  delivered 
up.  They  do  not,  it  is  true,  exclude  such  a  supposition,  but 
rather,  perhaps,  imply  it.  It  would  not,  however,  have  been 
gathered  from  their  narrative  with  any  historical  precision." 

Turning  now  to  John's  Gospel,  we  find  Christ's  ministry  in 
Galilee  between  the  Baptism  and  the  Faasion  interrupted  by 
journeys  to  Jerusalem.  He  goes  up  to  the  Passover,  on  which 
occasion  occur  the  cleansing  of  the  temple  and  the  visit  of  Nic- 
odemus  (ii.  13 ;  iii.  1-21).  A  second  visit  is  made  to  an  un- 
named feast  of  the  Jews  (v.  1),  during  which  He  heals  the  im- 
potent man  at  Bethesda,  excites  thereby  the  hostility  of  the 
Jews,  and  delivers  the  discourse  in  v.  17—47.  He  goes  up 
again  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (vii.  10),  and,  ten  months 
later,  appears  at  the  Feast  of  Dedication  (x.  22).  An  interval 
is  spent  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan  (x.  40).  at  Ephraim  in 
the  wilderness  of  Judtea  fxi.  53^),  and  at  Bethany  (xi.,  xii.  1), 
after  which  He  makes  His  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem  (xii. 
12  sqq.).  According  to  John,  therefore,  between  Christ's  last 
jonmey  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem  and  His  triumphal  entry, 
there  is  an  interval  of  several  months,  spent  partly  in  Jenisa- 
lem  and  partly  in  the  neighboring  districts;  while  according  to 
the  Synoptists  it  seems  that  He  went  from  Galilee  to  Jenisa- 
lem  to  the  last  Passover  only  a  short  time  before  it  began  ;  and 


3 


INTRODUCTION. 

that  lie  had  previously  retuained  continiioiiBly  Id  Galilee  or  in 
the  neigliborhood,  having  taken  up  Hie  abode  there  at  tlie  be- 
ginning of  Ilia  piibiic  ininistrj-. 

In  the  SynoptiBtB  the  scene  of  Chriet'e  work  iB  aimoEt  exclu- 
Bively  Galilee,  while  John  mentione  only  five  events  connected 
with  the  Galilfean  ministry.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fourth 
GoBpel  assniuee  a  knowledge  of  Jesns'  activity  in  Galilee  and 
Perffia  (vi.  1  ;  vii.  1 ;  v.  11,  52;  x.  40). 

The  difference  between  John  and  the  Synoptieta  aleo  appeais 
in  tlie  form  of  the  narrative.  The  latter  represent  JeBita'  teach- 
ing as  dealing  mainly  with  the  hnmble  peasantry.  It  is  pro- 
verbial, popular,  abounding  in  parable,  and  the  discourses  are 
brief.  John  represents  Christ  as  speaking  in  long  and  pro- 
foundly tlionghtfnl  discourses.  While  John  has  nothing  an- 
swering to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  the  groups  of  par- 
ables, the  other  evangelists  have  nothing  answering  to  tlie 
interviews  with  Nicodemas,  the  Samaritan  woman,  and  the 
disciples  before  the  Passover.  In  John  the  discourses  are  more 
dramatic  and  dialectic :  in  the  Synoptists,  proverbial,  parabolic, 
and  prophetic.  Yet  John's  account  of  Jesus'  teaching  is  not 
wanting  in  short  paradoxical  sayings,  snch  as  abound  in  the 
Synoptists  (see  ii.  19 ;  iv.  32,  34,  35 ;  vii.  33  ;  v.  17  ;  vi.  27,  33, 
63) ;  nor,  thongh  no  parable  is  worked  out  by  John,  are  para- 
bolic sayings  wanting,  siicli  as  the  Good  Shepherd,  the  Vine, 
the  Living  Water,  and  the  Bread  of  Heaven. 

In  another  and  deeper  aspect  his  Gospel  stands  related  to  the 
others  as  completing.  He  alone  has  seized  and  preserved  cer- 
tain sides  of  the  life  and  teaching  of  the  Ix)rd,  such  as  His  ut- 
terances as  to  His  eternal  relation  to  the  Father  and  His  eter- 
nal unity  with  Him  (iii.  13  sqq. ;  v.  17  sqq. ;  vi.  33,  51 ;  vii.  16, 
28  sqq.;  viii.  5S,  and  elsewhere).  It  is  to  John,  in  short,  that 
we  owe  the  view  of  the  speculative  side  of  Christ's  work ; 
while  as  regards  the  relation  of  believers  to  their  Lord,  John 
gives  us  those  deep  and  comforting  words  concerning  the  mys- 
tical unity  and  community  of  life  between  Himself  and  His 
disciples,  into  which  they  will  enter  through  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Yet  these  deeper  and  more  mystical  views  were  not  alto- 
gether the  outcome  of  John's  characteristic  personality.     They 


UTTBODUCTION. 


13 


were  also  toned  and  Bhapud  by  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the 
Church  and  of  the  religious  tlionglit  of  liie  time.  The  conflict 
of  Christianity  was  no  longer  with  Judaistic  error  ;  no  longer 
between  the  Gospel  and  the  Law;  between  circumcision  and 
aucircumcision  ;  but  with  an  essentially  heathen  G-nosticism 
which  appealed  to  the  Church  with  the  claim  of  a  profound 
insight  into  Christianity,  and  sought  to  wrest  the  Gospel  to  its 
own  service.  It  has  already  been  remarked  that  the  aim  of 
the  fourth  Gospel  was  not  distinctively  polemic.  John  was 
impelled  to  write  by  the  pressure  upon  his  own  soul  of  the 
truth  "God  manifest  in  the  liesh,"  rather  than  by  the  aggres- 
sions o£  heresy ;  but  none  the  less  the  utterances  of  a  Cerin- 
thus  ■  lent  sharpness  to  the  lines  of  the  Apostle's  portrait  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  and  no  more  impressive  answer  to  such  teaching 
coald  have  been  given  than  John  furnished  in  the  words  of  the 
Lord  himself  concerning  His  own  pre-existence  and  eternal 
Godhead,  and  in  His  testimony  that  the  Father  has  created  all 
things  through  the  Word.  (See  i.  3,  14,  33,  34,  49  ;  iii.  13, 
14 ;  Y.  23,  26  ;  vi.  51,  62  ;  vm.  58  ;  xiii.  23  sqq. ;  xvii.  1,  2,  16, 
19  ;  iviii.  6, 11,  37.) 

THE   EPISTLSa. 

It  is  generally  conceded  that  the  first  Epiatle  was  written  at 
Ephesus.  In  the  Latin  Church  the  opinion  prevailed  that  it 
■was  primarily  addressed  to  the  Parthians ;  but  ecclesiastical 
tradition  knows  of  no  mission  of  John  to  the  Parthians,  St. 
Thomas  being  supposed  to  Lave  carried  the  Gospel  to  them. 

Its  exact  destination,  however,  is  of  little  consequence.  "  Its 
coloring  is  moral  rather  than  local."  It  is  a  unique  picture  of 
a  Christian  society,  the  only  medium  of  the  Spirit's  work  among 

•  Oeriothaa  Uught  that  the  world  waa  not  nmde  by  the  aapreme  God.  but 
by  another  aod  remote  power  which  is  over  the  nniverse.  Jeana  una  not  bom 
of  the  Virgin  by  miraouloua  conception,  hnt  waa  the  Son  of  Joseph  and  Mary 
1>y  natural  g->nerBtioQ,  though  specially  endowed  with  jantioe  and  wiadom. 
After  the  haptiam  of  Jeins  the  Ghriat  deaoended  upon  Him  io  the  form  of  a 
dove,  from  that  aoTereign  power  which  ia  over  all  thiogH.  He  then  an- 
noonoed  the  uaknown  Father  and  wrought  miraolea  ;  but  toward  the  end  of 
Bia  miniitry  the  Christ  dopnrt^  from  Jeaaa.  and  Jobub  anlTered  and  roat 
-from  tha  dead,  while  the  Christ  remiiaed  impaaoible  aa  a  apititaal  being. 


INTRODUCTION. 

men.  There  is  no  trace  of  persecution  :  "  the  world  was  peril- 
ous by  its  seductions  rather  than  hy  ite  hostility;"  the  dangers 
were  within  rather  than  without. 

TiieBe  facts  give  character  to  tlie  Epistle  in  two  ways  :  First, 
the  missionary  work  of  the  Church  falls  into  the  background 
in  the  Apostle's  thought.  The  world  is  overcome  by  faith  as 
represented  in  tlie  Church,  and  the  Gospel  is  proclaimed  by  the 
very  existence  of  the  Cliureh,  and  eflfectivaly  proclaimed  in  pro- 
portion to  the  Church's  purity  and  fidelity.  Secondly,  attention 
is  concentrated  upon  the  central  idea  of  the  message  itself 
rather  than  upon  the  relation  of  the  message  to  otiier  systems. 
The  great  question  is  the  person  and  work  of  the  Lord. 

The  peculiar  form  of  error  combated  In  the  Epistle  is  Do- 
cetic  and  Cerinthian.*  In  this  teaching  sin  and  atonement 
have  no  place.  Christ  came  into  tlie  world,  not  to  redeem  it 
by  the  remission  of  sins,  but  to  illuminate  a  few  clioice  intel- 
lects with  philosophy  :  Jesus  is  not  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  : 
Jesus  and  the  Clirist  are  distinct:  Jesus'  humanity  was  not  real, 
but  a  phantasm.  Against  these  views  John  asserts  that  no 
spirit  is  of  God  who  denies  Uiat  Jesns  Christ  is  come  in  the 
flesh  (1  John  iv.  2,  3) :  that  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  is  a  liar,  and  that  the  denial  of  the  Sou  involves  the  re- 
jection of  the  Father  (ii.  22,  23) :  that  he  who  dunies  that  he  is 
sinful  deceives  liimsclf,  and  impugns  the  veracity  of  God  (i.  8, 
10).  The  Word  of  life  which  he  proclaims  was  the  real  human 
manifestation  of  God,  the  human  Christ  whom  he  and  his  fel- 
low-disciples had  seen  and  heard  and  touched  (i.  1,  2).  Jesus 
is  the  propitiation  for  sin  (ii.  2).  The  world  is  not  overcome 
by  knowledge,  but  by  faith  that  Jesne  is  the  Son  of  God  (v. 
4,5]. 

The  principal  evidence  for  John's  authorship  of  the  Epistle 
is  internal,  drawn  from  its  resemblance  to  the  Gospel  in  vocab- 
ulary, style,  thought,  and  scope.  There  is  the  same  repetition 
of  fundamental  words  and  phrases,  snch  as  truth,  love,  tight, 
horn  of  God,  abiding  in  God.     There  is  the  same  simplicity  of 


INTRODDCTION. 


15 


coDstraction  ;  the  same  raritj  of  particles  ;  tlie  employment  of 
the  simple  connective  {leal,  and)  instead  of  a  particle  of  logical 
Bequence  {iii.  3,  IC) ;  the  succession  of  sentences  and  clauses 
witliout  particles  (ii.  22-34  ;  iv.  4-6  ;  7-10  ;  11-13  ;  ii.  5,  6,  9, 
10),  and  the  bringing  of  sentences  into  parallelism  bj  the  rep- 
etition of  clauses  (i.  6,  8,  10 ;  v,  18,  20).  Vei'bal  coineidencea 
abound.  Such  words  as  xc(<r/u>s  (world),  ^w  (ii%\\i),  vKorla 
(darkness),  <f>avepoihi  (to  manifest),  fo*^  amvio^  (eternal  life),  6 
a\T}3ivo';  Sio<!  (the  real  God),  6  /wjiwyei^  ui'os  (the  only-begotten 
Son),  etc.,  are  common  to  both.  Coincidences  of  expression  are 
also  Dumeroue.     Cknupare,  for  example, 


The  Epistle  presnppoeee  the  Goape!.  The  differences  are 
such  as  would  naturally  appear  between  a  historian  and  a 
teacher  interpreting  the  history.  This  may  be  seen  by  a  com- 
parison of  the  Prologue  of  the  Gospel  with  the  Epistle.  The 
Prologue  and  the  Epistle  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  dis- 
conrses,  as  appears  from  a  comparison  of  the  tiionghts  on  life, 
light,  and  truth  in  the  Prologue  with  passages  in  the  discourses. 
Thns  compare,  on  Life,  Gospel  v.  26  ;  xi.  25  ;  xiv.  6  ;  Prologne 
i.  4 ;  Epistle  i.  1 ;  v.  20.  On  Light,  Gospel  viii.  12  ;  xii.  46  ; 
Prologne  i.  4,  7,  9 ;  Epistle  i.  6,  7  :  ii.  8.  On  Trnth,  Gospel 
viii.  32 ;  xiv.  6 ;  Prologue  i.  9,  14,  17  ;  Epistle  i.  6,  8,  10 ;  ii. 
4,  8,  21.27;  lii.  19;  iv.  1,  6 ;  v.  20. 

The  theuie  of  the  Gospel  is,  Jetus  is  the  Chritt  in  jnveet*  (^ 


INTBODDCTION. 

manifesting  His  glory.  In  the  Epistle  the  manifestation  of 
the  glory  ia  aasuined  as  the  basis  of  the  exhortation  to  believ- 
ers to  manifest  it  in  their  life.  The  doctrine  of  propitiation, 
which  is  unfolded  to  Kicodenius,  is  applied  in  1  John  iii.  1. 
The  promise  of  the  Paraclete  in  the  Gospel  is  asBumed  in  the 
Epistle  as  fulfilled  (ii.  20).  The  Epistle  deals  with  the  fruits 
of  that  love  which  is  commanded  in  the  Gospel.  (Compare 
Gospel  xiii.34;  xv.  12,  and  Epistle  iii.  11 ;  iv.  7,  11;  iii.  14;  iv. 
12,  20,  31.)  In  the  Gospel  the  divine  glory  is  prominent ;  in 
the  Epistle,  Christ's  humanity.  The  doctrine  of  propitiation 
and  cleansing  is  more  fully  treated  in  the  Epistle  (ii.  2  ;  iii.  16 ; 
iv.  10  ;  i.  7,  9). 

The  epistolary  character  does  not  appear  in  the  form.  It  ia 
without  address  or  subscription,  and  bears  no  direct  trace  of  its 
author  or  of  its  destination.  But  it  ia  instinct  with  personal 
feeling  (i.  4 ;  ii.  12),  personal  experience  (i.  1),  and  appreciation 
of  the  circumstancea  of  the  peraons  addressed  (_ii.  12,  22,  27 ; 
iii.  2,  13  ;  iv.  1,  4 ;  v.  18). 

The  Second  and  Third  Epistles  contain  no  direct  indication 
of  the  time  or  the  place  at  which  they  were  written.  They  were 
probably  composed  at  Epheaus.  That  the  two  are  the  work  of 
the  aarae  author  ia  apparent  from  their  agreement  in  style  and 
spirit.  Aa  related  to  the  Firat  Epistle,  the  resemblance  between 
the  second  and  first  in  language  and  thought  is  closer  than  be- 
tween the  lirst  and  third. 

THE   APOCALTPaE. 

This  document  has  given  rise  to  voluminous  controversy  aa 
to  its  author,  its  origin,  ita  purpose,  and  its  interpretation.  It 
has  been  held  to  be  a  forgery  in  the  name  of  Jolin ;  to  have 
been  composed  by  another  writer  in  the  apostle's  name,  not  in 
order  to  deceive,  but  in  order  to  record  an  oral  revelation  of 
John ;  or  to  have  been  the  work  of  another  John.  Some  who 
deny  that  John  wrote  the  Gospel,  have  attributed  the  Apoca- 
lypse to  him,  and  the  authenticity  of  the  latter  is  maintained 
by  some  prominent  rationalistic  critics. 

The  Apostle  John  was  banished  to  the  laland  of  Patmoa, 
probably  by  the  Emperor  Domitian,  i.D.  95  or  96,  and  the 


IHTBODaOTIOir, 


17 


book,  composed  either  during  his  exile,  or,  as  is  more  likely, 
after  iiis  return  to  Ephesus,  contaiiiB  the  revelation  given  him 
there  in  a  series  of  visions.  It  is  directly  addressed  to  the 
Seven  Churches  of  Proconsular  Aaia ;  the  number  seven  being 
representative,  and  not  including  all  the  Asiatic  ChurcheB.  Its 
design  was  to  encourage  the  Church  during  that  trying  period, 
predicted  by  Jesus  himself,  between  the  close  of  direct  revela- 
tion and  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  This  encouragement 
centres  in  the  return  of  Jesua  to  give  His  people  eternal  life 
and  to  trample  down  Uisfoes.  As  related  to  the  progress  of 
doctrine  in  the  New  Testament,  it  represents  the  final  eon- 
eumination  in  the  redeemed  Church,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
which  is  foreshadowed  in  the  riae  and  growth  of  the  Apostolic 
Church. 

The  style  is  figurative  and  symbolical.  It  deals  with  princi- 
ples rather  than  with  particular  events.  To  the  neglect  of  this 
characteristic,  and  the  corresponding  attempt  to  link  the  sym- 
bols and  prophecies  with  specific  historical  incidents  or  person- 
ages, are  due  most  of  the  extravagauces  of  interpretation.  No 
satisfactory  argument  against  its  authenticity  can  be  drawn  from 
its  contents  as  related  to  the  other  writings  of  Jolm.  It  pro- 
claims the  same  eternal  truths  which  are  asserted  and  vindi- 
cated in  the  Gospel  and  in  the  Epistles— the  sovereignty  of  God, 
the  conflict  of  sin  with  righteousness,  the  temporary  triumph 
of  evil,  and  the  final,  decisive  victory  of  holiness.  As  in  the 
other  writings,  Christ  is  the  central  figure,  the  conqueror  of  sin 
and  death,  the  crowning  joy  of  the  redeemed,  and  the  object 
of  their  adoration.  It  emphasizes  the  divine  hatred  of  sin  and 
the  certainty  of  the  divine  judgment  of  the  wicked  and  of  the 
future  bliss  of  believers  in  Jesus.  The  main  idea  of  the  Gos- 
pel and  of  the  Apocalypse  is  the  same — that  of  a  decisive  con- 
fiict  between  the  powers  of  good  and  evil. 

The  symbolism  of  the  Apocalypse  is  Jewish,  and  not  Greek 
or  Roman.  It  is  pervaded  with  the  style  and  imagery  of  the 
Old  Testament,  and  is  moulded  by  its  historical  and  propheti- 
cal books.  "The  book,"  says  Professor  Milligau,  "is  abso- 
lutely steeped  in  the  memories,  the  incidents,  the  thoughts,  and 
the  language  of  the  Church's  past.  To  such  an  extent  is  thia 
Vol.  II.— I 


I 


IBTRODOCnOH. 

the  case  that  it  m&j  be  doubted  whether  it  contains  a  eitigle 
figure  not  drawn  from  the  Old  Testament,  or  a  single  complete 
Eeiitence  not  more  or  lesa  built  np  of  materials  brought  from 
the  same  source.  .  .  .  Il  is  a  perfect  mosaic  of  patsages 
from  the  Old  Testament,  at  one  time  quoted  verbally,  at  an- 
other referred  to  by  distinct  allusion  ;  now  taken  from  one 
scene  in  Jewisli  history,  and  now  again  from  two  or  three  to- 
gethei-."  Thus  the  heresy  of  the  Nicolaitanes  is  the  heresy  of 
Balaam  (ii.  14) :  the  evil  in  the  Church  of  Thyatira  is  personi- 
fied in  Jezebel  (ii.  20) :  the  angelic  captain  in  the  war  against 
the  dragon  is  the  Micliael  of  Daniel  (xii.  7):  Jerusalem,  Mount 
Zion,  Babylon,  the  Euphrates,  Sodom,  and  Egypt  are  symbols 
of  the  holy  bliss  of  the  saints,  of  the  transgressors  against  God. 
and  of  the  judgment  of  the  wicked  (xxi.  2  ;  xiv.  1  ;  xvi.  19  ;  ix. 
Ii;  xi.  8).  The  battle  of  llar-Magedon  carries  ns  back  to  the 
great  slaughters  in  the  plain  of  Megiddo  (Judges  v,  19 ;  I's. 
Ixxxiii,  9;  2  Kings  xxiii.  29).  The  promises  to  the  churches 
are  given  under  the  figure  of  the  tree  of  life,  the  hidden 
manna,  the  white  stone,  the  iron  sceptre,  the  pillar  in  the  tem- 
ple of  God  (ii.  7,  17,  27,  28;  iii.  5,  12,  20).  Heaven  is  de- 
scribed under  the  image  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  (xi. 
1,  19  ;  vi.  9 ;  viii.  3 ;  iv.  6).  The  plagues  of  ch.  viii.  are  the 
plagues  of  Egypt :  the  crossing  of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  destnic- 
tion  of  Korah  are  blended  in  the  representation  of  the  deliver- 
ance of  God's  people  (xii.  15,  16).  Of  the  Prophets,  Haggai 
contributes  the  earthquake  of  ch.  vi.,  and  Joel  the  sun  changed 
into  the  blackness  of  sackcloth  and  the  moon  into  blood  :  Isaiah 
the  falling  stars,  the  fig-tree  casting  her  untimely  fruit,  and  the 
heavens  departing  as  a  scroll :  Ezekiel  the  scorpions  of  ch.  ix., 
the  description  of  tlie  New  Jerusalem  in  ch.  xxi.,  the  roll  in 
ch.  v.,  and  the  little  book  in  ch.  x. :  Zechariali  the  opening  of 
the  seals  in  ch.  vi.  and  the  olive  trees  in  ch.  xi.  The  vision 
of  the  glorified  Redeemer  (i.  12-20)  is  combined  from  Exodni:, 
Zechariali,  Daniel,  Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  and  the  Psalms. 

Along  with  these  coincidences  there  are  certain  contrasts, 
notably  as  respects  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  coming,  which,  in 
the  Gospel  and  Epistles  lies  in  the  background,  while  it  is  the 
main  theme  of  the  Apocalypse.     The  Apocalypse  treats  the 


IHTRODDCTION, 


19 


I 


impending  jndgment  ae  external,  the  Qospel  as  spiritual.  Tlie 
Apocaljpse  deacribeB  the  triumph  of  Chrietianitj'  under  tlie 
imagery  of  Judaiaia ;  the  consuinmatiou  being  an  ideal  Jer- 
usalem and  an  ideal  worship ;  while  in  the  Grospel,  Judaism 
appears  in  opposition  to  Christ,  "standing  without,  isolated 
and  petrified,  and  not  taken  up  with  it,  quickened  and  glori- 
fied." 

The  sjrabols  of  the  book  are  drawn  from  objects  familiar  to 
the  writer — the  locusts,  the  eagleB,  the  millstone,  the  olive  and 
palm  and  vine. 

The  principal  objection  urged  against  the  common  anthor- 
fihip  of  the  Gospel  and  the  Apocalypse,  is  the  difference  in 
language  and  style.  This  difference  must  be  frankly  admitted. 
"  The  language,"  says  Dr.  Davidson,  "  departs  materially  from 
the  usual  Greek  of  the  New  Testament,  presenting  anomalies, 
incorrectnesses,  peculiar  constructions,  and  awkward  disposi- 
tions of  words,  which  have  no  parallel.  .  .  .  The  lan- 
guage is  so  thoroughly  Hebraistic  as  to  neglect  the  usual  rules 
of  Greek."  By  many  eminent  critics  these  differences  are  re- 
garded as  irreconcilable  on  the  assumption  of  a  common  an- 
tliorship. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged  that  these  differences  are 
largely  intentional ;  that  the  author  departs  from  common 
nsage  under  the  peculiar  demands  of  his  subject,  arising  from 
the  conditions  under  which  he  writes,  and  his  intent  to  con- 
form to  the  Old  Testament  style  of  address  ;  and  further,  tliat 
his  familiarity  with  correct  usage  is  shown  by  other  passages 
in  the  same  book.  The  Apocalypse,  moreover,  contains  many 
of  the  words  which  are  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  and  Epistles, 
euch  as  io  witness,  tn  tahemade,  to  keep,  to  overcome,  to  name 
ae  the  expression  of  character,  true  (a\ri3ivm)  in  the  sense  of 
real;  and  t!ie  figures  of  hungering  and  thirsting,  the  nuinna, 
the  living  water,  the  shepherd  and  the  sheep.  It  is,  indeed,  an- 
swered that,  where  the  same  words  occur,  they  are  ut^ed  in  a 
different  sense;  but  many  of  these  alleged  differences  disap- 
pear upon  closer  examination.  The  Hebrew  character  is  only 
enperficially  different  from  that  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  Ilebrew 
in  spirit,  though  the  Greek  is  mncli  purer,  and  "  the  absence 


ISTBODDCrroS. 

of   Bolecimns  arisea  £rom  tlie  avoidance  of  idiomatic  expre» 
sioDB."  * 

STYLE  AND  DICTION  OF  JOHN. 

John's  style  in  the  Goapel  acd  Epintles  is  marked  b;  simplic- 
ity and  ease.  It  is  plain  without  elegance,  and  the  diction  is 
comparatively  pure  bo  far  as  words  and  graraniar  are  con- 
cerned, but  animated  witii  a  Hebrew  genius.  Godet  describes 
the  style  as  characterized  by  "  a  childlike  simplicity  and  trans- 
parent  depth,  a  holy  melancholy,  and  a  vivacity  not  less  holy  ; 
above  ail,  the  sweetness  of  a  pare  and  gentle  love." 

Tlie  vocabulary  is  meagre.  The  same  expreesions  continu- 
ally recur.  Thus  we  find  iJMt  (light),  23  times  ;  Bo^a,  Bo^d^etr- 
Sat  (glory,  to  be  glorified),  42 ;  ifojij,  ^v  (life,  to  live),  52 ;  fuip- 
rvpelv,  fiapTvpia  (to  witness,  testimony),  47 ;  yiitocicetu  (to  know), 
55  ;  Koa-fitK  (world),  78 ;  ■mtrreveu/  (to  believe),  98  ;  epyov  (work), 
23  ;  SvofiA  (name),  and  aXij^da  (truth),  each  25  ;  trrjfieuv  (sign), 
17. 

The  meagreness  of  the  vocabulary,  however,  is  compen- 
sated  by  its  richness.  The  few  constantly  recurring  words  are 
symbols  of  fundamental  and  eternal  ideas.  "They  are  not 
purely  abstract  notions,  but  powerful  spiritual  realities,  which 
may  be  studied  under  a  multitude  of  aspects.  If  the  author 
has  only  a  few  terms  in  his  vocabulary,  these  terms  may  be 
compared  to  pieces  of  gold  with  which  great  lords  make  pay- 
ment "  (Godet). 

A  similar  sameness  is  apparent  in  the  constructions.  These 
are  usually  simple,  plain,  and  direct.  The  sentences  are  short 
and  are  co-ordinated,  following  each  other  by  a  kind  of  paral- 
lelism as  in  Hebrew  poetry.  Thus  where  other  writers  would 
employ  particles  of  logical  connection,  he  uses  the  simple  con- 
nective Koi  (and).  For  example  in  ch.  i.  10,  John  means  to 
say  that  though  Jesus  was  in  the  world,  yet  the  world  knew 

*  It  u.  of  oonrBe,  foreign  to  ths  soope  of  tbla  work  to  dinoun  thia,  wit. 
other  Johanniae  qDeBtions.  crjticallj.  Suoh  a  discuraioa  maat  anume  th« 
rea/ler'a  aoqaaintance  with  Greek.  The  dLBcDiiaian  concerning;  the  differeDoea 
iu  Inn^age  will  be  found  in  Profasaor  Blilligan'a  exoellent  Lftun*  on  (Aj 
RevdiUion  of  St.  John.  Appendix  II. 


INTBODtrCTlbN. 

Him  not ;  but  he  states  the  fact  in  two  distinct  and  indepen- 
dent propositions  :  "  He  was  in  the  world,  arul  the  world  knew 
Him  not."  So  in  viii,  20,  Jesus  epake  in  the  treasury,  teach- 
ing in  the  temple,  ani^  ye^  though  He  appeared  and  taught 
thus  publicly,  no  one  laid  hands  on  Him.  John  writes  : 
"  Tliese  words  spake  Jesiia  as  He  taught  in  the  temple,  oTid  no 
man  laid  hands  on  Him."  He  uses  and,  where  the  antithetic 
but  might  be  expected  (i.  5  ;  iii.  11 ;  xv.  24).  There  is  also  a 
frequent  absence  of  connecting  particles.  There  is  not,  for  in- 
stance, a  single  one  in  tiie  first  seventeen  verses  of  ch.  xv, 
Ont  of  the  wealth  of  Greek  particles,  John  usee  only  five.  He 
abounds  in  contrasts  or  antithetic  parallelisms  without  connect- 
ing links.  Thus,  "the  law  was  given  by  Moses:  grace  and 
truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ  "  (i.  17) :  "  No  one  ever  saw  God  : 
the  only-begotten  Son  revealed  Him  "  (i.  18),  Compare  viii.  23 ; 
XT.  5,  etc.  This  simple  co-ordination  of  clauses  is  assisted  by 
the  repetition  of  a  marked  word  or  phrase,  so  that  a  connection 
between  two  statements  is  established  and  the  idea  carried  for- 
ward in  a  new  direction  (see  S.  11 ;  xv.  13  sqq. ;  zt.  1,  5 ; 
xrii.  14  Bqq. ;  vi.  39,  iO,  44). 

The  narrative  is  direct.  Even  the  words  of  others  are  given 
directly  and  not  obliquely.  Instead  of  saying  "  This  is  the  wit- 
ness of  John  when  the  Jews  sent  to  ask  him  who  he  was,  and 
he  confessed  that  he  was  not  the  Christ  " — Jolm  says,  "  This 
is  tlie  witness  of  John  when  the  Jews  sent  to  ask  him  WTio  art 
thouf  and  he  confessed  I  am  not  tlie  C/irist"  {i.  19).  Compare 
vii.  40  sqq.  ;  ii.  3  sqq. ;  iv.  24  sqq. ;  v.  10  sqq. ;  vi.  14  ;  viii.  22 ; 
X.  2  sqq.  Illustrative  details  are  not  wrought  into  the  texture 
of  the  narrative,  but  are  interjected  as  parentheses  or  distinct 
Btat«ments  (see  vi.  10  ;  iv.  6 ;  x.  22 ;  xiii.  30 ;  xviii.  40). 
John's  style  is  circumstantial.  An  action  which,  by  other  writ- 
ers, is  stated  as  complex,  is  analyzed  by  him  and  its  components 
stated  separately.  Thus,  instead  of  the  usual  Greek  idiom, 
"  Jesus  answering  said,"  John  writes,  "  Jesus  answered  and 
aaid,"  thus  making  both  factors  of  the  act  equally  prominent 
(see  xii.  44  ;  vii.  28  ;  i.  15,  25).  This  peculiarity  is  further  il- 
lustrated by  the  combination  of  the  positive  and  negative  ex- 
preaeion  of  tlie  same  truth  (see  i.  3,  20;  ii.  24;  iii.  16;  x.  5; 


22  INTRODUCTION. 

XV]  ii.  20;  1  John  1, 6 ;  ii.  4,  27).  The  detachment,  however,  is 
only  saperficial.  The  inner  connection  is  closely  held  in  the 
writer's  mind,  and  is  impressed  upon  the  reader  by  that  con- 
stant iteration  which,  apon  a  hasty  view,  savors  of  monotony, 
but  which  serves  to  represent  the  central  thought  in  its  many- 
sidedness,  and  to  place  it  in  its  commanding  relation  to  subor- 
dinate thoughts.  His  frequent  use  of  the  particle  ovv  (there- 
fore) directs  attention  to  the  sequence  of  events  or  ideas  (ii. 
»  ,  \Jt  «5.  29  :  iv.  1,  6,  i»\  vi.  5 ;  vii.  25  ;  viii.  12,  21,  31,  38 ; 
X.  7 ;  xii.  1,  3,  9, 17,  *isi).  The  phrase  in  order  thai  (&a),  mark- 
ing an  object  or  purpose,  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  exhibits 
tiis  characteristic  of  John's  mind  to  regard  things  in  their 
moral  and  providential  relations.  Thus  iv.  34:  ^^My  meat  is 
in  order  thai  I  may  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me ; "  the  em- 
phasis lying  not  on  the  process,  but  on  the  end.  Compare  ▼• 
36 ;  vi.  29 ;  yiii.  56 ;  xii.  23 ;  xiii.  34 ;  xvii.  3. 

The  subject  or  the  significant  word  of  a  sentence  is  often 
repeated,  especially  in  dialogues  (which  are  characteristic  of 
John's  Gospel),  where,  by  the  constant  repetition  of  the  names 
of  the  parties  they  are  kept  clearly  before  the  reader's  mind 
(see  ii.  18 ;  iv.  7  sqq. ;  viii.  48  sqq. ;  x.  23  sqq.  Also  i.  1,  7, 
10 ;  iv.  22 ;  V.  31  ;  vi.  27 ;  xi.  33). 

The  demonstrative  pronoun  is  habitually  introduced  to  recall 
the  subject,  when  a  clause  has  intervened  between  the  subject 
and  the  verb  (see  xv.  5 ;  vii.  18 ;  x.  1 ;  xii.  48 ;  xiv.  21,  26  ;  xv. 
26).  The  personal  pronoun  is  frequently  employed,  especially 
that  of  the  first  person.  "In  this  respect,"  says  Westcott, 
"  much  of  the  teaching  of  the  Lord's  discourses  depends  upon 
the  careful  recognition  of  the  emphatic  reference  to  His  undi- 
vided personality  "  (see  viii.  14,  16 ;  v.  31). 

The  quotations  are  commonly  from  the  Septuagint|  and  never 
immediately  from  the  Hebrew. 


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  JOHN. 


PROLOGUE  * 

Vv.  1-18.  "The  Prologue  is  Bummed  up  in  three  tlioughts, 
which  aleo  deterniiiie  its  plan :  The  Looob:  the  Logos  disowned; 
the  Logos  acknowledged  and  regained.  These  three  fundamen- 
tal aspects  correspond  with  the  three  priDcipal  aepecte  of  tha 
history  as  related  in  this  gospel:  the  revelation  of  the  Logos; 
the  unbelief  of  the  Jewish  people  ;  the  faith  of  the  disciples. 
Between  the  tirst  part  (vv.  1-5)  and  the  second  (vv.  6-11),  ver.  5 
forms  a  transition,  as  w.  12,  13  connect  the  second  part  with 
the  third  (vv.  12-18),  which,  in  its  turn,  is  in  close  connection 
with  the  first.  The  relation  of  this  last  part  to  the  first,  indi- 
cated by  the  similarity  of  thought  and  expression  which  may 
be  observed  between  ver.  18  and  ver.  1,  may  be  expressed  thus : 
The  Person  whom  the  Apostles  beheld,  who  was  proclaimed  by 
John  the  Baptist,  and  in  wliom  the  Church  believed  (vv.  12-18), 
is  none  other  than  He  whose  existence  and  supreme  greatness 
have  been  indicated  by  the  title  Logos.  The  Church  possesses, 
therefore,  in  its  Bedeemer  the  Creator  of  all  things,  the  Essen- 
tial Light,  the  Principle  of  Life,  God  himself.  The  original 
link  between  man  and  God,  which  sin  had  impaired  (ver.  5),  and 
which  nnbelief  completely  broke  (ver.  11),  is  for  the  believer 
perfectly  restored ;  and,  by  means  of  faith,  the  law  of  Paradise 
(ver.  4)  becomes  once  more  the  law  of  human  history  (vv.  16-18), 
Thus  the  Prologue  forms  a  compact,  organic  whole,  of  which 
the  germinal  thought  is  this :  by  the  Incarnation  believers  are 


*  I  giTs  Uis  amngemant  of  th«  Piologoa  aooordlng  to  Godot. 


J 


reetored  to  that  commnnion  with  the  Word,  and  that  living  re. 
UtioQ  with  God,  of  which  man  had  been  deprived  by  dn." 

P1E8T  DIVISION  OF  THE  PROLOGUE.    THE  WORD  (1-6). 

1.  In  the  beginning  was  (ev  a^;^  ^v).  With  evident  allu- 
sion to  the  firBt  word  of  Genesis.  But  John  elevates  tlte  pliiate 
fi-om  its  reference  to  a  point  of  time,  the  beginning  of  creation, 
to  the  time  of  absolute  pre-existence  before  any  creation,  wliich 
is  not  mentioned  until  ver.  3.  This  beginning  had  no  beginning 
{compare  ver.  3  ;  xvii.  5  ;  1  Ep.  i.  1 ;  Eph.  i,  i  ;  Prov.  viii.  23 ; 
Ps.  xc.  2).  This  heightening  of  the  conception,  however,  ap- 
pears not  so  much  in  op^,  heginniiig,  whi(;h  simply  leaves 
room  for  it,  as  in  the  use  of  ffv,  was,  denoting  ahsobUe  existence 
(compare  elit-C,  I  am,  John  viii,  58)  instead  of  eyivero,  came  into 
heing,  or  began  to  he,  which  is  used  in  vv,  3,  14,  of  the  coming 
into  being  of  creation  and  of  the  Word  becoming  flesh.  Note 
also  the  contrast  between  ev  dpj^,  in  the  beginning,  and  the 
expression  aw'  apyri<!,  from  the  beginning,  which  is  common  in 
John's  writings  (viii.  44  ;  1  Ep.  ii.  7,  24 ;  iii.  S)  and  which  leaves 
no  room  for  the  idea  of  eternal  pre-existence.  "  In  Gen.  i.  1, 
the  sacred  historian  starts  from  the  beginning  and  comes  down- 
ward, tbns  keeping  us  in  the  course  of  time.  Here  he  starts 
from  the  same  point,  but  goes  upward,  thus  taking  ns  into  the 
eternity  preceding  time"  (Milligan  and  Moulton).  See  on  Col. 
i,  15.  This  notion  of  "beginning"  is  still  further  heightened  by 
the  subsequent  statement  of  the  relation  of  the  Logos  to  the 
eternal  God.  The  apy^  mnst  refer  to  the  creation — tlie  primal 
beginning  of  things ;  but  if,  in  this  beginning,  the  Logos  already 
Idas,  then  he  belonged  to  the  order  of  eternity.  "  The  Logos 
was  not  merely  existent,  however,  in  the  beginning,  but  was 
also  the  efficient  jmnciple,  the  beginning  of  the  bejjinning. 
The  apx<}  (fie^nning),  in  itself  and  in  its  operation  dark,  cha- 
otic, was,  in  its  idea  and  its  principle,  comprised  in  one  single 
luminous  word,  which  was  the  rx)g08.  And  wlien  it  is  said  the 
Logos  was  in  this  beginning.  His  eternal  existence  is  already 
expressed,  and  Uis  eternal  position  in  the  Godhead  already  in- 
dicated thereby  "  (Lange).     "Eight  times  in  the  narrative  of^ 


k 


PROLOGUK 


jreation  (in  GenesiB)  there  occur,  like  the  refrain  of  a  lijmn, 
the  words,  And  Ood  said.  John  gathers  up  ail  those  sayings 
\>i  God  into  a  singie  saying,  living  and  endowed  witli  activity 
and  intelligence,  from  which  all  divine  orders  emanate:  he 
Gads  as  the  basis  of  all  spoken  words,  the  speakUig  Word" 
(Godet). 

The  Word  (o  Xoyo^):  Loooe.  This  expression  is  the  key- 
note and  theme  of  tJie  entire  gospel.  Aoyo^  is  from  the  root 
>Lty,  appearing  in  \eyio,  the  primitive  meaning  of  which  is  to 
lay  :  then,  to  pick  out,  gather,  pick  up :  hence  to  gatlier  or  put 
words  together,  and  so,  to  speak.  Hence  \6yo^  is,  first  of  all, 
a  ooUecttTtg  or  collection  both  of  things  in  the  mind,  and  of 
words  by  which  they  are  expreseed.  It  therefore  signifies  both 
the  outward  form  by  which  the  inward  thought  is  expressed, 
and  tht  inward  tliouglu  itself,  the  I^tin  oratio  and  ratio :  com- 
pare the  Italian  ragionare,  "to  think"  and  "to  speak." 

As  signifying  the  outward  form  it  ie  never  used  in  the  merely 
grammatical  sense,  as  simply  the  nam^  of  a  thing  or  act  {eiro<;, 
Ifpo/ta,  pfj/M),  but  means  a  word  as  the  thing  referred  to.-  tlie 
material^  not  i\\%forfnal  part :  a  word  as  embodying  a  concep- 
tion or  idea.  See,  for  instance,  Matt.  xxii.  46 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  9, 
19,  Hence  it  signifies  a  saying,  of  God,  or  of  man  (Matt.  xix. 
21,  22  ;  Mark  v.  35, 36) :  a  decree,  a. precept  {Rom.  ix.  28 ;  Mark 
vii.  13).  The  ten  commandments  are  called  in  the  Septuagint, 
oi  StKa  Xoyoi,  "  the  ten  words  "  {Exod.  xxxiv.  28),  and  hence  the 
familiar  term  decalogue.  It  is  further  used  of  discourse:  either 
of  the  act  of  speaking  (Acts  xiv.  12),  ot  skill  and  practice  in 
speaking  (Eph.  vi.  19),  or  of  continuous  speaking  (Luke  iv.  32, 
36).  Also  of  doctrine  (Acts  xviii.  15;  2  Tim.  iv.  15),  specifi- 
cally  the  doctrine  of  salvation  through  Christ  (Matt.  xiii.  20-23; 
Philip,  i.  14) ;  of  narrative,  both  the  relation  and  the  thing  re- 
lated (Acts  i.  1 ;  John  xxi.  23  ;  Mark  i.  45) ;  of  matter  under 
discussion,  an  affair,  a  case  in  law  (Acts  xv.  6 ;  xix.  38). 

As  signifying  tha  inward  tltought,  it  denotes  the  faculty  of 
thinking  atul  reasoning  (Ueb.  iv.  12) ;  regard  or  coitsitleration 
(Acts  XX.  24) ;  reckoning,  account  (Philip,  iv.  16,  17 ;  Heb.  iv. 
13) ;  cause  or  reason  (Acts  x.  29). 


i 


John  uses  tlie  word  in  a  peculiar  Bense,  here,  aud  iu  ver.  14; 
and,  in  tliiB  eeuee,  in  these  two  passages  only.  Tlie  uearest  ap- 
proach to  it  ia  in  Apoc.  xix.  13,  where  the  conqueror  is  called 
t/ie  Word  of  God ;  and  it  is  recalled  iu  the  phriises  Word  of  Life, 
aud  the  Life  woe  manifested  {I  John  i,  1,  a).  Compare  Heb.  iv. 
12.  It  was  a  familiar  and  current  theological  term  wheu  John 
wrote,  aud  therefore  he  uaea  it  without  esplaQation. 

ULO   T&BTAHKNT   VBA.aK   OP   THS   TKBM. 

The  word  here  points  directly  to  Greu.  1,  where  the  act  of 
creation  is  effected  by  God  speaking  (compare  Ps.  xxxiii.  6). 
The  idea  of  God,  who  is  iu  hia  own  nature  hidden,  revealing 
bimseif  ia  creation,  ia  the  root  of  t!ie  Logos-idea,  in  contrast 
with  all  materialistic  or  pantheistic  conceptions  of  creation. 
This  idea  develops  itself  in  the  Old  Testament  on  three  lines. 
(1)  The  Word,  aa  embodying  the  divine  will,  w  personified  in 
Hebrew  poetry.  Consequently  divine  attributes  are  predicated 
of  it  aa  being  the  continuous  revelation  of  God  in  law  and 
prophecy  (Ps.  xxxiii.  4 ;  Is.  xl.  8 ;  Ps.  cxix.  105).  The  Word  is 
a  healer  in  Ps.  cvii.  20 ;  a  measenffer  in  Pe.  cxlvii.  15  ;  the  agent 
of  the  divine  decrees  in  Isa.  Iv.  11. 

(2)  TVie personified  wisdom  (Job  xxviii.  12  sq. ;  Prov.  viii.,  ix.). 
Here  alao  is  the  idea  of  the  revelation  of  that  which  is  hidden. 
For  wisdom  ia  concealed  from  man  :  "  lie  knoweth  not  the  price 
thereof,  neither  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  living.  The 
depth  saitli,  It  is  not  in  me;  aud  the  eea  aaith.  It  is  not  with 
me.  It  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall  silver  be 
weighed  for  tlio  price  tliereof.  It  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all 
living,  and  kept  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air"  (Job  xxviii.). 
Even  Death,  which  unlocks  so  many  secrete,  and  the  under- 
world, know  it  only  aa  a  rumor  (ver.  22).  It  ia  only  God  who 
knows  its  way  and  its  place  (ver.  23).  lie  made  the  world, 
made  the  winds  and  the  waters,  made  a  deci-ee  for  the  rain  and 
a  way  for  the  lightning  of  the  thunder  (vv.  25,  26).  He  who 
possessed  wisdom  in  the  beginning  of  his  way,  before  Ilis  works 
of  old,  before  the  earth  with  its  depths  and  springs  and  monn- 
taina,  with  whom  was  wisdom  as  one  brought  up  with  Tlim 
(Prov.  viii.  26-31),  declared  it.      "It  became,  aa  it  were,  ol> 


H  (iTov.  vui.  : 


PROJJOaVE. 


27 


jective,  so  that  He  beheld  it "  (Job  xxviii,  27)  and  embodied  it 
in  His  ci-eative  work.  Thia  personification,  therefore,  is  based 
oil  tlie  thought  that  wisdom  is  not  ehiit  up  at  re^t  in  God,  hut 
is  active  and  manifest  iu  tlie  world.  "  She  standeth  in  t}ie  top 
of  high  places,  by  the  way  in  tlie  places  of  the  psttiis.  She 
crieth  at  the  gates,  at  the  entry  of  the  city,  at  the  coming  in  at 
the  doors"  (Prov.  viii.  2,  3).  She  builds  a  palace  and  prepares 
a  banquet,  and  issues  a  general  invitation  to  the  simple  and  to 
him  that  wanteth  understanding  (Prov.  ix.  1-6).  It  is  viewed 
as  the  one  guide  to  salvation,  compi-ehending  all  revelations 
of  God,  and  as  an  attribute  embracing  and  combining  all  His 
other  attributes. 

(3)  T/ie  Angel  of  Jehovah.  The  messenger  of  God  who  servea 
as  His  agent  in  the  world  of  sense,  and  is  sometimes  distin- 
guished from  Jehovah  and  sometimes  identical  with  Iiim  {Gen. 
xvi.  7-13 ;  xxxii.  24^38 ;  Hob.  xii.  4,  5 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  20,  21 ; 
Mai.  iii.  1). 

AfOOBTPHAI.   ITaAQE. 

In  the  Apocryphal  writings  this  mediative  element  is  more 
distinctly  apprehended,  but  with  a  tendency  to  pantheism.  In 
the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  (at  least  100  e.c),  where  wisdom 
seems  to  be  viewed  as  another  name  for  the  whole  divine  nat- 
ure, while  nowhere  connected  with  the  Messiah,  it  is  described 
as  a  being  of  light,  proceeding  essentially  from  God ;  a  true 
image  of  Qod,  co-occupant  of  the  divine  throne  ;  a  real  and  in- 
dependent principle,  revealing  God  in  the  world  and  mediating 
between  it  and  Ilim,  after  having  created  it  as  his  organ — in 
association  with  a  spirit  which  is  called  fiMvoyevii,  only  begotten 
(vii.  22).  "  Slie  is  the  breath  of  the  power  of  God,  and  a  pure 
influence  flowing  from  the  glory  of  the  Almighty;  therefore 
can  no  defiled  thing  fall  into  her.  For  she  is  the  brightness  of 
the  everlasting  light,  the  unspotted  mirror  of  the  power  of 
God,  and  the  image  of  his  goodness"  (see  ch.  vii.,  throughout). 
Again  :  "  Wisdom  reacheth  from  one  end  to  another  mightily, 
and  sweetly  doth  she  order  all  things.  In  that  she  is  conver- 
sant with  God,  she  magnifieth  her  nobility :  yea.  the  Lord  of  all 
things  Himself  loved  her.     For  she  is  privy  to  the  mysterieB  of 


WURD  BrUDIBS  IN  THB  HBW  TBSTAMBNT. 

the  knowledge  of  God,  and  a  lover  of  His  works.  Moreover, 
bj  the  means  of  her  I  sliail  obtain  immortality,  and  leave  be- 
hind me  an  everlasting  memorial  to  them  that  come  after  me" 
(ell.  ix.).  In  ch.  xvi,  12,  it  is  eaid,  "Thy  word,  O  Lord,  heal- 
eth  all  things"  (compare  Pe.  cvii.  20);  and  in  ch.  xviii,  15,  L6, 
"Thine  almighty  word  leaped  from  heaven  ont  of  thy  royal 
throne,  as  a  fierce  man  of  war  into  the  midst  of  a  land  of  de- 
strnction,  and  brought  thine  nnfeigned  commandment  as  a 
sharp  sword,  and,  standing  up, filled  all  things  with  death;  and 
it  touched  the  heaven,  but  it  stood  upon  the  earth."  See  also 
Wisdom  of  Sirach,  chs.  i.,  xxiv,,  and  Baruch  iii.,  iv.  1-4. 

LATER  JEWISH    USAGE. 

After  the  Babylonish  captivity  the  Jewish  doctors  combined 
into  one  view  the  theophanies,  prophetic  revelations  and  mani- 
featations  of  Jehovah  generally,  and  united  them  in  one  single 
conception,  that  of  a  permanent  agent  of  Jehovah  in  the  sen- 
Bible  world,  whom  they  designated  by  the  name  Memra  {word, 
Xayo?)  of  Jehovah.  The  learned  Jews  introduced  the  idea  into 
the  Targums,  or  Aramtean  paraphrases  of  the  Old  Testament, 
which  were  publicly  read  in  the  synagogues,  substituting  tlie 
name  the  word  of  Jehovah  for  that  of  Jehovah,  each  time 
that  God  manifested  himself.  Thus  in  Qen.  xxxix.  21,  they 
paraphrase,  "  The  Memra  was  with  Joseph  in  prison."  In  Ps. 
ex.  Jehovah  addresses  the  first  verse  to  the  Memra.  The 
Memra  is  the  angel  that  destroyed  the  first-born  of  Egypt,  and 
it  was  the  Memra  that  led  the  Israelites  in  the  cloudy  pillar. 

nSAOE   IN   THE  J UD^O- ALEXANDRINE   PHILOSOPHY. 

From  the  time  of  Ptolemy  I.  (323-285  b.c.),  there  were  Jews 
in  great  numbers  in  Egypt.  Philo  (a.d.  50)  estimates  them  at 
a  million  in  his  time.  Alexandria  was  their  headquarters. 
They  had  their  own  senate  and  magistrates,  and  possessed  the 
same  privileges  as  the  Greeks.  The  Septuagint  translation  of 
the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into  Greek  (n.o.  280-150)  was  the  be- 
ginning of  a  literary  movement  among  them,  the  key-note  of 
which  was  the  reconciliation  of  Western  culture  and  Judaism, 
the  establishment  of  a  connection  between  the  Old  Testament 


u 


I 


PBOLOGDK  39 

faith  and  tlie  Greek  pliilosopliy.  Uence  they  interpreted  the 
facts  of  sacred  history  allegorically,  and  made  tbem  symbols  of 
certaiD  speculative  principles,  alleging  that  the  Greek  philos- 
ophers had  borrowed  their  wisdom  from  Moses.  Aristobulus 
(aboat  150  8.0.)  asserted  the  existence  of  a  previous  and  much 
older  translation  of  the  law,  and  dedicated  to  Ptoleray  VI.  an 
allegorical  exposition  of  the  Pentateuch,  in  which  he  tried  to 
show  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Peripatetic  or  Aristotelian  school 
were  derived  from  the  Old  Testament.  Most  of  the  schools 
of  Greek  philosophy  were  represented  among  the  Alexandrian 
Jews,  but  the  favorite  one  was  the  Platonic.  The  effort  at 
reconciliation  culminated  in  Philo,  a  contemporary  of  Christ. 
Fbilo  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  Platonic  philosophy, 
and  made  it  the  fundamental  feature  of  his  own  doctrines, 
while  availing  himself  likewise  of  ideas  belonging  to  the  Peri- 
patetic and  Stoic  schools.  Unable  to  discern  the  difference  in 
the  points  of  view  from  which  these  different  doctrines  severally 
proceeded,  he  jumbled  together  not  merely  discordant  doctrines 
of  the  Greek  schools,  but  also  those  of  the  East,  regarding  the 
wisdom  of  the  Greeks  as  having  originated  in  the  legislation 
and  writings  of  Moses,  lie  gathered  together  from  East  and 
West  every  element  that  could  help  to  shape  his  conception  of 
s  vicegerent  of  God,  "a  mediator  between  the  eternal  and  tlie 
ephemeral.     Ilis  Logos  reflects  light  from  countless  facets." 

According  to  Philo,  God  is  the  absolute  Being.  He  calls 
God  "  that  which  is  i "  "  the  One  and  the  All."  God  alone  ex- 
ists for  himself,  without  multiplicity  and  without  mixture.  No 
name  can  properly  be  ascribed  to  Uim :  He  simply  is.  Hence, 
in  His  nature.  He  is  unknowable. 

Outside  of  God  there  exists  eternal  matter,  without  form  and 
Toid,  and  essentially  evil ;  but  the  perfect  Being  could  not  come 
into  direct  contact  with  the  senseless  and  corruptible;  so  that 
the  world  could  not  have  been  created  by  His  direct  agency. 
Hence  the  doctrine  of  a  mediating  principle  between  God  and 
matter — the  divine  Reaaon,  the  Logos,  in  whom  are  comprised 
all  the  ideas  of  finite  things,  and  who  created  the  sensible 
world  by  causing  these  ideas  to  penetrate  into  matter. 

The  absolute  God  ie  surrounded  by  \na pmoers  {hwaft^it)  &&  a 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  7TEW  TESTAMENT. 

king  by  his  Berv&nts.  These  powers  are,  in  Platonic  language, 
idtsas  ;  in  Jewish,  angels  ;  but  all  are  essentially  one,  and  their 
unity,  as  they  exist  in  God,  as  they  emanate  from  him,  aa  they 
are  disseminated  in  the  world,  is  expressed  by  Logos.  Hence 
the  Ixtgos  appears  nnder  a  twofold  aspect :  (Ij  As  ike  wiTncMient 
reason  of  God,  containing  within  itself  the  world-ideal,  which, 
while  not  outwardly  existing,  is  like  the  immanent  reason  in 
man.  This  is  styled  A6yo<;  iv&uiSero^,  i.e.,  tAs  Logos  conceived 
and  residing  in  the  mind.  This  was  the  aspect  emphasized 
by  the  Alexandrians,  and  which  tended  to  the  recognition  of  a 
twofold  personality  in  the  divine  essence,  (2)  As  the  outyoken 
■word,  proceeding  from  God  and  manifest  in  the  world.  This, 
when  it  lias  issued  from  God  in  creating  the  world,  is  tlje  AoytK 
irpo^opiKO'i,  i.e.,  the  Logos  uttered,  even  as  in  man  tlie  spoken 
word  is  the  manifestation  of  thought.  This  aspect  prevailed 
in  Palestine,  where  the  Word  appears  like  the  angel  of  the  Pen- 
tateuch, as  the  medium  of  the  outward  communication  of  God 
with  men.  and  tends  toward  the  recognition  of  a  divine  person 
subordinate  to  God.  Under  the  former  aspect,  the  Logos  is, 
really,  one  with  God's  hidden  being :  the  latter  eomprehenda 
all  the  workings  and  revelations  of  God  in  the  world ;  affords 
from  itself  the  idoaa  and  energies  by  which  the  world  was 
framed  and  is  upheld;  and,  tilling  all  things  with  divine  light 
and  life,  rules  them  in  wisdom,  love,  and  righteousness.  It  is 
the  beginning  of  creation,  not  inaugurated,  like  God,  nor  made, 
like  the  world  ;  but  the  eldest  son  of  the  eternal  Father  (the 
world  being  the  younger) ;  God's  image  ;  the  mediator  between 
God  and  the  world ;  the  bigheat  angel ;  the  second  (jod. 

Philo's  conception  of  the  Logos,  therefore,  is:  the  sum-total 
and  free  exercise  of  the  divine  energies  ;  so  that  God,  so  far  as 
he  reveals  himself,  is  called  Logos;  while  the  Logos,  so  far  as 
he  reveals  God,  is  called  God. 

John's  doctrine  and  terms  are  colored  by  these  preceding  in- 
fluences. During  his  residence  at  Ephesus  he  must  have  be- 
come familiar  with  the  fortiis  and  terms  of  the  Alexandrian 
theology.  Nor  is  it  improbable  that  he  nsed  the  term  Logos 
with  an  intent  to  facilitate  the  passage  from  the  current  the- 
ories of  his  time  to  the  pure  gospel  which  he  proclaimed.    "  To 


PROLOGUE.  31 

those  Helleniats  and  Ilelleiiistic  Jews,  on  the  one  hand,  who 
were  vainl^'  philosophizing  on  the  relations  of  the  finite  and  in- 
finite ;  to  those  investigators  of  the  letter  of  the  Scripturee,  on 
the  other,  who  speculated  about  the  theocratic  revelations,  John 
said,  by  giving  this  name  Logos  to  Jesus:  'Tiie  nnknown  Me- 
diator between  God  and  the  world,  the  knowledge  of  whom 
you  are  striving  after,  we  have  seen,  lieard,  and  touched.  Your 
philosophical  speculations  and  your  scriptural  subtleties  will 
never  raise  you  to  llim.  Believe  as  we  do  in  Jesus,  and  you 
will  possess  in  Him  that  divine  Gevealer  who  engages  your 
thoughts'"  (Godet). 

But  John's  doctrine  is  not  Fhilo's,  and  does  not  depend  upon 
it.  The  differences  between  tlie  two  are  pronounced.  Though 
both  use  the  term  Logos,  they  use  it  with  utterly  different 
meanings.  In  John  it  signifies  word,  as  in  Holy  Scripture 
generally;  in  Phito,  reastm ;  and  that  so  distinctly  that  when 
Philo  wishes  to  give  it  the  meaning  of  word,  he  adds  to  it  by 
way  of  explanation,  the  term  p)]/Mi,  word. 

The  nature  of  the  being  described  by  r.,ogos  is  conceived  by 
each  in  an  entirely  different  spirit.  John's  Logos  is  a  person, 
with  a  consciousness  of  personal  distinction ;  Fhilo's  is  im- 
personal. His  notion  is  indeterminate  and  fluctuating,  shaped 
hy  the  infiuence  which  happens  to  be  operating  at  the  time. 
Under  the  influence  of  Jewish  documents  he  styles  the  Logos 
an  "  archangel ; "  under  the  influence  of  Plato,  "  the  Idea  of 
Ideas ; "  of  the  Stoics,  "  the  impersonal  Reason."  It  is  doubtful 
whether  Philo  ever  meant  to  represent  the  Logos  formally  as  a 
person.  All  the  titles  he  gives  it  may  be  explained  by  supposing 
it  to  mean  the  ideal  world  on  which  the  actual  is  modelled. 

in  Philo,  moreover,  the  function  of  the  Logos  is  confined  to 
the  creation  and  preservation  of  the  universe.  He  does  not 
identify  or  connect  liiin  with  the  Messiah.  His  doctrine  was, 
to  a  great  degree,  a  philosophical  substitute  for  Messianic  hopes. 
He  may  have  conceived  of  the  Word  as  acting  through  the  Mes- 
siah, but  not  as  one  with  him.  He  is  a  universal  principle. 
In  John  the  Messiah  is  the  Logos  himself,  uniting  himself  with 
humanity,  and  clothing  himself  with  a  body  in  order  to  save  the 
world. 


VOttD  STCDIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TBSTAJIBNT. 

TJie  two  notions  differ  as  to  origia.  The  impersonal  God  of 
Philo  cannot  pass  to  tlie  finite  creation  without  contamination 
of  his  divine  essence.  Hence  an  inferior  agent  mnst  be  inter- 
posed. John's  God,  on  the  other  hand,  is  personal,  and  a  loving 
personality.  He  is  a  Father  (i.  18) ;  His  essence  is  love  (iii.  16 ; 
1  John  i7,  8, 16).  lie  is  in  direct  relation  with  the  world  which 
lie  desires  to  save,  and  tfie  Logos  is  He  Himself,  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  According  to  Philo,  tfie  Logos  is  not  coe-tistent  with  the 
eternal  God.  Eternal  matter  is  before  him  in  time.  According 
to  John,  the  Logos  ia  essentially  with  the  Father  from  all  eteniily 
(i,  2),  and  it  is  He  who  creates  all  things,  matter  included  (i.  3). 

Philo  misses  the  moral  enci^y  of  the  Hebrew  religion  as 
expressed  in  its  emphasis  npon  the  holiness  of  Jehovah,  and 
therefore  fails  to  perceive  the  necessity  of  a  divine  teacher  and 
Saviour.  He  forgets  the  wide  distinction  between  God  and  the 
world,  and  declares  that,  were  the  universe  to  end,  God  would 
die  of  loneliness  and  inactivity. 

THE   MEANING    OF   L0008    IN  JOHN, 

As  Logos  haa  the  double  meaning  of  thought  and  apeech,  bo 
Christ  is  related  to  God  as  the  word  to  the  idea,  the  word  being 
not  merely  a  name  for  the  idea,  but  the  idea  itself  expressed. 
The  thongbt  is  the  inward  word  (Dr.  Schaff  compares  the 
Hebrew  expression  "  I  speak  in  my  heart "  for  "  I  think  "). 

The  Logos  of  John  is  the  real,  personal  God  (i.  1),  the  Word, 
who  viaa  originally  before  the  creation  with  God,  and  was  God, 
one  in  essence  and  nature,  yet  personally  distinct  (i.  1,  18);  the 
revealer  and  interpreter  of  the  hidden  being  of  God  ;  the  re- 
flection and  visible  image  of  God,  and  the  organ  of  all  Ilia 
manifestations  to  the  world.  Compare  Heb.  i.  3.  He  made 
all  things,  proceeding  personally  from  God  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  act  of  creation  (i.  3),  and  became  man  in  the  per- 
son of  Jesus  Christ,  accomplisbing  the  redemption  of  the  world. 
Compare  Philip,  ii.  6. 

The  following  is  from  William  Austin,  "Meditation  for 
Christmas  Day,"  cited  by  Ford  on  John : 

"The  name  Word  ia  moat  excellently  given  to  our  Savionr; 
for  it  expresses  Iiis  nature  in  one,  more  than  in  any  others. 


V 


PROLOGDB. 


33 


Therefore  St.  John,  when  he  namee  the  Person  in  the  Tritiily 
(1  John  V.  7),*  chooseB  rather  to  call  Ilim  Word  tlian  Stm  :  for 
v>orfi  is  a  phrase  more  coiDrtmiiicable  than  so-ii.  Smt  hatli  only 
reference  to  the  Father  that  begot  Him  ;  but  word  may  refer 
to  liim  that  conceives  it;  to  him  that  speaks  it;  to  that  which 
is  spoken  by  it;  to  the  voice  that  it  is  clad  in  ;  and  to  the  effects 
it  raiseB  in  him  that  hears  it.  So  Christ,  ae  He  ie  the  Wtyrd, 
not  only  refers  to  His  Father  that  begot  Ilim,  and  from  whom 
lie  comes  forth,  but  to  all  the  creatures  that  were  made  by 
Him;  to  the  desh  that  lie  took  to  clothe  Ilim;  and  to  the 
doctrine  He  brought  and  taught,  and  which  lives  yet  in  the 
hearts  of  all  them  that  obediently  do  hear  it.  He  it  Ib  that  is 
this  Wofd ;  and  any  other,  prophet  or  preacher,  he  is  but  a 
voice  (Luke  iii.  4).  Word  ia  o?i  inward  conception  of  the  mind,' 
and  foicet  is  hut  a  sign  of  inteTiHon.  St.  John  was  but  a  sign, 
B  voice;  not  worthy  to  untie  the  shoe-latchet  of  this  Word. 
Christ  is  the  inner  conception  '  in  the  bosom  of  Hia  Father  ; ' 
and  that  is  properly  the  Word.  And  yet  the  Word  is  the  inten- 
tion uttered  forth,  as  well  as  conceived  within;  for  Christ  waa 
no  less  the  Word  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,  or  in  the  cradle  of 
the  manger,  or  on  the  altar  of  the  cross,  than  be  was  in  the  be- 
ginning, 'in  the  bosom  of  Hia  Father.'  For  as  the  intention 
departs  not  from  the  mind  when  tlie  word  is  uttered,  so  Christ, 
proceeding  from  the  Father  by  eternal  generation,  and  after 
here  by  birth  and  incarnation,  remains  still  in  Him  and  with 
Him  in  essence;  as  the  intention,  which  is  conceived  and  born 
in  the  mind,  remains  still  with  it  and  in  it,  though  the  word  be 
spoken.  He  is  therefore  rightly  called  l/ie  Word,  both  by  His 
coming  from,  and  yet  remaining  still  in,  the  Father." 

And  the  Word.    A  repetition  of  the  great  subject,  with  sol- 
emn emphasis. 

Was  with  God  (ijc  irpb'i  top  Bebe).    Anglo-Saxon  vei-s.,  mid 
Gode.    Wye,  at  God.    With  (irpof!)  does  not  convey  the  full 


*  Of  coune  not  aDticipitin^  the  eritioism  which  hi 
from  the  UM. 

\  Aoatin  lued  the  Lattai  nw,  vid  of  ooa 


eliminated  thli  pai 
mind  the  aeeottiuj  m 


meaniDg,  but  there  is  no  single  EngliBh  word  which  will  give 
it  better.  The  preposition  w^ot,  which,  with  the  accusative 
case,  denotes  motion  towards,  or  direction,  is  also  ofteu  used  in 
the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of  witk  ;  and  that  not  merely 
as  heiTig  iiear  or  beside,  but  as  a  living  union  and  communion  ; 
implying  the  active  notion  of  intercourse.  Thus  :  "  Are  not  his 
sisters  here  toitk  us  "  (ir^o<;  iif^a's),  i-e.,  in  social  relations  with  us 
(Mark  vi,  3  ;  Matt.  xiii.  56).  "  How  long  shall  I  be  toitA  you  " 
{■trpm  viMv,  Mark  ix.  16).  "  I  sat  daily  loitA  you  "  (Matt.  xxvi. 
55).  "To  be  present  wUJi.  the  Lord^^  {vpoi  top  Kvpiov,  2  Cor. 
V.  8).  "  Abide  and  winter  vrUh  you  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  6).  "  The 
eternal  life  which  was  wUh  the  Father"  {vpot  top  irarepa,  1 
John  i.  2).  Time  John's  statement  is  that  the  divine  Word  not 
only  abode  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity,  but  was  in  the 
living,  active  relation  of  communion  with  llim. 

And  the  Word  was  God  (ical  Sem  ^p  o  Xoyo<!).  In  thd 
Gieek  order,  and  God  was  the  Word,  which  is  followed  by 
Ang.-Sax.,  Wye,  and  Tynd.  But  0eo9,  GoU,  is  i\iq  predicate 
and  not  tiie  subject  of  the  proposition.  The  subject  must  be 
the  Word ;  for  John  is  not  trying  to  show  who  is  God,  hnt  who 
is  the  Word.  Notice  that  ©eos  is  without  the  article,  which 
could  not  have  been  omitted  if  he  had  meant  to  designate  the 
word  as  God ;  because,  in  that  event,  Seot  would  have  been 
ambiguous ;  perhaps  a  God.  Moreover,  if  he  had  said  God  was 
the  Word,  he  would  have  contradicted  his  previous  statement 
by  which  he  had  distinguished  (hypostatically)  *  God  from  the 
word,  and  Xoyo';  (Logos)  would,  further,  have  signified  only  an 
attribute  of  God.  The  predicate  is  emphatically  placed  in  the 
proposition  before  the  subject,  because  of  the  progress  of  the 
thought;  this  being  the  third  and  highest  statement  respecting 
the  Word^the  climax  of  the  two  preceding  propositions.  The 
word  God,  used  attributively,  maintainathe  personal  distinction 
between  God  and  the  Word,  but  makes  the  nnity  of  essence  and 

*  The  word  hypoiliuu  it  eqnirilent  to  mihalnncf.  tn  theoloRical  [■ngnage  it 
is  OBod  in  the  aenxa  ot  per»on  as  diatinguinhed  from  tttniwe.  Hence  the  ail  verb 
/l^ift-utiaiUy  gIgniRes  permniiUy  in  the  theolujgical  MDM,  wtlioll  recugoilel 
tbree  pertant  in  the  Godhead  with  ooe  atenee. 


k 


nature  to  follow  the  distinction  of  person,  and  ascribes  to  the 
Word  all  the  attributes  of  tlie  divine  eeseuce.  "There  ie  some- 
thing majestic  in  the  way  in  wliicli  the  description  of  the 
Logoa,  in  the  three  brief  but  great  propositions  of  ver.  1,  is  un- 
folded with  ino-easing  fulness"  (Meyer). 


2.  The  same  (o5tos).     Lit.,  this  one-  the  o 
the  Word. 


Q  first  named : 


Was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  In  ver.  1  the  eiemeiits 
of  this  statement  have  been  given  separately:  tlie  Word,  tbe 
eternal  being  of  the  Word,  and  liis  active  communion  with 
God.  Here  they  are  combined,  and  with  new  force.  This 
same  Word  not  only  was  coeternal  witli  God  in  respect  of  being 
(ijv,  was),  but  was  eternally  in  active  comTnwnion  witii  Him 
(in  the  beginning  with  God  :  vpoi  tov  Sew) :  "  not  simply  tlie 
Word  with  God,  bnt  God  with  God"  (Moulton).  Notice  that 
here  0eov  has  the  article,  as  in  the  second  proposition,  where 
God  is  spoken  of  absolutely.  In  the  third  proposition,  the 
Word  was  God,  the  article  was  omitted  because  ©eos  described 
the  nature  of  the  Word  and  did  not  identify  his  person.  Here, 
as  in  the  second  proposition,  the  Word  is  placed  in  personal  re- 
lation to  God. 

This  verse  forms  the  transition  point  from  the  discueeion  oE 
the  personal  being  of  the  Word  to  Ilis  manifestation  in  creation. 
If  it  was  this  same  Word,  and  no  other,  who  was  Himself  God, 
and  who,  from  all  eternity,  was  in  active  communion  with  God, 
then  the  statement  follows  naturally  that  all  things  were  created 
through  Uim,  thus  bringing  the  essential  natui-e  of  the  Word 
and  Ilis  manifestation  in  creation  into  connection.  As  th^ 
idea  of  the  Word  involves  knowledge  and  will,  wisdom  and 
force,  the  creative  function  is  properly  His.  Hence  His  close 
relation  to  created  things,  especially  to  man,  prepares  the  way 
for  His  incarnation  and  redeeming  work.  The  connection  be- 
tween creation  and  redemption  is  closer  than  is  commonly 
apprehended.  It  is  intimated  in  the  words  of  Isaiah  (xlvi.  4), 
"I  have  made,  and  I  will  hear."  Redemption,  in  a  certain 
sense,  grows  out  of  creation.     Because  God  created  man  in 


M 


WORD  STUDIKS  Ilf  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Ilia  own  image,  lie  would  restore  liim  to  tliat  image.  Becauar 
God  made  man,  lie  lovea  bini,  educates  him,  bears  with  him 
carries  ou  ilie  race  un  the  iioe  of  His  iufinite  patience,  is  bur 
dened  with  its  porverseiiesA  and  bliudtiess,  and  expresses  and 
effectuates  all  this  iu  the  iiicaruatioa  and  redemptive  work  of 
Jesus  Christ.  God  is  under  the  stress  of  the  parental  instinct 
(humanly  speaking)  to  redeem  mau. 

3.  All  things  (TTtiirra).  Regarded  fievi?ra^^.  The  reference 
is  to  the  iuHnite  detail  of  creation,  rather  than  to  creation  as 
a  whole,  which  is  expressed  by  tA  trdma,  the  all  (Col.  i.  16). 
For  this  reason  John  avoids  the  word  Koafia^,  Uis  world,  which 
denotes  the  world  as  a  great  system.  Hence  Bengel,  quoted 
by  Meyer,  is  wrong  in  referring  to  Koafup  (the  world)  of  ver.  10 
as  a  parallel. 

Were  made  (eyitiero).  Lit,,  came  into  heing,  or  became.  Ex- 
pressing the  passage  from  nothingness  into  being,  and  the  un- 
folding of  a  divine  order,  Compai-e.  vv,  14,  17.  Three  words 
are  used  in  the  New  Testament  to  express  the  act  of  creation  : 
KT^feip,  to  create  (Apoc.  iv.  11. ;  x.  8  ;  Col.  i.  16) ;  woieiv.  to 
make  (Apoe.  xiv.  7;  Mark  x.  6),  botli  of  which  refer  to  the 
Creator;  and  yir/v€ff$at,  to  become,  which  refers  to  that  which 
la  created.  In  Mark  x.  6,  both  words  occur.  "  From  the  begin- 
ning of  the  creation  ((trtVeiu?)  God  made"  (evoiTfirev).  So  'n 
Eph.  ii.  10:  "We  are  llis  workmanship  (iroii;/ia),  created 
{icri(TBfVT€<i)  in  Christ  Jesus."  Here  the  distinction  is  between 
tlio  ahsolute  being  expressed  by  tji*  (see  on  ver.  1),  and  the  cont- 
ing  iitio  being  of  creation  {iyevero).  Tlie  same  contrast  oc- 
curs iu  vv,  6,  9 :  "A  man  sent  from  God  came  into  beiny" 
(eyevero) ;  "the  true  Light  wa«"  (^n). 

"  The  main  conception  of  creation  which  is  present  in  the 
writings  of  St.  John  is  expressed  by  the  first  notice  whicli  he 
makes  of  it:  All  things  cams  into  being  through  the  Word. 
This  statement  sets  aside  the  notions  of  eternal  matter  and  of 
inherent  evil  in  matter.  •  There  was  when '  the  world  '  was  not ' 
(John  xvii,  5,  24) ;  and,  by  implication,  all  things  as  made  were 
good.  The  agency  of  the  Word, '  who  was  God,'  again  excludeo 


PROLOG UK 

both  the  idea  of  a  Creator  eseentiiilly  inferior  to  God,  and  the 
idea  of  an  abstract  Monotheism  in  which  tliere  is  no  living  re- 
lation hetween  the  creature  and  the  Creator;  for  as  all  tilings 
come  into  being  'through  '  tlie  Word,  so  they  are  supported  'in' 
Him  (John  i,  3 ;  compare  Col.  i.  16  sq. ;  Ileb.  i.  3).  Ami  yet 
more,  the  use  of  the  term  eyii/ero,  came  into  beiii^,  aa  distia- 
guished  from  iierla^,  were  created,  snggests  the  thought  that 
creation  is  to  be  regarded  (according  to  our  apprehension)  as  a 
manifestation  of  a  divine  law  of  love.  Thus  creation  {aU 
thiti-jn  cat/ie  into  being  through  U'un)  answers  to  the  Incarna- 
tion {the  Word  became  Jlesh).  All  the  iinfolding  and  infolding 
of  finite  being  to  the  last  issue  lies  in  the  fulfilment  of  His 
will  who  is  love"  (Weatcott,  on  1  John  ii.  17). 

By  Him  (£('  ain-ov).  Lit,  through  him.  The  preposition  Stci 
is  generally  used  to  denote  the  working  of  God  through  some 
secondary  agency,  as  StA  roi)  irpo^rfrov,  through  Vie  proph^ 
(Matt.  i.  22,  on  which  see  note).*  It  is  the  preposition  by 
which  the  relation  of  Christ  to  creation  is  usually  expressed 
(see  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Col.  j.  16  ;  Heb.  i.  2),  though  it  is  oc- 
casionally used  of  the  Father  (Keh.  ii.  10 ;  Rom.  xi.  36,  and 
Gal.  i.  1,  where  it  is  iised  of  both).  Hence,  as  Godet  remarks, 
it  "  does  not  lower  the  Word  to  the  rank  of  a  simple  instru- 
ment," but  merely  implies  a  different  relation  to  creation  on 
the  part  of  tlie  Father  and  the  Son. 

Without  (j(aph).     Lit.,  apart  from.     Compare  xv,  5. 

Was  not  anything  made  that  was  made  (eyEvero  oii&k  fv. 
6  yiyopev).  Many  authorities  place  the  period  after  &,  and  join 
o  TcvofCf  with  what  follows,  rendering.  "  without  Him  was  not 
anything  made.  That  which  hath  been  made  was  life  in 
Him."  t 

•  So  the  H«»..  bnt  not  ooniigl«nlty  Ihronghoat.  A.  V.,  Jy.  8m  my  «itlalt 
«D  the  Eevised  New  TesUment.  PreBbyterlan  Reriew,  October,  1881. 

(Tbli  reading  ia  Terjearnegtly  defended  b;  Cannn  Westoott,  and  U  adopted 
h.  Weatcott  and  Hort'i  lent,  and  »inpport«d  bj  MilliRan  and  Moolton.  It  la 
-ejected  by  Tlscberidorf  and  by  the  Reviscre  ;  alan  by  Alford,  He  Wette,  Meyer, 
uid  Godet.  Urammatipftl  coniiiiie rations  wnm  to  hv  aoainn  it  (see  Alford  oa 
the  pawage).  but  Canon  Weatootfa  deteuct  is  iiuwt  ingenioua  and  pUualble. 


WORD  STTIDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TH6TAMKNT. 

Made  (eyivero),  as  before,  came  into  being. 

Not  anything  {oijik  tv).  Lit.,  fwt  even  one  thing,  Ck>mpare 
OD  -irairra  {alt  thingg)  at  the  beginDiDg  of  this  verse. 

That  was  made  {6  yeyovfv).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  that 
hatli  been  maile,  observiag  the  force  of  tlie  perfect  tenee  as  dis- 
tinguieiied  from  the  aoriet  {h^evera).  The  latter  teuse  points 
back  to  the  work  of  creation  considered  aa  a  definite  act  or 
series  of  acts  in  the  beginning  of  time.  The  perfect  tense  in- 
dicates the  continuance  of  things  created ;  bo  that  the  full  idea 
is,  thai  which  hath  been  made  and  exists.  The  combination  of 
a  positive  and  negative  clause  (compare  ver.  20)  is  characteristic 
of  John's  style,  as  also  of  James'.  See  note  on  "  wanting  noth- 
ing," Jas.  i.  4. 

4,  In  Him  was  life  {ev  airrw  f»q  ^v).  He  was  the  fountain 
of  life — physical,  moral,  and  eternal^ts  principle  and  source. 
Two  words  for  life  are  employed  in  the  New  Testament :  ySio! 
and  ^ij.  The  primary  distinction  is  that  ^mff  means  ejnstence 
aa  contrasted  with  death,  and  0io>i,  the  period,  means,  or  man- 
ner of  existence.  Hence  ^lot  is  originally  the  higher  word, 
being  used  of  men,  while  fw^  is  used  of  animals  {^ata).  We 
speak  therefore  of  the  discussion  of  the  life  and  liabits  of  ani- 
mals as  soology ;  and  of  accounts  of  men's  lives  as  Jiography. 
Animals  have  the  vital  principle  in  common  with  men,  but 
men  lead  lives  controlled  by  intellect  and  will,  and  directed 
to  moral  and  intellectual  ends.  In  the  New  Testament,  5^? 
means  either  living,  i.e.,  means  of  svhsistence  (Mark  xii.  44; 
Luke  viii.  43),  or  course  of  life,  life  regarded  as  an  economy 
(bike  viii.  14 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  2  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4).  Zoih  occurs  in  the 
lower  sense  of  life,  considered  principally  or  wholly  as  existence 
(I  Pet.  iii.  10:  Acts  viii.  33:  xvii.  25;  Heb.  vi'i.  3).  There 
seems  to  bo  a  significance  in  tbo  use  of  the  word  in  Luke  xvi. 
25  ;  "  Thou  in  thy  lifetime  (en  rrj  ftirp  trovi  receivedst  thy 
good  things;"  the  intimation  being  that  the  rich  man's  life  had 
been  little  better  than  mere  existence,  and  not  life  at  all  in  the 
true  sense.     Bnt  througliout  the  New  Testament  {Ju^  is  the 


i 


PttOUWDE.  39 

nobler  word,  seemiDg  to  have  changed  places  with  0io<i-  It  ex- 
presses the  snm  of  mortal  aiid  eternal  bleesedoeflB  (Matt.  xxr. 
46;  Luke  xviii.  30;  John  xi.  25;  Acts  ii.  28;  Rom.  y.  17;  vi. 
4),  and  that  not  onljr  in  respect  of  men,  but  also  of  God  and 
Christ.  So  here.  Compare  John  v.  26 ;  xW.  6  ;  1  John  i.  2. 
This  change  is  due  to  the  gospel  revelation  of  the  essential  con- 
nection of  sin  with  death,  and  consequently,  of  life  with  holi- 
ness. "Whatever  trul)-  lives,  does  go  because  sin  has  never 
found  place  in  It,  or,  having  found  place  for  a  time,  has  since 
been  overcome  and  expelled"  (Trench). 

Zaij  ia  a  favorite  word  with  John.  See  xi.  25 ;  xiv,  6  ;  viiL 
12;  1  John  i.  2;  v.  20;  John  vi.  35,  48;  vi.  63;  Apoc.  xxi. 
6;  xxii.  1,  IV;  viL  17;  John  iv.  14;  Apoc.  ii.  7;  xxii.  2,  14, 
19;  Johnxii.50;  xvii.  3;  xx.  31;  v.  26;  vi.  53,54;  v.  40; 
iiL  15,  16,  36;  x.  10;  v.  24;  xii.  25;  vi  27;  iv.  36;  1  John 
V.  12,  16;  John  vi.  51. 


Was  the  Light  of  men  {^v  to  ipw  twv  M/^parmav).  Passing 
from  the  thought  of  creation  in  general  to  that  of  mankind, 
who,  in  the  whole  range  of  created  things,  had  a  special 
capacity  for  receiving  the  divine.  The  Lighi—lhe  peculiar 
mode  of  the  divine  operation  upon  men,  conformably  to  their 
rational  and  moral  nature  which  alone  was  fitted  to  receive  the 
light  of  divine  truth.  It  is  not  said  that  iheWord  was  light,  but 
that  the  life  was  the  light.  The  Word  becomes  light  through 
the  medinm  of  life,  of  spiritnal  life,  jnst  as  eight  is  a  function  of 
physical  life.  Compare  xiv.  6.  where  Christ  becomes  the  life 
through  being  the  tnith ;  and  Matt.  v.  8,  where  the  pnre  heart 
is  the  medinm  through  which  God  is  beheld.  In  whatever 
mode  of  manifestation  the  Word  is  in  the  world.  He  is  the  light 
of  the  world ;  in  His  works,  in  the  dawn  of  creation ;  in  the 
happT  conditions  of  Eden;  in  the  Patriarchs,  in  the  Law  and 
the  Prophets,  in  His  incarnation,  and  in  the  sabseqaent  history 
of  the  Church.  Compare  ix.  5.  Cf  mm,  a  ft  dasB,  and  do* 
of  individnals  only. 


WORD   8TDDIB8  IN   THE   RBW  TBSTAMKNT. 

THE  SECOND  DIVISION  OF  THE  PROLOGUE.  THE  WORD 
DISOWNED. 

AgatDBt  the  eternal  being,  light  and  life  of  the  divine  Word, 
a  contrary  principle  emerges  in  the  world  ~  darkneaa.  The 
purpose  and  work  of  God  in  creation  having  been  set  forth,  we 
are  now  shown  man's  attitude  toward  these. 

5.  Shineth  {ipalvei).  Note  the  present  tense,  indicating  not 
merely  the  present  point  of  time,  but  that  the  light  has  gone 
forth  continuouslj  and  without  interruption  from  the  beginning 
nntil  now,  and  is  still  shining.  Hence  ^{vei,  shineth,  denot- 
ing the  peculiar  property  of  light  nnder  all  circumstances,  and 
rot  ^Tii^et,  li^hteneth  or  illumhiateth,  as  in  ver.  9.  The  shin- 
ing doea  not  always  illuminate.     Compare  1  John  ii.  8. 

In  the  darkness  {hi  t^  aKoria).  Xkot^o.,  darkness,  is  a 
word  peculiar  to  later  Greek,  and  used  in  the  New  Testament 
almost  exclusively  by  John.  It  occurs  once  in  Matt.  x.  27,  and 
once  in  Luke  xii.  3,  The  more  common  New  Testament  word 
ifi  o-K^TDf,  from  tlie  same  root,  which  appears  in  aKtd,  s/iadow, 
and  o-«iji^,  tent.  Another  word  for  darkness,  ^d<^,  occurs  only 
in  Peter  and  Jude  (2  Pet.  ii.  4. 17 ;  Jnde  6,  13).  See  on  2  Pet. 
ii.  4.  The  two  words  are  combined  in  the  phrase  blackness  of 
darkness  (3  Pet.  ii.  17  ;  Jude  13).  In  classical  Greek  o-kotos, 
as  distinguished  from  £^^<;,  is  the  stronger  term,  denoting  the 
condition  of  darkness  as  opposed  to  light  in  nature.  Hence 
of  deatfi ;  of  the  condition  before  birth  ;  of  nighi.  Z6<f>o<;,  which 
is  mainly  a  poetical  term,  signifiea  gloomy  half-darknest,  nehu- 
loustuiss.  Here  the  stronger  word  is  used.  The  darkness  of 
ein  is  deep.  The  moral  condition  which  opposes  itself  to  di- 
vine light  is  utterly  dark.  Tlie  very  light  that  is  in  it  is 
darkness.  Its  condition  is  the  opposite  of  that  happy  state  of 
humanity  indicated  in  ver.  4,  when  the  life  was  the  light  of 
men  ;  it  is  a  condition  in  which  mankind  lias  become  the  prey 
of  falsehood,  folly  and  ein.  Compare  1  John  i.  9-11.  Rom. ' 
21,  22. 

Comprehended  (MiTAa,8«f).  Rev.,  apprehended.  Wye., 
took  not  it.     See  on  Mark  ix.  18 ;  Acts  iv.  13.     Comprehended, 


PROLOGUE. 


41 


I 


in  tlie  eeaee  of  the  A.  V.,  underaUxxl,  is  inadmissible.  This 
meaning  would  require  tlie  middle  voiL-e  of  the  verb  {see  Acts 
iv.  13 ;  X.  34 ;  xxv,  25).  The  Kev.,  apprehended,  i.e.,  grasped 
or  seised,  gives  the  correct  idea,  which  appears  in  Jolm  xii.  35, 
"  lest  darkness  oom^  upon  you,"  i.e.,  overtake  and  seize.  The 
word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  laying  hold  of  so  as  to  make  one'» 
ovm  ;  hence,  to  take  possession  of.  Used  of  obtaining  the  prize 
in  the  games  (1  Cor.  ix.  24) ;  of  attaining  righteouGness  (Koui. 
ix.  30) ;  of  a  demon  taking  possession  of  a  man  (Mark  ix.  IS) ; 
of  the  day  of  the  Lord  overtaking  one  as  a  thief  (1  Thess.  v. 
4).  Applied  to  darkness,  this  idea  inclndes  that  of  edipsing 
or  ovenohelming.  Hence  some  render  overcame  (WestcotI, 
Moolton).  John's  thouglit  is,  tliat  in  the  struggle  between 
light  and  darkness,  light  was  victorious.  The  darkness  did  not 
appropriate  the  light  and  eclipse  it.  "  The  wliole  phrase  ia  in- 
deed a  startling  paradox.  The  light  does  not  banish  the  dark- 
ness; the  darkness  does  not  overpower  the  Hght.  Light  and 
darkness  coexist  in  the  world  side  by  side  "  (Westcott). 

6.  There  was  a  man  {iyhvro  owSpowro?).  Better,  Rev., 
"  tliere  came  a  man,"  tyh/ero  denoting  the  historical  manifes- 
tation, the  emergence  of  the  Baptist  into  the  economy  of  the 
revelation  of  the  light.  Compare  iii.  1,  t/iere  was  a  man  (^p 
avSpvirm),  where  the  mere  fact  that  there  was  such  a  man  as 
Nicodemns  is  stated.  See  remarks  on  ^c,  ver.  1.  A  distinction 
is  also  intimated  between  tJie  etertuU  being  {^v)  of  the  Word 
and  tAe  coming  into  being  of  his  messenger. 


Sent  (aweoToX^wcw).  See  on  Matt.  x.  2, 16  ;  Mark  iv.  29; 
Lnke  iv.  18.  The  verb  carries  the  sense  of  sending  an  envoy 
with  a  special  commission.  Hence  it  is  used  of  the  mission  of 
the  Son  of  God,  and  of  His  apostles ;  the  word  apostle  being  di- 
rectly derived  from  it.  It  is  thns  distingiiished  from  irefiTnOfta 
send,  which  denotes  simply  the  relation  of  the  sender  to  the  sent. 
See  on  xx.  2],  and  1  John  iii.  5.  The  statement  is  not  merely 
iqaivaleni  to  was  sent.  The  finite  verb  and  the  participle  are 
to  be  taken  separately,  as  stating  two  distinct  facte,  the  appear- 


M 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  TRB  NEW  TBSTAMBNT. 

once  and  the  mission  oi  John.     There  came  a  man,  and  that 
man  was  sent  from  God. 

From  God  {-n-ap^  OeoO).  The  preposition  means/roTn  beside. 
It  invests  the  iiieBBeiiger  with  more  dignity  and  Bignificance 
than  if  the  writer  had  said,  "sent  by  God."  It  is  used  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  Eeatfrotn  the  Father  (xv.  26). 

Whose  name  was  John  {Svofui  avr^  'ladinp).  Lit.,  the 
name  unto  Aim  Jchn.  The  first  mention  of  John  the  Baptist. 
The  last  occurs.  Acts  xix.  3.  On  the  name,  see  on  Matt.  iii.  1  ; 
Luke  iii.  2.  John  never  speaks  of  the  Baptist  as  John  the 
Baptist,  like  the  other  Evangelists,  but  simply  as  John.  This 
is  perfectly  natural  on  the  Bupposition  that  John  himself  is  the 
author  of  the  gospel,  and  is  the  other  John  of  the  narrative. 

7.  The  same  (o&to«).  Compare  ver.  2,  and  the  pronoun 
ixetvm,  fie,  in  ver.  8. 

For  a  witness  (ew  fiaprvpiiw).  Rev,,  more  correctly,  /or 
witfiesa :  a  vritness  would  be  /idprvpa  as  Acts  i.  8.  The  sense 
iijor  witness-bearing  or  to  bear  witness.  On  the  word,  see  Acts 
i.  22 ;  1  Pet.  v.  1.  It  is  one  of  John's  characteristic  words,  oc- 
curring nearly  fifty  times  in  variouB  forms  in  hia  Gospel,  and 
thirty  or  forty  times  in  the  Epistles  and  Apocalypse.  The 
emphatic  development  of  the  idea  of  witness  is  peculiar  to  this 
Gospel.  *'  It  evidently  belongs  to  a  time  when  men  had  begun 
to  reason  about  the  faith,  and  to  analyze  the  grounds  on  which 
it  rested  "  ( Westcott).  He  develops  the  idea  imder  the  follow- 
ing forms :  The  witness  of  the  Father  (v.  31,  34,  37) ;  the  wit- 
neaa  of  Christ  himself  (viii.  14 ;  xviii,  37) ;  the  witness  of  works 
(v.  17,  36;  X.  25  ;  xiv.  11;  xv.  24);  the  witness  of  Scripture 
(v.  39,  40,  46 ;  i.  46) ;  the  witness  of  the  forenmner  (i.  7 ;  v. 
33,  35) ;  the  witness  of  the  disciples  (xv,  27  ;  xix.  35 ;  xxi.  24  ; 
I  John  i.  2 ;  iv.  14) ;  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  (xv.  26 ;  xvi.  13, 
14 ;  1  John  v.  6i.  Note  the  emphasis  attached  to  the  idea  here, 
by  the  twofold  form  in  which  it  is  pat:  first,  generally,yor  wit- 
ness, and  then  by  giving  the  subject  of  the  testimony. 


PROLOGUK  43 

AIL  The  Baptist  took  np  the  work  of  the  prophets,  as  re- 
spects their  preparation  for  the  universal  extension  of  the  divine 
odl  (Isa.  xlix.  6).  His  message  was  to  merij  withoat  regard  to 
nation,  sect,  descent,  or  other  considerations. 

Through  him.    John  the  Baptist. 

8.  He  (itceiiH^).  Emphatic,  *'  It  was  not  he  who  was  the  light.** 
Compare  ii.  21,  ^^  Hs  {i/celvo^)  spake,"  bringing  ont  the  difiPer- 
ence  between  Jesus'  conception  of  destroying  and  rebuilding 
the  temple,  and  that  of  his  hearers. 

That  light  {t6  <^).  Rev.,  the  light  The  emphatic  tAcU  of 
the  A.  y.  is  unnecessary. 

Was  sent.  Bev.,  came.  Neither  in  the  original  text  Lit., 
^*  He  was  not  the  light,  but  in  order  that  (Zya)  he  might  bear 
witness."  So  in  ix.  3.  ^*  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his 
parents,  but  (he  was  bom  blind)  that  the  works,"  etc.  Compare 
XV.  25. 

9.  That  was  the  true  light,  etc.  This  passage  is  differ- 
ently interpreted.  Some  join  coming  {ipxofievop)  with  man 
{flv^p(airov\  and  render  every  man  that  comethy  as  A.  Y.  Others 
join  coming  with  lights  and  render,  as  Bev.,  the  true  light — com- 
ing into  the  world.  The  latter  is  the  preferable  rendering,  and 
is  justified  by  Jolin's  frequent  use  of  the  phrase  coming  into 
the  worlds  with  reference  to  our  Lord.  See  iii.  19  ;  vi.  14 ;  ix. 
39;  xi.  27;  xii.  46;  xvi.  28  ;  xviii.  37.  In  iii.  19  and  xii.  46, 
it  is  used  as  here,  in  connection  with  light.  Note  especially  the 
latter,  where  Jesus  himself  says,  ^^  I  am  corns  a  light  into  the 
vjorld?^  Was  (j}i/)  is  to  be  taken  independently,  there  waSy  and 
not  united  in  a  single  conception  with  coming  {ip^dfJ^^vov)^  so  as 
to  mean  wae  coming.  The  light  waSy  existed,  when  the  Baptist 
Appeared  as  a  witness.  Up  to  the  time  of  his  appearance  it 
was  all  along  coming:  its  permanent  heing  conjoined  with  a 
elow,  progressive  coming^  a  revelation  '^  at  sundry  times  and  in 
divers  manners  "  (Heb.  i.  1).  "  From  the  first  He  was  on  His 
way  to  the  world,  advancing  toward  the  incarnation  by  pre- 


44  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

paratory  revelations  "  (Westcott).  Render  therefore  as  Rev., 
^^  There  was  the  true  light,  even  the  light  which  lighteth  everjr 
man,  coming  into  the  world." 

True  (aXi/^^vov).  Wye,  very  light  (compare  the  Nicene 
creed,  "  very  God  of  very  God ").  This  epithet  is  applied  to 
light  only  here  and  1  John  ii.  8,  and  is  almost  confined  to  the 
writings  of  John.  A  different  word,  aXi;.^,  also  rendered 
true^  occurs  at  iii.  33 ;  v.  31 ;  viii.  13,  and  elsewhere.  The  dif- 
fei*ence  is  that  0X17^179  signifies  true^  as  contrasted  with  false  / 
while  aXi/^ii^  signifies  what  is  realj  yerfect^  and  suhstantialy 
as  contrasted  with  what  is  fancifuly  shadowy^  counterfeit^  or 
merely  symbolic.  Thus  God  is  aXi^di;^  (John  iii.  33)  in  that 
He  cannot  lie.  He  is  aXffSivo^  (I  Thess.  i.  9),  as  distinguished 
from  idols.  In  Heb.  viii.  2,  the  heavenly  tabernacle  is  called 
oXi/A^i^,  as  distinguished  from  the  Mosaic  tabernacle,  which 
was  a  figv/re  of  the  heavenly  reality  (Heb.  ix.  24).  Thus  the 
expression  true  light  denotes  the  realization  of  the  original  di- 
vine idea  of  the  Light — the  archetypal  Light,  as  contrasted 
with  all  imperfect  manifestations:  ^Hhe  Light  which  fulfilled 
all  that  had  been  promised  by  tho  preparatory,  partial,  evea 
fictitious  lights  which  had  existed  in  the  world  before." 

"  Oor  little  sjstems  have  their  daj ; 
Thej  have  their  day  and  oease  to  be : 
They  are  bat  broken  lights  of  Thee, 
And  Thoo,  O  Lord,  art  more  than  thej.** 

Tbnntson,  In  Memoriam, 

Lighteth  {4>€aTl^€i),  See  on  shvneth^  ver.  5,  and  compare 
Luke  xi.  35,  36. 

Every  man  {iravra  av^fHoirov),  Not  coUedmely^  as  in  ver.  7^ 
but  vndividuaUy  and  personally. 

The  world  {rov  tcotrfiop).  As  in  ver.  3,  the  creation  was  des- 
ignated in  its  several  details  by  irdvra,  all  things^  so  here, 
creation  is  regarded  in  its  totality^  as  an  ordered  whole.  See 
on  Acts  xvii.  24 ;  Jas.  iii.  6. 

Four  words  are  used  in  the  New  Testament  for  world :  (1) 


PBOLOGUK 


45 


I 


fij,  land,  ground,  territory,  tAe  earth,  as  distiiigiiiehed  from  the 
heavens.  The  sense  is  piirel}'  physical.  (2)  oiKovfievr),  which 
is  a  participle,  meaning  inhabited,  with  y^,  earth,  nnderstood, 
and  signifies  the  eartli  as  tfte  abod^  of  inen;  the  whole  inhab- 
ited world.  See  on  Matt,  kxiv,  14;  Luke  ii.  1.  AUo  in  a  phys- 
ical sense,  though  used  once  of  "  the  world  to  come  "  (Ileb,  ii. 
5),  (3)  alaiv,  essentially  time,  as  the  condition  under  which  all 
created  tilings  exist,  and  the  measure  of  tlieir  existence:  a 
jferuid  of  existence  ;  a  lifetime  ;  a  generation;  hence,  a  long 
gpace  of  time ;  an  age,  era,  ej>ovh,  period  of  a  diy}ensation.  On 
tliis  primary,  physical  sense  there  ariaes  a  secondary  sense, 
viz.,  a^  that  exists  in  th^  world  ^nder  the  conditions  of  time. 
From  this  again  develops  a  more  distinctly  ethical  sense,  the 
course  and  current  of  this  toorUTs  affairs  (compare  the  expres- 
sion, the  times),  and  this  course  as  corrupted  by  sin ;  hence 
the  evU  vjorld.  So  Gal.  i.  4  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  (4)  Koa-fUK,  wliich 
follows  a  similar  line  of  development  from  the  pliysical  to  the 
ethical  sense;  meaning  (a)  omametit,  arrangement,  order  [1 
Pet.  iii.  3) ;  (b)  the  sum.-total  of  the  material  universe  considered 
as  a  St/stem  (Matt,  xiii.  35  ;  John  xvii.  5  ;  Acts  xvii.  24  ;  Philip. 
ii.  15).  Compare  Plato.  "  lie  who  is  incapable  of  commun- 
ion is  also  incapable  of  friendship.  And  philosophers  tell  us, 
Callicles,  that  communion  and  friendship  and  orderliness  and 
temperance  and  justice  bind  together  heaven  and  earth  and 
gods  and  men,  and  that  this  universe  is  therefore  called  Cosmos, 
or  order,  not  disorder  or  misrule"  ("  Goi^as,"  508).  (c)  That 
universe  as  the  abode  of  man  (John  xvi.  21;  1  John  iii.  17). 
(d)  The  sum  total  of  humanity  in  the  world;  the  human  race 
(John  i.  29 ;  iv.  42).  (e)  In  tlie  ethical  sense,  the  sum-total  of 
human  life  in  the  ordered  world,  considered  apart  from,  alien- 
ated from,  and  hostile  to  God,  and  of  t/ie  earthly  things  which 
seduce  from  God  (John  vii.  7  ;  xv.  18 ;  xvii.  9,  14 ;  1  Cor.  i. 
20. 31  ;  2  Cor.  vti.  10 ;  Jas.  iv.  4). 

This  word  is  characteristic  of  John,  and  pre-eminently  in  this 
last,  ethical  sense,  in  which  it  is  rarely  used  by  the  Synoptists ; 
while  John  nowhere  uses  owe  of  the  moral  order.  In  this  latter 
sense  the  word  is  wholly  strange  to  heathen  literature,  since  the 
heathen  world  had  no  perception  of  the  opposition  between  God 


J 


46  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TE8TAURNT. 

au(i  einful  man ;  between  the  divine  order  and  the  moral  dis- 
urder  introduced  and  maintained  by  Bin. 

10.  Ha  was  in  the  world.  Not  merely  at  Rib  advent,  but 
before  Uis  incarnation  no  lesB  than  after  it.     See  on  vv.  i,  5. 

Was  made  {eyevero).     Came  into  being.     See  on  ver.  3. 

By  Him>     Or  through  Him  {Sm).     See  on  ver.  3. 

Knew  {Syvto).  Kecognized.  Though  lie  was  in  the  world 
and  was  its  Creator,  yet  the  world  did  not  recognize  hiin.  Thia 
is  tiie  relation  of  ideas  in  these  three  clauses,  but  John  expresses 
this  relation  after  the  Hebrew  manner,  by  simply  putting  the 
three  side  by  side,  and  connecting  them  by  Kal,  and.  This  con- 
struction is  characteristic  of  Jolin.  Compare  viii.  20,  where  tlie 
point  of  the  passage  is,  that  t/iough  Jesus  was  leaching  publicly, 
where  He  might  easily  have  been  seized,  yet  no  man  attempted 
his  seizure.  Thie  is  expressed  by  two  parallel  clauses  with  the 
simple  copulative.  "  These  words  spake  Jesus,"  etc.,  "  mid  no 
man  laid  hands  on  Him." 

Him  {avTov).  The  preceding  him  (aurov)  is,  in  itself,  am- 
biguous as  to  gender.  So  far  as  its  form  ia  concerned,  it  might 
be  nenter,  in  which  case  it  would  refer  to  the  light,  "  the  Word 
regarded  as  a  luminous  principle"  as  it,  in  ver.  5.  Uut  ainop 
is  masculine,  Him,  so  tliat  the  Word  now  appears  as  a  person. 
This  determines  the  gender  of  the  preceding  ainov. 

On  the  enlightened  and  nnen lightened  nature,  compare  the 
allegory  in  Plato's  "  Republic,"  at  the  beginning  of  Book  vii., 
where  he  pictures  men  confined  fiom  childliood  in  an  under- 
ground den,  chained  so  that  they  can  only  see  before  them,  and 
with  no  light  save  from  a  fire  behind  them.  They  mistake 
shadows  for  substance,  and  echoes  for  voices.  When  they  are 
liberated  and  compelled  to  look  at  the  light,  either  of  the  fire  or 
of  the  snn,  their  unaccustomed  eyea  are  pained,  and  they  imagine 
that  the  shadows  which  they  formerly  saw  are  truer  than  the 
real  objects  which  are  now  shown  them.  Finally,  they  will  be 
able  to  see  the  sun,  and  will  recognize  him  as  the  giver  of  the 


PBOLOOX7K  47 

seasons  and  years,  and  tlie  gaardian  of  all  that  is  in  the  visible 
world.  ^^  When  the  eje  of  the  soal  is  turned  round,  the  whole 
soul  must  be  turned  round  from  the  world  of  becoming  into 
that  of  being,  and  of  the  brightest  and  best  of  being,  or,  in 
other  words,  of  the  good." 

Notice  also  the  appropriateness  of  the  two  verbs  joined  with 
the  neuter  and  the  masculine  pronouns.  In  ver.  5,  with  it;  the 
Word,  as  a  princijjle  of  lights  tcariXa/Sev,  apprehended.  Here, 
with  jHtm,  the  Word,  as  a  persotij  SyvtOj  recognized. 

11.  He  came  {^xBep).  The  narrative  now  passes  from  the 
general  to  the  special  action  of  the  Word  as  the  Light  The 
verb  oamej  in  the  aorist  tense,  denotes  a  definite  act — the  In- 
carnation. In  ver.  10  the  Word  is  described  as  in  the  world 
invisibly.    Now  He  <yppea/rs. 

Unto  His  own  {^h  rii  ZSm).  Lit,  his  own  things:  see  on 
Acts  i.  7.  The  Rev.  follows  the  A.  V.  Wye,  into  his  own 
things.  Bender  his  own  homey  and  compare  xvi.  32 ;  xix.  27 ; 
Acts  xxi.  6.  The  reference  is  to  the  land  of  Israel,  which  is 
recognized  as  God's  own  in  a  peculiar  sense.  See  Jer.  ii.  7 ; 
Hosea  ix.  3 ;  Zech.  ii.  12 ;  Deut.  vii.  6.  Not  a  repetition  of 
ver.  10.  There  is  a  progress  in  the  narrative.  He  was  in  the 
world  at  large :  then  he  oa/me  unto  His  own  home. 

His  own  (oi  ZSm^).  The  masculine  gender,  as  the  preceding 
was  neuter.  That  signified  His  own  home  or  possessions^  this 
His  own  j>eople.     Rev.,  th&g  that  were  His  own. 

Received  {vapiKafiov).  Most  commonly  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment of  taking  one  along  with  another.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  5  ; 
xvii.  1 ;  Acts  xvi.  33.  But  also  of  accepting  or  acknowledging 
one  to  be  what  he  professes  to  be,  and  of  receiving  something 
transmitted,  as  1  Cor.  xi.  23  ;  Gal.  i.  12,  etc.  Westcott  thinks 
this  latter  sense  is  implied  here;  Christ  having  been  offered  by 
the  teachers  of  Israel  through  John.  Alford  adopts  the  former 
sense ;  ^^  expressing  the  personal  assumption  to  one^s  self  as  a 
friend  or  companion."  De  Wette  explains  to  receive  into  the 
house,     Godet  strains  a  point  by  explaining  as  welcomed.    De 


I 


tS  WORD  SrODIRi  IN  THH  SEW  TESTAMENT. 

Wette's  explanation  seems  to  agree  best  witli  Aw  own  home. 
Ilere  agaiu  compai-e  the  nice  choice  of  verbs:  apprehended 
(«OTeXo;3€c)  the  Light  as  a  principle,  and  received  {irapeXa^oi) 
the  Light  as  ajmson  and  the  Master  of  the  house. 

THIED  DIViaiON   OF  THE    PROLOGUE.     THE  WORD  RE- 
CEIVED (12-18). 

12.  As  many  as  (oiroi.).  Denoting  individuals,  as  ot  IStot 
(ver.  11)  signified  the  nation  at  large. 

Received  {eXaffov).  The  simple  verb  of  the  compound 
irapeXa^ov  in  ver.  11.  The  meaning  of  the  two  verbs  is  sub- 
stantially the  same  (so  Alford,  De  Wette,  and  apparently 
Meyer),  though  some  recognize  a  difference,  as  Milligan  and 
Moulton,  wlio  render  -TrapeKa^ov  accepted,  and  eKa^ov  received, 
and  say  that  "  the  former  lays  emphasis  upon  ihe  will  that  con- 
sented (or  refused)  to  receive,  while  the  latter  brings  before  us 
the  possession  gaiiied:  so  that  the  full  meaning  is,  As  many  as 
by  accepting  Him,  received  Him."  For  the  use  of  the  simple 
verb,  see  v.  43 ;  xiii.  20 ;  xix.  6. 

Power  {e^oMtTiav).  Rev.,  the  right.  Six  words  are  used  for 
power  in  tlie  New  Testament:  ^ia,  force,  often  oppressive,  ex- 
hibiting itself  in  violence  (Acts  v.  26  ;  xxvii.  41.  Compare  the 
kindred  verb  ^lAfyrat,  Matt.  xi.  13  ;  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  taken  by  violence) :  Bvvafiii,  natural  ahiiity  (see  on  2  Pet.  ii. 
II) :  evepyeta,  energy,  power  in  exetfise  ;  only  of  superhuman 
power,  good  or  evil.  Used  by  Paul  only,  and  chiefly  in  the 
Epistles  of  the  Imprisonment  (Eph.  i.  19;  iii.  7;  Col.  ii.  12. 
Compare  the  kindred  verb  evepyeto,  to  put  fi/rth  power,  and  see 
on  Mark  vi.  14  ;  Jas.  v.  16):  la^in,  strength  (see  on  2  Pet.  ii.ll. 
Compare  the  kindred  verb  iajcia,  to  be  strong,  and  see  on  Luke 
xiv,  30 ;  xvi.  3) :  Kparo^,  might,  only  of  God,  relati/ce  and  mani- 
fested power,  dominion  (Eph.  i.  19;  vi.  10;  1  Tim.  vi.  16;  1 
Pet.  iv.  11.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  Kparem,  to  kavepower, 
to  be  master  of,  and  see  on  Mark  vii.  3  ;  Acts  iii.  11) :  i^owria, 
liberty  of  action  (l^etm,  it  is  lawful),  authority,  delegated  or 
arbitrary  (John   v.  27;  x.   18;  xvii.  2;  xix.  10,  11.     See  on 


PB0LUQI7K.  49 

Mark  ii.  10 ;  Lake  xx.  20).  Here,  therefore,  t^viria  is  not 
i\tGTG\y  possibUUy  or  ability,  but  Intimate  right  derived  from 
a  competent  source — the  Word. 

To  become  ifiepia^m).  As  those  who  are  horn  (ver.  13. 
Compare  lii.  3,  and  Matt,  v,  45). 

Sons  {riiaia).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  children.  Son  is  vlot. 
Teiniov,  child  (tiktw,  to  bring  forth),  denotes  a  relation  based  on 
comiitunity  of  nature,  while  wws.  Son,  may  indicate  only  adop- 
tion and  /leirship.  See  Gal.  iv.  7.  Except  in  Apoc.  xxi.  7, 
which  is  a  qnotation,  John  never  uses  vlot  to  describe  tlie  rela- 
tion of  ChrialiatiB  to  God,  since  he  regards  tlieir  position  not 
as  a  result  of  adoption,  but  of  a  new  life.  Paul,  on  the  other 
hand,  regards  the  relation  from  the  legal  standpoint,  as  adop- 
tion, imparting  a  new  dignity  and  relation  (Bom.  viii.  15  ;  Gah 
iv.  5,  6).  See  also  Jas.  i.  18;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  33,  where  the  point 
of  view  is  John's  rather  than  Paul's.  Teicvov,  indicating  the 
relationship  of  man  to  God,  occnrs  in  John  i.  IS ;  xi.  52 ;  1  John 
iii.  1,  2,  10;  V.  2,  and  always  in  the  plural. 


Believe  on  {■n-i^revoutriv  ek).  The  present  participle,  6e- 
lievinff,  indicates  the  present  and  continuous  activity  of  faith. 
The  word  is  used  by  John,  sometimes  with  the  dative  case 
simply,  meaning  to  believe  a  person  or  thing ;  i.e.,  to  believe 
that  they  are  true  or  speak  tJie  truth.  Thus,  to  believe  the 
Scripture  (ii.  22) ;  believe  nw  (iv,  21) ;  believe  Moses,  his  vyrii- 
ingt,  my  worth  (v.  46}.  At  other  times  with  a  preposition,  «'?, 
into,  which  is  rendered  beli&ve  in,  or  believe  on.  So  here,  vi.  29 ; 
viiL  30 ;  1  John  v.  10.  See  the  two  contrasted  in  vi,  29,  30; 
viii,  30,  31 ;  1  John  v.  10.  To  believe  in,  or  on,  is  more  than 
mere  acceptance  of  a  statement.  It  is  so  to  accept  a  statement 
or  a  person  aa  to  rest  upon  them,  to  trust  them  practically ; 
to  draw  upon  and  avail  one's  self  of  all  that  is  offered  to  him 
in  them.  Hence  to  believe  art  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  not 
merely  to  believe  the  facts  of  His  historic  life  or  of  Hie  saving 
energy  as  facts,  but  to  accept  llim  as  Saviour,  Teacher,  Sym- 
pathizer, Judge ;  to  rest  the  soul  upon  llim  for  present  and 
Vol.  ri,— 4 


50  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

future  Balvation,  and  to  accept  and  adopt  His  precepts  and  ex- 
ample as  binding  upon  the  life. 

Name  {Svofia).  See  on  Matt,  zzyiii.  19.  Expressing  the  sum 
of  the  qualities  which  mark  the  nature  or  character  of  a  person. 
To  believe  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  is  to 
accept  as  true  the  revelation  contained  in  that  title.  Compare 
XX.  31. 

13.  Which  (oQ.    Beferring  to  children  of  God. 

Were  born  {iyewiiSffaav).  Lit.,  were  hegoUen.  The  phrase 
yevin)$ijv(u  ix  rod  0€ov,  to  be  bom  or  begotten  of  Ood^  occurs 
only  here  in  the  Oospel,  and  several  times  in  the  First  Epistle. 
It  is  peculiar  to  John. 

There  is  a  progress  of  thought  in  the  three  following  clauses, 
describing  the  proper  origin  of  a  believer's  new  life.  Children 
of  Ood  are  begotten,  not  of  bloody  nor  of  the  wiU  of  the  fleshy 
nor  of  the  will  of  ma/n.  "  The  new  birth  is  not  brought  about 
by  descenty  by  deeire^  or  by  huina/n, power^'^  (Westcott). 

OIF  blood  (^f  oifidTtov).  Lit,,  of  bloods.  The  plural  is  vari- 
ously explained  :  by  some  as  indicating  the  duality  of  the  sexes, 
by  others  of  the  multiplicity  of  ancestors.  The  best  explana- 
tion seems  to  be  afforded  by  a  similar  use  of  the  plural  in  Plato, 
ft-4  iv  ydXc^i  Tp€<l>6fi€voi,  "while  still  nourished  by  milJcs'*^ 
("Laws,"  887).  The  fluids,  blood  or  milk  being  represented  as 
the  sum-total  of  all  their  parts.     Compare  r^  iharoy  the  waters. 

14.  And  the  Word  (/cot).  The  simple  copula  as  before ;  not 
yea,  or  namely^  or  therefore^  but  passing  to  a  new  statement 
concerning  the  Word. 

Was  made  flesh  (ahp^  eyhero).  Rev.,  ^^  became  flesh."  The 
same  verb  as  in  ver.  3.  All  things  became  through  Him ;  He 
in  turn  became  flesh.  "  He  became  that  which  first  became 
through  Him."  In  becoming.  He  did  not  cease  to  be  the 
Etenial  Word.  His  divine  nature  was  not  laid  aside.  Lj  be- 
coming flesh  He  did  not  part  with  the  rational  soul  of  man. 


PROIiOGUB.  51 

Retaining  all  the  essential  properties  of  the  Word,  He  entered 
into  a  new  mode  of  being,  not  a  new  being. 

The  word  tri^p^y  fieeh^  describes  this  new  mode  of  being.  It 
signifies  hwman  natttre  in  and  according  to  its  corporeal  inani- 
f Citation.  Here,  as  opposed  to  the  pwrtly  divine,  and  to  the 
pnrely  immaterial  natare  of  the  Word.  He  did  not  first  be- 
come a  personality  on  becoming  flesh.  The  prologue  throngh- 
oat  conceives  Him  as  a  personality  from  the  very  beginning — 
from  eternal  ages.  The  phrase  became  fleshj  means  more  than 
that  He  assumed  a  hum^an  body.  He  assumed  human  nature 
entire^  identifying  Himself  with  the  race  of  man,  having  a 
human  body,  a  human  soul,  and  a  human  spirit  See  xii.  27 ; 
xi.  33 :  xiii.  21 ;  xix.  30.  He  did  not  assume,  for  a  time 
merely,  humanity  as  something  foreign  to  Himself.  The  in- 
carnation was  not  a  mere  accident  of  His  substantial  being. 
^'  He  became  flesh,  and  did  not  clothe  Simself  in  flesh."  Com- 
pare, on  the  whole  passage,  1  John  iv.  2 ;  2  John  7. 

Dwelt  (iatei^vwrev).  Lit.,  tabernacled,  Jiicedj  or  hcui  Sis  tab- 
ernacle :  from  aKfjvi],  a  tent  or  taberMicle.  The  verb  is  used  only 
by  John :  in  the  Gospel  only  here,  and  in  Apoc.  vii.  15 ;  xii.  12  ; 
xiii.  6  ;  xxi.  3.  Tt  occurs  in  classical  writings,  as  in  Xenophon, 
iv  Tfl5  ireZUp  iaici^vov,  he  pitched  his  tent  in  the  plain  ("  Ana- 
basis," viL  4,  11).  So  Plato,  arguing  against  the  proposition 
that  the  unjust  die  by  the  inherent  destructive  power  of  evil, 
says  that  '^  injustice  which  murders  others  keeps  the  murderer 
alive — aye,  and  unsleeping  too ;  ovto)  iroppa  irov  (09  eoiicev 
ia-Kijvonai  tov  Savdaifio^  elvait  i.e.,  literally,  so  far  has  her  tent 
been  spread  from  being  a  house  of  death "  ("Republic,"  610). 
The  figure  here  is  from  the  Old  Testament  (Lev.  xxvii.  11  ;  2 
Sam.  vii.  6 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  67  sqq. ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  27).  The  taber- 
nacle was  the  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah ;  the  meeting-place  of 
God  and  Israel.  So  the  Word  came  to  men  in  the  person  of 
Jesus.  As  Jehovah  adopted  for  His  habitation  a  dwelling  like 
that  of  the  people  in  the  wilderness,  so  the  Word  assumed  a 
community  of  nature  with  mankind,  an  embodiment  like  that 
of  humanity  at  large,  and  became  flesh.  "  That  which  was 
from  the  beginning,  we  heard,  we  saw,  we  beheld,  we  handled. 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Our  fellowship  ia  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jeant 
CiirUt"  (1  Jolm  i.  1-3.     Compare  Philip,  it.  7,  8). 

Some  find  in  the  word  tabernacle,  a  temporary  structure  (see 
the  contraet  betweeu  aKr}i/o<;,  taieniacle,  and  oucoSofi^,  building, 
in  2  Cor.  v.  1),  a  Bnggestion  of  the  tranaitoriness  of  onr  Ivord's 
stay  npon  earth ;  which  may  well  be,  althougli  the  word  does 
not  neceBBarily  imply  this ;  for  in  Apoc.  xxi.  3,  it  ie  eaid  of  the 
Aeavenlj/  Jerusalem  "  the  tabemade  of  God  is  with  men,  and 
He  wili  set  up  hie  tahertiade  (tneijvaxret)  with  tliem." 

Dante  alUides  to  the  incarnation  in  the  seventh  canto  of  the 
"Paradiso:" 

"  the  humkn  ipecies  down  baloir 

Lbj  sick  for  m«D7  oeDturiua  in  great  error, 
Till  to  descend  It  plBUod  the  Word  of  God 
To  irhers  llie  natara,  which  from  its  own  Maker 
Eatraiiged  itself.  He  joined  to  Him  in  pereoa 
B;  the  lole  act  of  His  eternal  love," 

Among  us  (eV  ij/itf).  In  the  midst  of  ua.  Compare  Gen. 
xxiv.  3,  Sept., "  the  Canaanitee,  with  whom  I  dwell  (/ie-9'  av  ryat 
oUm  iv  aural!!)."  The  reference  is  to  the  eye-witneeseB  of  onr 
Lord's  life.  "  According  as  the  spectacle  presents  itself  to  the 
mind  of  tlie  Evangelist,  and  in  the  words  among  us  takes  the 
character  of  the  most  personal  recollection,  it  becomes  in  him 
the  object  of  a  delightful  contemplation  "  (Godet). 

The  following  words,  as  far  as  and  including  Kaiher,  are 
parenthetical.  The  nnbroken  sentence  is:  "The  Word  be- 
came flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and  truth." 

We  beheld  (e^eoo-o/w^a).  Compare  Luke  ix.  32 ;  2  Pet.  ii, 
16;  1  John  i.  1;  iv.  U.  See  on  Matt.  xi.  7;  xsiii.  5.  The 
word  denotes  calm,  continuous  contemplation  of  an  object 
which  remains  befora  the  spectator. 

Glory  (So'fon).  Not  the  absolute  glory  of  the  Eternal  Word, 
which  could  belong  only  to  His  pre-existent  state,  and  to  the 
conditions  subsequent  to  his  exaltation  ;  but  His  glory  revealed 
under  human  limitations  both  in  Iliniself  and  in  those  who  be- 
held Him.    The  reference  is  again  to  the  Old  Testament  tnani' 


festations  of  the  divine  glory,  in  the  wilderness  (Exod.  xvi.  10; 
xxiv,  16,  etc.) ;  in  the  temple  (I  Kings  viii.  11);  to  the  proph- 
ets (lea.  vi.  3 ;  Ezek.  i.  28).  The  divine  glory  flashed  out  in 
Christ  from  time  to  time,  in  His  transfiguration  (Luke  ix.  31 ; 
compare  2  Pet.  i.  16,  17)  and  His  miracles  (John  ii.  11 ;  xi.  4, 
40),  but  appeared  also  in  Ilis  perfect  life  and  character,  in  His 
fulfilment  of  the  absolute  idea  of  manhood. 


Glory*  Without  the  article.  This  repetition  of  the  word 
is  explanatory.  The  nature  of  the  glory  is  defined  by  what 
follows. 

As  (<w).  A  particle  of  comparison.  Compare  Apoe.  v.  6, 
"  a  lamb  as  though  it  had  been  slain ; "  also  Apoc.  xiii.  3. 

Of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father  Qioi^€i>ov<;  waph 
irarpoi).  Rev.,  "yrotn  the  Father."  The  glory  was  like,  cor- 
responds in  nature  to,  the  glory  of  an  only  Son  sent  from  a 
Father,  It  was  the  glorj'  of  one  who  partook  of  Ilis  divine  Fa- 
ther's essence ;  on  whom  the  Father's  love  was  visibly  lavished, 
and  who  represented  the  Father  as  His  ambassador.  The  word 
fiavtrfevTfi,  only  hegoUen  (De  Wette  and  Westcott,  "  only  bom  ") 
is  nsed  in  the  New  Testament  of  a  human  relationship  (Luke 
vii.  12;  viii.  42;  ix.  38).  In  the  Septnagint  it  answers  to 
darling,  Heb.,  oidy  one,  in  Ps.  xxi.,  A.  V.  x.\ii,  20;  and  to 
desolate  in  Ps.  xxiv.,  A.  V.  xxv.,  16.  With  the  exception  of 
the  passages  cited  above,  and  Heb.  xi.  17,  it  occurs  in  the 
New  Testament  only  in  the  writings  of  John,  and  is  used 
only  of  Christ.  With  this  word  should  be  compared  Paul's 
wpoyTOTOKov,  Jirat  horn  (Bom.  viii.  29;  Col,  i.  15.  18),  which 
occurs  but  once  in  John  (Apoc.  i.  5),  and  in  Heb.  i.  6 ;  xi.  28 ; 
lii.  23.  John's  word  marks  the  relation  to  the  Father  as 
nniqne,  stating  the  fact  in  itself.  Paul's  word  places  the  eter- 
nal Son  in  relation  to  the  universe.  Paul's  word  emphasizes 
His  existence  before  created  things;  John's  His  distinctnesfi 
from  created  things.  MoiwycviJ?  distinguishes  between  Christ 
ae  the  only  Son,  and  the  many  childreii  {jeieva)  of  God ;  and 
further,  in  that  the  only  Son  did  not  become  {yeviffSai)  such 


64  WORD  flTtTDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMBHT. 

by  receiving  power,  by  adoption,  or  by  moral  generation,  but 
was  (^p)  encU  in  the  beginning  witli  God.  The  fact  set  forth 
does  not  belong  to  the  sphere  of  His  incarnation,  but  of  Uia 
eternal  being.  The  Btatenient  is  anthropomorphic,*  and  there- 
fore cannot  fully  express  tlie  metaphysical  relation. 

Of  the  Father  is  properly  rendered  by  Rev.,  ^^from  the 
Father,"  thus  giving  the  force  of  ■jrapd  (see  on  from  Ood^ 
ver.  6).  The  preposition  does  not  express  the  idea  of  genera- 
tion, which  would  be  given  by  ix  or  by  the  simple  genitive, 
but  of  mission — sent  from  the  Father,  as  John  from  God  (see 
vi.  46 ;  vii.  29  ;  xvi.  27 ;  xvii.  8).  The  correlative  of  this  is  ver. 
18,  "  who  is  in  tlie  bosom  {eh  tov  KoXirov)  of  the  Father ; "  lit., 
"  into  the  bosom,"  the  preposition  ek  signifying  who  has  gone 
into  and  is  t/iere  ;  thus  viewing  the  Son  as  having  returned  to 
the  Father  (but  see  on  ver.  18). 

Full  of  grace  and  truth  (itX^/mj?  xtipiro-j  koX  a\t]$titK). 
This  is  connected  with  the  main  subject  of  the  sentence  :  "The 
Word — full  of  grace  and  truth."  A  common  combination  in  the 
Old  Testament  (see  Gen.  xxiv.  27,  49  ;  xxxii.  10 ;  Exod.  xxxiv. 
6;  Ps.  xl.  10,  11 ;  Ixi.  7).  In  these  two  words  the  character  of 
the  divine  revelation  is  summed  up.  "  Grace  corresponds  with 
the  idea  of  the  revelation  of  God  as  Love  (1  John  iv.  8,  16)  by 
Ilim  who  is  Life ;  and  Truth  with  that  of  the  revelation  of 
God  as  Light  {1  John  i.  5)  by  Ilim  who  is  Uimself  Light" 
(Westcott).     Compare  ver.  17.     On  Grace,  see  on  Luke  i.  30. 

15.  As  ver.  14  is  parallel  to  w.  1-5,  ao  this  verse  is  parallel 
to  vv.  6-8,  but  with  an  advance  of  thought.  Vv.  6-8  set  forth 
the  Baptist's  witness  to  the  Word  as  the  general  light  of  men. 
This  verse  gives  the  Baptist's  witness  to  the  personal  Word  be- 
come flesh. 

Bare  witness  {fiMprvpeX).  Present  tense.  Rev.,  correctly, 
beareth  witness.    The  present  tense  describes  tlie  witness  of  the 

*i'.fl. .  kUribnting  humin  form  ind  humui  model  of  activitj  to  God,  u 
when  Wfl  Hpeak  of  ths  hand,  the  faoe,  tba  eye  ol  Qod,  or  ol  Qod  btgatUhg  am 


PBOLOGUB.  55 

Bai^tiet  as  abiding.     The  fact  of  the  Word's  becoming  flesh  is 
permanently  established  by  his  testimony. 

Cried  (KSKpwyev).  See  on  Mark  v.  5 ;  ix.  24  ;  Luke  xviii.  39. 
The  verb  denotes  an  inarticulate  utterance  as  distinguished  from 
words.  When  used  in  connection  with  articulate  speech,  it  ia 
joined  with  Xeyav  or  eiirelv,  io  say,  as  vii.  38,  cried,  saying. 
(/oinpare  vii.  37 ;  xii.  44.  Tiie  crying  corresponds  with  the 
Baptist's  description  of  himself  as  a  voice  (^v^,  sound  or  tone), 
Mark  i.  3 ;  Luke  iii.  4 ;  John  i.  23.  The  verb  is  in  the  perfect 
tense,  but  with  the  usual  classical  sense  of  the  present. 

Was  lie  (^v).  Tlie  imperfect  tense,  pointing  back  to  a  testi- 
mony historically  past. 

After  me  {oTrlatit  /lav).  Lit.,  behind  me :  in  His  human  mani- 
festation. 

Is  preferred  before  me  (efiirpoaSiv  fiov  ySyoi/ev).  Lit.,  "  is 
heuome"  so  Rev.,  "or  ia  here  (compare  vi.  25)  before  me," 
Before  is  nsed  of  time,  not  of  dignity  or  rank.  The  expression 
is  enigmatical  in  form :  "  my  successor  is  my  predecessor." 
The  idea  of  the  superior  dignity  of  Christ  is  not  a  necessary 
inference  from  His  coming  after  John,  as,  on  that  interpretation, 
the  words  would  imply.  On  the  contrary,  the  herald  who  pre- 
cedes is  inferior  in  dignity  to  the  Prince  whom  he  announces. 

For  (^i).  Or  because.  The  reason  for  the  preceding  state- 
ment :  the  key  to  the  enigma. 

He  was  before  me  {trpioTm  /wu  ^v).  Lit.,  Jirst  in  regard 
of  me  (Rev.,  in  margin).  The  reference  to  dignity  would  re- 
quire iirriv.  is  (see  Matt.  iii.  11,  "i»  mightier").  A  similar  ex- 
pression occurs  in  xv,  18  :  the  world  hated  me  before  (it  hated) 
you  {vp&Tov  vi*<Zv).  The  reference  is  to  the  pre  existence  of 
Christ,  When  speaking  of  Christ's  historic  manifestation,  is 
becotne  before  me,  the  Baptist  says  ySyovtv.  When  speaking  of 
Christ's  eterTial  being.  He  was  before  me,  he  uses  ffv.     The 


WORD  BTUDtBS  IN  THE  KBW  TH8TAMENT. 

meauing  is,  then,  that  ChriEt,  in  His  liumaD  maQifeetatton,  ap- 
peured  after  John,  but,  ae  the  Eternal  Word,  preceded  liini, 
becauee  He  existed  before  him.     Compare  viii.  58," 

16.  And  («ai).  But  the  correct  reading  ie  on,  because,  thus 
cjunecting  the  following  sentence  with  "full  of  grace  and 
truth  "  in  ver.  14.  "We  know  Him  as  full  of  grace  and  truth, 
because  we  have  received  of  UisfuiTt^a. 

Of  His  fulness  («  toO  irXjipwfMTtK  airrov).  Tliese  and  the 
succeeding  words  are  the  Evangelist's,  not  the  Baptist's.  The 
word  ftdness  (irX^pto/ui)  is  found  here  only  in  John,  but  fre- 
quently occurs  in  the  writings  of  Paul,  wliose  use  of  it  in 
Epiiesians  and  Colossians  illustrates  the  sense  in  John  ;  these 
being  Asiatic  churches  which  felt,  later,  within  the  sphere  of 
John's  influence.  The  word  is  akin  to  TrXijfMj?,  fuU  (ver.  14), 
and  tovXtjpoOv,  to  JiU  ot  complete  ;  and  TaGXn&  that  ■which  is  com- 
plete in  iieelf,  jjleniiude,  entire  number  or  quantity.  Thus  the 
crew  of  a  ship  is  called  T-X^piafia,  its  complement.  Aristophanes 
("  Wasps,"  660),  "  TOVTiov  vXijptofui,  the  sum^toful  oi  these,  is 
nearly  two  thousand  talents."  Herodotus  (iii.,  22)  says  that  the 
ftdl  term  of  man's  life  among  the  Persians  is  eighty  years  ;  and 
Aristotle  ("  Polities,"  iv.,  4)  refers  to  Socrates  as  saying  that  the 
eight  classes,  representing  difTerent  industries  in  the  state,  con- 
stitute the  j^fertwia  of  the  state  (see  Plato,  "Iiepublic,"371).  In 
Ephesians  i.  23,  Paul  says  that  the  church  is  tlie  jfleroma  of 
Christ:  i.e.,  the  plenitude  of  the  divine  graces  in  Oirist  is  com- 
municated to  the  Church  as  His  body,  making  all  the  bod}-, 
supplied  and  knit  together  through  the  joints  and  bands,  to  in- 
crease with  the  increase  of  God  (Col.  ii.  19  ;  compare  Eph.  iv. 
16).  Similarly  he  prays  (Epli.  iii.  19)  that  tlie  brethren  may 
be  filled  unto  all  the  pleroma  of  God  :  i.e.,  that  they  may  be 
filled  with  the  fulness  which  God  imparts.  More  closely  re- 
lated to  John^s  nse  of  the  term  here  are  Co),  i.  19,  "It  pleased 

*  1  follow  Mejer  and  Godet.  De  Wette.  Alford,  Milligan  &iid  Moultoo 
mdopt  the  other  Interpretation,  reterrinf!  f)i.w(ivibn,  to  rank  or  dignitg.  So 
Westcott,  Kho.  hnnever.  do«H  not  stale  the  iMoe  between  the  two  explkoMiooa 
with  bis  usual  shupDese. 


PROLOGUE.  o7 

tlie  Fatlier  that  in  Ilim  (Christ)  eliould  all  tlic  fulness  (to 
trX^pafta,  note  the  article)  dwell;"  and  ii.  9,  10,  "In  Ilira 
dwelletli  all  the  jyleroma  of  the  Godhead  hodihj  (i.e.,  corpo- 
really, hecoming  incarnate),  and  in  Ilim  ye  are  fulfilled  {irfTrXii- 
(Mafi^voiy  This  declares  that  the  wfiole  aggregate  of  the  divine 
powers  and  graces  appeared  in  the  incarnate  Word,  and  corre- 
sponds with  John's  statement  that  "  the  Word  became^asA  and 
tabernacled  among  men,  /'iti^  of  grace  and  truth;"  while  "je 
arey«i/tZ^"  answers  to  John's  "of  Ilis/Mfee**we  all  received." 
Hence  Jolm's  meaning  here  is  that  Christians  receive  from  the 
divine  completeness  whatever  each  requires  for  the  perfection 
of  his  character  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  work  (com- 
pare John  XV.  15  ;  xvii,  22).* 

Have — received  {eKa^oiav).  Rev,,  we  received:  rendering 
the  aoriet  lenee  more  literally. 

Grace  for  g^race  (^^a^tvaio-i  x^piTo<i),  The  prepoeition  avrl 
originally  tiie&i]6  over  against  ,■  opjiosite;  Se^ore  (in  a  local  sense). 
Through  the  idea  of  placing  one  thing  over  against  another  is 
developed  that  of  eecluinge.  Thus  Ilerodotng  (iii.,  59),  "  They 
bought  the  island,  ami  ■)(p^ndTiav,  for  money."  So  Matt.  v.  38, 
"An  eye  for  {ami)  an  eye,"  etc.  This  idea  is  at  the  root  of  the 
peculiar  sense  in  which  the  prepoeition  is  used  here.  We  re- 
ceived, not  New  Testament  grace  insijiad  of  Old  Testament 
grace ;  nor  simply,  grace  added  to  grace ;  but  new  grace  im- 
parted as  the  former  measure  of  grace  has  been  received  and 
improved.  "To  have  realized  and  used  one  measure  of  grace, 
was  to  have  gained  a  larger  measure  (as  it  were)  in  ^/xluxnge 
for  it."  Consequently,  continuous,  unintermiHed  grace.  The 
idea  of  the  development  of  one  grace  from  another  is  elaborated 
by  Peter  (2  Pet.  i.  5),  on  which  see  notes.  Winer  cites  a  most 
interesting  parallel  from  Philo.  "Wherefore,  having  provided 
and  dispensed  the  first  graces  (^aptTov),  before  their  recipients 
have  waxed  wanton  through  satiety,  he  subsequently  bestows 

*  It  la  h>rdl7  necemrj  to  refer  tlie  critlokl  student  to  the  admirkble  n 
of  Biiliop  LigliKoot,  ID  h\t  CommvaUiiy  on  CoIouUhh.  p.  323  iq. 


i 


58  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

different  graces  in  exchange/or  (avrl)  those,  and  a  third  snpplj? 
Jin'  the  second,  and  ever  new  ones  in  exchange  Jar  the  older." 

17.  For  (5t()-  Because.  Giving  the  ground  of  the  state- 
meat  that  Christians  received  new  and  richer  gifts  of  grace: 
tiie  ground  being  that  the  law  of  Moses  was  a  limited  and 
narrow  enactment,  while  Jesua  Christ  imparted  the  fulness  of 
grace  and  truth  which  was  in  Him  (ver.  14).  Compare  Rom. 
iv.  15;  X.  4;  Gal.  iii.  10. 

Was  given  {^BoSt}).  A  special  gift  serving  a  special  and 
preparatory  purpose  with  reference  to  the  Gospel :  tlie  word 
being  appropriate  to  "  an  external  and  positive  institution." 

By  Moses  (8uQ.    Lit.,  through.     See  on  by  Him,  ver.  3. 

Grace  and  tmth  came  {^vero).  Game  into  being  as  the 
development  of  the  divine  plan  inaugurated  in  the  law,  and 
unfolding  the  signiticance  of  the  gift  of  the  law.  They  came 
into  being  not  ab/toliUdt/,  but  in  relation  to  mankind.  Com- 
pare 1  Cor.  i,  30,  where  it  is  said  of  Christ,  lie  teas  made  (prop- 
erly, became,  eyev^liTi)  unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness,  etc. 
Note  the  article  with  ^race  and  iruth  ;  the  grace  and  the  truth ; 
that  which  in  tiie  full  sense  is  grace  and  truth.  Grace  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  John,  except  in  salutations  (2  John  3 ;  Apoc. 
i.  4;  xxii.  21). 

Jesus  Christ.  The  Being  who  has  been  present  in  the 
Evangelist's  mind  from  the  opening  of  the  Gospel  is  now  first 
named.  The  two  clauses,  "the  law  was  given,"  "grace  and 
truth  came,"  without  the  copula  or  qualifying  particles,  illus- 
trate the  parallelism  which  is  characteristic  of  John's  style  (see 
on  ver.  10), 

IS.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  {Sehv  ovheU  iw^ 
paK€v  iriairore).  God  is  first  in  the  Greek  order,  as  emphatic  : 
'^Gofi  liath  no  man  over  seen."  As  to  the  substance  of  the 
statement,  compare  iii.  11  ;  Exod.  xxxiii.  20  ;  1  John  iv.  12. 
Manifestations  of  God  to  Old  Testament  saints  were  only  par- 


PBOLOGUB.  59 

tial  and  approximate  (Exod.  xxxiii.  23).  The  seeing  intended 
here  is  seeing  of  the  divine  essence  rather  than  of  the  divine  per- 
son, wliich  also  is  indicated  by  the  absence  of  the  article  from 
Oeov,  God.  In  this  sense  even  Christ  was  not  seen  as  God. 
The  verb  opdm,  to  see^  denotes  a  physical  act,  but  emphasizes 
the  mental  discernment  accompanying  it,  and  points  to  the  re- 
snlt  rather  than  to  the  act  of  vision.  In  1  John  i.  1 ;  iv.  12, 14, 
SedofjMi  is  used,  denoting  calm  and  deliberate  contemplation 
(see  on  ver.  14).  In  xii.  45,  we  have  Seo^pita,  to  behold  (see  on 
Mark  v.  15 ;  Lnke  x.  18).  Both  Sedofuu  and  Setopim  imply  de- 
liberate  contemplation,  but  the  former  is  gazing  with  a  view  to 
eatisfy  the  eye,  while  the  latter  is  beholding  more  critically, 
with  an  inward  spiritual  or  mental  interest  in  the  thing  beheld, 
and  with  a  view  to  acquire  knowledge  about  it.  *'*' Sen^pehf 
would  be  used  of  a  general  officially  reviewing  or  inspecting 
an  army ;  ^aa^a^  of  a  lay  spectator  looking  at  the  parade " 
(Thayer). 

The  only  begotten  son  (o  fAovoyei^  vib^).  Several  of  the 
principal  manuscripts  and  a  great  mass  of  ancient  evidence 
support  the  reading  fiovoyevif^  Oci?,  "  God  only  begotten."  * 

Another  and  minor  difference  in  reading  relates  to  the  article, 
which  is  omitted  from  fiovoyevff^  by  most  of  the  authorities 
which  favor  Oeb^.  Whether  we  read  the  only  begotten  So7i^  or 
God  only  begotten^  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  not  affected.  The 
latter  reading  merely  combines  in  one  phrase  the  two  attri- 
butes of  the  word  already  indicated — God  (ver.  1),  only  begot- 
ten (ver.  14) ;  the  sense  being  one  who  was  both  God  and  only 
begotten. 

*  Dr.  Scrivener,  **  Introdaotfon  to  the  CritioiBm  of  the  New  Testament,'*  re- 
marks :  **  Those  who  will  resort  to  ancient  eyidenoe  exclosiyelj  for  the  recension 
of  the  text,  maj  well  be  perplexed  in  dealing  with  this  passage.  The  oldest 
manuscripts,  versions,  and  writers  are  hopelesslj  divided."  He  decides,  how- 
ever, for  the  reading  vl6s.  So  Tischendorfs  text,  and  of  commentators,  Meyer, 
De  Wette,  Alford,  Godet,  SchafiF  (in  Lange).  Westcott  and  Hort's  text  gives 
Oc^s.  with  6  puHfvyf^iis  v&s  in  margin.  So  Westcott  (Commentarj),  Milligan  and 
Monlton,  and  Tregelles.  See  SchafiF's  note  on  the  passage  in  Lange ;  Scriv- 
ener, p.  S25;  and  **Two  Dissertations,"  bj  F.  J.  A.  Hort,  Cambridge, 
1877. 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Who  is  in  the  bosom  (o  uf  ei;  toi'  koXttov).  The  expression' 
6  S)v,  who  is,  or  (/le  otw  being,  ie  explained  in  two  ways :  1.  As  a 
timeless  present,  expressing  the  itiliereut  and  eternal  relation  of 
the  Son  to  tlie  Father.  2.  As  interpreted  by  the  preposition 
ew,  in,  lit.,  into,  and  expressing  the  fact  of  Christ's  return  to 
the  Father's  glory  after  Uis  incarnation  :  "  The  Son  who  lias 
entered  into  the  Father's  bosom  and  is  there."  In  the  former 
case  it  is  an  absolute  description  of  the  nature  of  the  Son  :  in 
the  latter,  the  emphasis  is  on  the  historic  fact  of  the  ascension, 
though  with  a  reference  to  his  eternal  abiding  with  the  Father 
from  thenceforth. 

While  tlie  fact  of  Christ's  retorn  to  the  Father's  glory  may 
have  been  present  to  the  writer's  mind,  and  have  helped  to  de- 
termine the  form  of  the  statement,  to  emphasize  that  fact  in 
this  connection  would  seem  less  consistent  with  the  coarse  of 
thought  in  the  Prologue  than  the  other  interpretation :  shice 
John  is  declaring  in  this  sentence  the  competency  of  the  incar- 
nate Son  to  manifest  God  to  mankind.  The  ascension  of  Clirist 
is  indeed  bound  up  with  that  truth,  but  is  not,  in  the  light  of 
the  previous  course  of  thought,  its  primary  factor.  That  is 
rBX\ieir  t}i£  eternal  oneness  of  the  Word  with  God  ;  which,  though 
passing  through  the  phase  of  incarnation,  nevertheless  remains 
unbroken  (iii.  13).  Thus  Godet,  aptly :  "The  quality  attributed 
to  Jesus,  of  being  tlie  perfect  revealer  of  the  divine  Being,  is 
founded  on  Kis  intimate  and  perfect  relation  to  God  Himself." 

The  phrase,  in  the  bosom,  of  the  Father,  depicts  this  eternal 
relation  as  essentially  a  relation  of  love  ;  the  figure  being  used 
of  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife  (Deut.  xiii.  6);  of  a  father 
to  an  infant  child  (Num.  xi.  12),  and  of  the  affectionate  protec- 
tion and  rest  afforded  to  Lazarus  in  Paradise  (Luke  xvi.  23). 
The  force  of  the  preposition  eis,  into,  according  to  the  first  in- 
terpretation of  who  is,  is  akin  to  that  of  "wifA  God  "  (see  on 
ver.  1) ;  denoting  an  ever  active  relation,  an  eternal  going  forth 
and  returning  to  the  Father's  bosom  by  the  Son  in  Uis  eternal 
work  of  love.  He  ever  goes  forth  from  that  element  of  grace 
and  love  and  returns  to  it.  That  element  is  His  life.  He  is 
there  "  because  He  plunges  into  it  by  His  onceasing  actioo  "^ 
(Godet). 


PBOLOOUB.  61 

He  (iKeiua^).  StFODg]j  emphatic,  and  pointing  to  the  eternal 
"Son.  This  pronoun  is  used  by  John  more  frequently  than  by 
any  other  writer.  It  occurs  seventy-two  times,  and  not  only  aa 
•denoting  the  more  distant  subject,  but  as  denoting  and  laying 
special  stress  on  the  person  or  thing  immediately  at  hand,  or 
possessing  pre-eminently  the  quality  which  is  immediately  in 
-question.  Thus  Jesus  applies  it  to  Himself  as  the  person  for 
whom  the  healed  blind  man  is  inquiring :  ^^  It  is  JSe  {iKeufo^) 
that  talketh  with  thee  "  (John  ix.  37).  So  here,  ^^  tlie  only-be- 
gotten Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father — Me  hath  de- 
'clared  Him.** 

Hath  declared  (ifi^yi^craro).  Or,  rendering  the  aorist  strictly, 
JBe  declared.  From  ix,  farthy  and  ^ofuu,  to  lead  the  way. 
Orig.,  to  lead  or  govern.  Hence,  like  the  lAt.praeire  verhisy  to 
go  before  with  wordsy  to  prescribe  or  dictate  a  form  ofworde. 
To  draw  out  in  narrativey  to  recotmt  or  rehearse  (see  Acts  xv. 
14,  and  on  Luke  xxiv.  35).  To  relate  in  fvU  ;  to  interpretj  or 
translate.  Therefore  i^^^rtn^^*  exegesisy  is  interpretation  or  ex- 
planaiian.  The  word  iffiyfirii^  was  used  by  the  Greeks  of  an 
*expoimder  of  oracles,  dreams,  omens,  or  sacred  rites.  Thus 
Croesus,  finding  the  suburbs  of  Sardis  alive  with  serpents,  sent 
to  the  soothsayers  (cfifyiyrA?)  of  Telmessus  (Herodotus,  i.,  78). 
The  word  thus  comes  to  mean  a  spiritual  director.  Plato  calls 
Apollo  the  tutelary  director  {irarp^of:  i^yrpnv^)  of  religion 
("  Republic,"  427),  and  says,  "  Let  the  priests  be  interpreters  for 
.life"  (''  Laws,"  759).  In  the  Septnagint  the  word  is  used  of  the 
magicians  of  Pharaoh's  court  (Gen.  xli.  8,  24),  and  the  kindred 
verb  of  teaching  or  interpreting  concerning  leprosy  (Levit.  xiv. 
57).  John's  meaning  is  that  the  Word  revealed  or  manifested 
and  interpreted  the  Father  to  men.  The  word  occurs  only  here 
in  John's  writings.  Wye.  renders,  JSe  hath  told  out.  These 
words  conclude  the  Prologue. 

The  HisTOBioAii  Narrative  now  begins,  and  falls  into  two 
general  divisions. 


WORD  BTUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


1.  THE  8ELF-RETELATI0N    OF  CHRIST  TO  THE  WORLD  (L 
19-xii.  50). 

n.  THE  SELF-REVELATION  OF  CHRIST  TO  THE  DISCIPLES 
(xiii.  l-ui.  23).» 

19.  This  {avTf}).  The  following.  This  nse  of  the  pronoun, 
calling  the  reader's  attention  to  what  follows,  and  preparing 
him  for  it,  ia  frequent  in  John.  Sometimes  the  prononn  earriea 
the  set]se  oi  quality :  of  this  cliaracter.  See  iii.  19;  xv.l2;  1 
John  V.  4,  9,  11,  14. 

Witness  {jutprvpia).    Testimony.    See  on  ver.  7,  and  1  Pet. 


John.  See  on  ver.  6.  Note  the  article :  the  John  previously 
mentioned. 

The  Jaws  {oi  Toi/Saioi).  This  is  a  characteristic  word  in 
John.  It  occiira  more  than  fifty  times  in  his  Gospel  »s  his  own 
expression,  while  there  are  six  instances  of  the  formula  Kin^ 
of  Hit,  Jevia  used  by  Gentiles.  In  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  on  the 
other  liaud,  to  twelve  instances  of  King  of  the  Jews,  there  are 
but  four  passages  in  which  the  word  Jews  occurs.  In  Paul's 
writings  it  is  comparatively  rare,  mostly  in  contrast  with  Greek, 
and  both  in  contrast  with  Christianity.  In  the  Apocalypse  it 
is  found  twice  {ii.  9 ;  iii.  9),  of  those  who  say  they  are  Jews  and 
are  not,  but  are  "  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan  "  and  "  do  lie." 

John,  in  the  Gospel,  distingnislies  between  the  multitude  (6 
Sy(\o<t)  and  the  Jews  {'lovSaioi).  By  the  former  he  means  tlie 
aggregate  of  the  Jewish  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  the  7)ias8  of 
the  people,  chiefly  Galilseans;  by  the  latter,  more  particularly 
Jiideeans,  the  leaders  of  Judaism  in  opposition  to  Jesus.  The 
wiM^iit«/e  are  unsettled  in  conviction,  inquisitive,  despised  by  the 
Pharisees,  inclined  to  listen  to  Jesus  and  to  believe;  moved  by 
an  impulse  to  make  llim  a  king,  escorting  Ilim  triumphantly 
into  Jerusalem,  and  not  appearing  in  the  narrative  of  the  trial 

*  I  take  tliie  divisiuii  from  W^atcott. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  63 

and  cmcifixion.  The  Jefvo9  are  tenacious  of  the  expectation  of  a 
national  Messiah.  They  represent  the  narrow,  sectarian  aspect 
of  Judaism ;  thej  are  the  instigators  and  leaders  of  the  opposi- 
tion to  Jesus,  and  to  them  His  crucifixion  is  attributed.  John 
uses  the  word  where  the  other  Evangelists  speak  of  the  op- 
posers  of  Christ  as  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  elders,  chief-priests, 
scribes,  or  lawyers.  He  recognizes  the  distinction  between 
Pharisee  and  Sadducee,  and  though  he  does  not  mention  the 
latter  by  name,  he  characterizes  them  by  their  position.  Jesus 
is  the  key  to  the  sense  in  which  John  employs  the  term  JekM. 
He  regards  them  in  their  relation  to  Him.  The  idea  underly- 
ing the  word  is  habitually  that  of  separation  from  the  character 
and  privileges  of  a  true  Israelite  through  their  rejection  of 
Jesus.* 

Sent  {pnrkcT^CKjoaf).    As  a  deputation.     See  on  ver.  6. 

Priests  and  Levites.  Representing  the  ecclesiastical  ele- 
ment of  the  nation ;  the  two  classes  employed  in  the  temple 
service.  See  Josh.  iii.  3  ;  2  Chron.  xxx.  27 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  15.  The 
combination  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament  These 
deputies  probably  came  from  the  Sanhedrim. 

To  ask  (&a  ipwrfyrwriif).  Lit,  in  order  thai  they  ahovld  <uk. 
See  on  Matt  xv.  23. 

Who  art  thou  {<n>  rk  el)  ?    Lit,  thcnij  who  art  thou  t 

20.  He  confessed  and  denied  not.  John's  characteristic 
combination  of  a  positive  and  negative  clause.  See  on  ver.  3. 
Both  verbs  are  used  absolutely. 

I  am  not  the  Christ.  According  to  the  proper  reading,  *yo), 
/,  stands  first  in  the  Baptist's  statement,  the  irt  having  the 
force  merely  of  quotation  marks.  It  is  emphatic  :  "  I  am  not 
the  Christ,  though  the  Christ  is  here."     Some  were  questioning 


^  The  student  shonld  bj  all  means  read  Canon  WeRtcott^s  admirable  sum- 
marj  of  this  subject  in  the  Introduction  to  his  Commentary  on  John's  Gospel. 


64  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

whether  John  was  the  Christ  (Luke  iii.  15 ;  Acts  xiii.  25).  Note 
the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  emphatic  /;  yy.  23,  26,  27,  30, 
31,  33,  34.    On  the  Ghrxsty  see  on  Matt.  i.  1. 


24.  What  then  ?  Art  thou  Elias  ?  Better,  as  Ber., 
Elijah.  Some  authorities  read,  Whai  then  art  thou  t  Elijah  t 
Elijah,  predicted  in  Mai.  iv.  5,  as  the  forerunner  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord. 

Art  thou  that  prophet?  Rev.,  ^^  tiie  prophet."  According 
to  the  Greek  order,  the  prophet  art  thou.  See  Dent,  xviii. 
15,  and  compare  Acts  iii.  22 ;  vii.  37 ;  John  L  46  ;  vi.  14. 

No.    Observe  how  the  successive  denials  become  shorter. 

23.  The  voice  (^i^)-  Or,  a  voice.  There  is  no  article. 
See  on  Matt.  iii.  5. 

Crying  in  the  wilderness.  Some  join  in  the  wilderness 
with  make  straight^  as  in  the  Hebrew.  The  quotation  is  from 
Isa.  xl.  3.  In  the  other  three  Gospels  it  is  applied  to  the  Bap- 
tist (Matt.  iii.  3 ;  Mark  i.  3  ;  Luke  iii.  4).  Here  he  uses  it  of 
himself.     On  wilderness^  see  on  Matt  iii.  1. 

Make  straight  the  way  {evBvvare  rifv  oBbv).  For  oSop,  way^ 
all  the  Synoptists  have  rplfiov^,  beaten  tracks  ;  and  for  the  verb 
euStWre,  make  straight^  the  adjective  and  verb  eiAela^  iroutire. 
On  the  figure  of  preparing  the  roads,  see  on  Luke  iii.  5. 

24.  They  which  were  sent  were  (ot  aveirraXfAivoi  i^av). 
Lit,  those  having  been  sent  were.  But  the  best  texts  omit  the 
article,  so  that  the  remaining  words  form  the  pluperfect  pas- 
sive :  ^^  they  had  been  sent  from  the  Pharisees."  This  addition 
of  an  explanatory  circumstance  is  characteristic  of  John.  Com- 
pare i.  41,  45  ;  ix.  14 ;  xi.  5,  18  ;  xiii.  23. 

26.  I  baptize  with  water:  but  there  standeth.  The  best 
texts  omit  but ;  so  that  the  two  clauses  illustrate  John's  char- 
acteristic parallelism,  and  bring  out  the  sharp  contrast  be- 
tween the  Baptist  and  his  successor. 


006PBL  OP  JOHN.  65 

Among  you  (jiico^  vfA&v).  The  Greek  idiom  is  a  mid  one 
in  reypect  of  you.  'BSyi»,  I^  and  fUa-o^,  a  mid  one,  stand  re- 
spectively at  the  head  of  the  parallel  clauses,  thas  emphasizing 
the  two  contrasted  parties. 

Standeth  {Itmftcev).  The  best  texts  read  on^icei,  a  verb 
which  is  kindred  to  farrfitcev,  bat  with  tlie  added  sense  of  Jirmj 
persistent  standing.  Thus,  stand  fast  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13  ;  Gal.  v. 
1 :  Philip,  i.  27).  The  verb  emphasizes  the  firm,  dignified  at- 
titude of  Christ. 

Ye  know  not  (biiw).    Emphatic. 

27.  He  it  is  who,  coming  after  me  {aM^  iirrw  o  dirl(rm 
ftoO  ipxpiA€in^).  The  best  texts  omit  the  first  two  words. 
Westcott  and  Hort  also  omit  6 ;  so  that  the  rendering  is,  whom 
ye  know  not,  coming  after  me. 

Was  preferred  before  me.    The  best  texts  omit 

To  unloose  (Zm  Xwrw).  Lit.,  thai  I  should  unloose.  Mark 
(i.  7)  and  Luke  (iii.  16)  have  unloose.  Matt  (iiL  11)  hear. 
See  on  Matt.  iii.  11. 

28.  Bethabara  (Bi/3a^apfi).  The  correct  reading  is  Bi^Soy^ 
Bethany.  Not  the  Bethany  of  John  xi.  18,  but  an  unknown 
village.  It  was  not  uncommon  for  two  places  to  have  the  same 
name,  as  the  two  Bethsaidas,  the  one  on  the  eastern  shore  of 
the  Lake  of  G^nnesaret  (Mark  vi.  32,  45),  and  the  other  on  the 
western  shore  (John  i.  44) ;  the  two  Cffisareas,  on  the  Mediter- 
ranean (Acts  viii.  40),  and  in  Gaulonitis,  at  the  foot  of  Lebanon, 
Cffisarea  Philippi  (Matt  xvL  13). 

Was  baptizing  (ffv  fiairrl^mv).  The  participle  with  the  sub- 
stantive verb  indicating  continued  action ;  was  engaged  in  hap' 
tizing. 

29.  John.    Tlie  best  texts  omit 

Vol.  II.— 5 


66  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Seeth  (fikhrei).  Both  o/x£a>  and  pkhrw  denote  the  plijsicHl 
act  of  seeing,  the  former  seeing  in  general,  the  latter  the  single 
look.  The  perception  indicated  by  pXJh-fo  is  more  oiUward; 
tiie  perception  of  sense  as  distinguished  from  mental  discern- 
ment, which  is  prominent  in  6paa>.  A  look  told  the  Baptist 
that  the  Mightier  One  had  come.  See  on  ver.  18,  and  Matt, 
vii.  3. 

Unto  (TTpo^).    Strictly,  Unoarda. 

Behold  (ZSe).  The  imperative  in  the  singnlar  number, 
though  the  oom/pwny  of  his  followers  is  addressed.  This  con- 
struction, however,  is  not  uncommon.  See  Matt.  xxvi.  65 ; 
Acts  xiii.  46. 

The  Lamb  (o  ai^vi^.  The  word  occurs  in  John  only  here 
and  in  ver.  36.  Also  in  Acts  viii.  32 ;  1  Pet.  i.  19.  The  diminu- 
tive dpvlov,  a  lilUe  lamb^  is  found  once  in  the  Gospel  (xxL  15), 
often  in  the  Apocalypse,  but  only  of  the  glorified  Redeemer, 
and  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  In  some  instances 
the  word  may  emphasize  the  gentle  and  innocent  character  of 
Jesus  suffering  to  expiate  the  sins  of  men  (Apoc.  v.  6,  12 ;  xiii. 
8) ;  but  it  is  also  employed  in  describing  Him  as  indignatU 
(Apoc.  vi.  16) ;  as  victorious  (Apoc.  xvii.  4);  tis  the  object  of 
adoralion  (Apoc.  v.  8) ;  and  as  enthroned  (Apoc.  v.  13 ;  vii. 
17). 

The  term,  the  Lamb  of  Ood  (note  the  article),  is  evidently 
used  here  by  the  Baptist  in  some  sense  understood  by  his 
hearers,  and  points  to  Isa.  liii.  (7) ;  compare  Acts  viii.  32. 
The  reference  is  probably  to  the  Paschal  lamb,  though  com- 
mentators differ. 

Of  God.    Provided  by  God  for  sacrifice. 

That  taketh  away  (o  aip<uv).  Either  takes  away  or  takes 
upon  himsdf  in  order  to  bear:  either  remxxoal  or  expiation  of 
sin.  The  one  idea,  however,  is  included  in  the  other.  The 
taking  away  of  the  sin  is  through  His  bearing  it.  In  Isa.  liii. 
(Sept.),  <f>€p<D,  to  hear^  and  its  compound  apaxf>ipw  (see  on  1  Pet. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  67 

iL  5)  are  ased,  and  alpwy  to  take  up  a/nd  carry  wwayy  occurs  only 
in  the  phrase  hia  life  is  taken  from  the  earthy  A.Y.,  he  was  cut 
off  out  of  the  land  of  the  livingy  in  accordance  with  the  universal 
usage  of  the  Septuagint,  which  never  employs  alpew  to  express 
the  hearing  of  sin.  If  the  Baptist  had  meant  hearingy  he  would 
probably  have  used  ^/m0.  Compare  1  John  iii.  5 :  ^'  He  was 
manifested  to  take  away  {Jva  aprfj  our  sins,"  and  1  John  i.  7, 
*^  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  In  the  use  of  the  present  tense, 
takethy  the  Baptist  views  the  future  consummation  of  Christ's 
atoning  work  as  potentially  present. 

The  sin  {rifp  a^uiprrlav).    Collectively  regarded. 

World.    See  on  ver.  9. 

30.  Of  whom  {wepl  oS) ;  i.e.,  "  oonoeming  whom  ;**  but  the 
proper  reading  is  inrip  oi,  ^'  on  behalf  oi  whom ; "  in  vindication 

A  man  (ipifp).  Three  words  are  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment for  man :  &pfnpf  or  dpinfv,  aviip,  and  &vSpc»rro^.  ''Apaijv 
marks  merely  the  sextuU  distinctiony  m/Ue  (Rom.  i.  27 ;  Apoc 
xii.  5,  13).  ^Avrip  denotes  the  man  as  distinguished  from  the 
womany  as  male  or  as  a  husband  (Acts  viii.  12;  Matt.  i.  16),  or 
from  a  hoy  (Matt.  xiv.  21).  Also  man  as  endowed  with  courage, 
intelligence,  strength,  and  other  noble  attributes  (1  Cor.  xiiL 
11 ;  £ph.  iv.  13 ;  Jas.  iii.  2). 

"AvSpamo^  is  generic,  without  distinction  of  sex,  a  hum^m 
heing  (John  xvi.  21),  though  often  used  in  connections  which 
indicate  or  imply  sex,  as  Matt.  xix.  10 ;  x.  35.  Used  of  ma/i- 
kind  (Matt.  iv.  4),  or  of  the  people  (Matt.  v.  13,  16 ;  vi.  5,  18; 
John  vi.  10).  Of  man  as  distinguished  from  animals  or  plants 
(Matt.  iv.  19;  2  Pet  ii.  16),  and  from  God,  Christ  as  divine 
and  angels  (Matt.  x.  32 ;  John  x.  33  ;  Luke  ii.  15).  With  the 
notion  of  weakness  leading  to  sin,  and  with  a  contemptnous 
sense  (1  Cor.  ii.  5 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  2 ;  John  v.  12 ;  Rom.  ix.  20). 
The  more  honorable  and  noble  sense  thus  attaches  to  avrfp 
rather  than  to  avSpayrro<;.  Tlius  Herodotus  says  that  when  the 
Modes  charged  the  Greeks,  they  fell  in  vast  numbers,  so  that 


68  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

it  was  manifest  to  Xerxes  that  he  had  many  men  combaUmU 
(av^fHunroi)  but  few  warriors  (ivSpe^)  viL,  210.  So  Homer:  "O 
friends,  be  men  (01^^69),  and  take  on  a  stout  heart "  (^'  Iliad/' 
v.,  529).  *Avi]p  is  therefoi-e  used  here  of  Jesus  by  the  Baptist 
with  a  sense  of  dignity.  Compare  avSfxoTro^,  in  ver.  6,  where 
the  word  implies  no  disparagement,  but  is  simply  indefinite. 
In  John  canip  has  mostly  the  sense  of  hu^ofid  (iv.  16-18).  See 
vi.  10. 

31.  And  I  {fcayib).  Emphatic.  ^^  And  /,  though  I  predicted 
His  coming  (ver.  30),  knew  Him  not.'' 

Knew  Him  not.  Officially,  as  the  Messiah.  There  is  no 
reference  to  personal  acquaintance.  It  is  inconceivable  that, 
with  the  intimate  relations  between  the  two  families,  the  Bap- 
tist should  have  been  personally  unacquainted  with  Jesus. 

Israel.  Always  with  the  idea  of  the  spirUual  privilege  of 
the  race. 

32.  Bare  record  {ifiapTvpfforey).  Better,  hear  wUnesBy  as 
Rev.    See  on  ver.  7. 

I  saw  (reSio/ioi).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  gives  the  force  of 
the  perfect  tense,  /  hofoe  beheld.  Calmly  and  thoughtfully ; 
see  on  ver.  14.  The  perfect  indicates  the  abiding  effect  of  the 
vision.     Compare  icapatea,  I  home  seen  (ver.  34). 

As  a  dove  (coo-el  irepurrepiuf).  In  the  shape  of  a  dove.  See 
on  Matt  iii.  16. 

33.  The  same  (e/ceuw).  Bev.,  Be.  See  on  ver.  18.  Em- 
phasizing the  personal  communication  of  Christ  to  the  Baptist 

With  the  Holy  Ghost  {iv  IIvevfjLari,  'Ayiip).  Better,  as  Rev., 
Holy  Spirit,  The  preposition  ^,  in  (Rev.,  in  marg.),  often  has 
the  instrumental  force,  with.  Here,  however,  it  would  seem  to 
signify  the  element  of  the  new  life,  as  hf  Sharif  in  waiery  signi- 
fies the  element  of  the  symbolic  baptism,  and  might  better  be 
rendered  in.    The  absence  of  the  article  from  Holy  Spirit  falls 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  69 

in  with  this,  aa  indicating  the  spiritual  influence  of  the  divine 
Agent  rather  than  His  personality. 

34.  I  saw  {iipatea).  Bev.,  more  strictly,  according  to  the 
perfect  tense,  /  have  seen.  See  on  yer.  32,  and  note  the  dif- 
ferent verb  for  seeing,  on  which  see  on  ver.  18. 

Bare  record  Qiefiaprvpi^ica).  Bev.,  have  lame  witness. 
Also  the  perfect  tense. 

The  Son  of  God.  This  is  the  proper  reading,  but  one  very 
important  manuscript  reads  o  iKKesni^,  the  chosen.  By  the 
phrase  John  means  the  Messiah.  It  has  the  same  sense  as  in 
the  Synoptic  Gkwpels.  Compare  Matt  zi.  27 ;  zzviii  19.  For 
the  sense  in  which  it  was  understood  by  the  Jews  of  Christ's 
day,  see  v.  18, 19 ;  x.  29,  30-36.  The  phrase  occurs  in  the 
Old  Testament  only  in  Daniel  iiL  25.  Compare  Ps.  ii  12.  On 
tM09,  Atm,  as  distinguished  £rom  risawif,  ehUdy  see  on  ver.  12. 

35.  Stood  {eumiicei).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  toas  siandinffj 
since  the  imperfect  tense  denotes  something  in  progress.  Here, 
therefore,  with  the  idea  of  waiiing ;  was  standing  in  expecta- 
tion.   Compare  vii.  37 ;  xviii.  5,  6, 18. 

Two  of  his  disciples.  The  one  was  Andrew  (ver.  41),  the 
other  the  Evangelist  himself,  who  studiously  refrains  from 
mentioning  his  own  name  throughout  the  narrative.  The 
name  of  James  the  elder  also  does  not  appear,  nor  that  of 
Salome,  the  Evangelist's  mother,  who  is  mentioned  by  name  in 
Mark's  Gospel  (xv.  40  ;  xvi.  1).  The  omission  of  his  own  name 
is  the  more  significant  from  the  fact  that  he  is  habitually  ex- 
act in  defining  the  names  in  his  narrative.  Compare  the  sim- 
ple designation  Simon  (i.  42)  with  subsequent  occurrences  of 
his  name  after  his  call,  as  i.  42 ;  xiii.  6 ;  xxi.  15,  etc  Also 
Thomas  (xi.  16 ;  xx.  24 ;  xxi.  2) ;  Judas  Iscariot  (vi.  71 ;  xii.  4 ; 
xiii.  2,  26) ;  the  other  Judas  (xiv.  22).  Note  also  that  he  never 
speaks  of  the  Baptist  as  John  the  Baptist^  like  the  other  three 
Evangelists,  but  aJways  as  John. 


70  WOHD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

36.  Looking  {t/*^\S^(K).  'Rev.,  giving  the  force  of  the 
aorist,  atid  he  looked.  See  od  rer.  29.  The  verb  is  used  by 
Johu  only  here  and  ver.  42. 

As  He  walked  {vepfTraravvri,).  The  verb  literally  meaDG  to 
walk  about  (trepi).  Here,  possibly,  walking  along.  Weatcott, 
"  walking  away."     See  on  1  Pet.  v.  8  ;  Luke  xi.  44. 

37.  Speak  (XaXoOvrw).     Lit,  speaking. 

They  followed.  Bengel  says,  "  The  origin  of  the  Christian 
Oharch." 

38.  Saw   (^aa-dfievot).     Better,   as   Be?.,   beheld:    looked 

steadfastly  upon  them  as  if  studying  them. 

What  seek  ye  ?  The  first  words  o£  Christ  as  recorded  by 
John.     Compare  Matt.  iii.  15;  Mark  i.  15;  Luke  ii,  49. 

Rabbi.  Mg  great  otie  ;  my  honorable  air.  Eicplained  by 
Jesus  himself  as  SiSoirieaXov,  teacher  (Matt,  xxiii.  8,  where  the 
proper  reading  is  Si&tia-KdKos,  instead  of  KaSTiyijTilt,  guide,  mas- 
ter, found  in  Matt,  xxiii.  10).  [Jsed  by  the  Jews  in  addressing 
their  teachers,  and  formed  from  a  Hebrew  root  meaning  great. 
It  occurs  commonly  in  John,  and  is  found  in  Matthew  and 
Mark,  but  not  in  Luke,  who  uses  ETrtoTan};.   See  on  Luke  v.  5. 

Being  interpreted,  John  frequently  adds  explanatory  re* 
marks.     See  vv.  42,  43  ;  ix.  7.  , 

Dwellest  thou  {pAveit).  Rev.,  cAidest.  Jesus  had  asked 
"  What  seek  ye  t "  not  whom.  They  reply,  "  Where  dost  thou 
abide  ? " 

39.  See  (JSere).     But  the  correct  reading  is  Sy^aSe,  ye  shall 


They  came.  The  beat  texts  add  o!rv,  therefore.  So  Rer, 
This  connecting  particle  is  found  in  John's  Gosjiel  as  often  as 
in  the  other  three  combined,  and  most  commonly  in  narrative, 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  71 

marking  the  tranBition  from  one  thing  to  another,  and  serving 
to  coimect  the  several  parts  of  the  narrative.  See  ver.  22 ;  ii. 
18 ;  iii.  25  ;  iv.  28,  30,  etc.  Much  more  frequently  thus  than 
in  the  discourses,  where  it  would  be  used  to  mark  a  sequence  of 
thought.  Still  such  instances  occur,  as  vv.  21,  25 ;  iii.  29 ;  viiL 
5 ;  iv.  11. 

He  dwelt  {jJ^t)'  The  present  tense.  lit,  they  saw  where 
he  dtoelleth.  For  a  similar  construction  see  ii.  9 ;  iv.  1 ;  Acts 
X.  18,  etc. 

Tenth  hour.  The  question  is  whether  this  is  to  be  reck- 
oned according  to  the  Jewish  or  the  Koman  method  of  com- 
putation. The  Jewish  method,  employed  by  the  other  Evan- 
gelists,  begins  the  day  at  sunrise ;  so  that,  according  to  this, 
the  tenth  hour  would  be  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  The 
Roman  method,  like  our  own,  reckons  from  midnight ;  accord- 
ing to  which  the  tenth  hour  would  be  ten  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing. Tlie  weight  of  the  argument  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  be 
in  favor  of  the  Jewish  method,  which  is  undoubtedly  assumed 
by  John  in  xi.  9.  The  Greeks  of  Asia  Minor,  for  whom  John 
wrote,  had  the  Jewish  method,  received  from  the  Babylonians. 
Godet  cites  an  incident  from  the  '^  Sacred  Discourses  "  of  Aelius 
Aristides,  a  Greek  sophist  of  the  second  century,  and  a  con- 
temporary of  Polycarp.  God  having  commanded  him  to  take 
a  bath,  he  chose  the  sixth  hour  as  the  most  favorable  to  health. 
It  being  winter,  and  the  bath  a  cold  one,  the  hour  was  mid- 
day;  for  he  said  to  his  friend  who  kept  him  waiting,  ^^Seest 
thou  the  shadow  is  already  turning?"  Even  Canon  West- 
cott,  who  advocates  the  Roman  method,  admits  that  ^^  this 
mode  of  reckoning  was  unusual  in  ancient  times,"  and  that  ^^  the 
Romans  and  Greeks,  no  less  than  the  Jews,  reckoned  their 
hours  from  sunrise,"  though  the  Romans  reckoned  their  civil 
days  from  midnight,  and  the  tenth  hour  is  named  as  a  late 
hour,  when  soldiers  took  their  repast  or  were  allowed  to  rest. 
Thus  Livy,  in  his  account  of  the  Roman  attack  on  Sutrium 
says,  ^'  About  the  tenth  hour  the  consul  ordered  his  men  a  re- 
past, and  gave  directions  that  they  should  be  ready  in  arms  at 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

whatever  time  of  the  day  or  night  lie  should  give  the  aignaL 
.  .  .  After  refreshing  themeelvee,  tliej  conEigrted  them- 
eelvee  to  rest "  (ix.,  37). 

Arietophanee  savs,  "  When  the  shadow  on  the  dial  is  ten  feet 
long,  then  go  to  dinner"  ("Eccleaiazusffi,"  648),  and  Horace,  "You 
will  dine  with  rae  to  day.  Como  after  the  ninth  hour  "  {"  EpiBtle," 
Bk.  It  vii.,  69).  It  is  objected  that  the  time  from  four  o'clock  to 
the  cloBfl  of  the  day  would  not  have  been  described  as  that  day  ; 
but  beyond  the  marking  of  the  specific  hour  of  accompanying 
JeBDS  as  tlie  first  honr  of  his  Christian  life,  John  would  not  have 
been  unlikely  to  use  a  looser  and  more  popular  form  of  speech 
in  indicating  the  length  of  the  stay  witli  Jesus,  meaning  simply 
that  they  remained  with  him  during  the  remainder  of  the  day, 
and,  no  doubt,  prolonged  their  conversation  into  the  night.* 

40.  One  of  the  two.    The  other  being  John. 

Andrew.  See  on  Mark  iii.  18.  Compare  Mark  xiii.  3; 
John  vi.  8  ;  xii.  22. 

Simon  Peter's  brother.  The  mention  of  Simon  Peter  be- 
fore be  has  appeared  in  the  narrative  indicates  the  importance 
which  the  Evangelist  attaches  to  liim.  It  seems  to  assume  a 
knowledge  of  the  evangelic  narrative  on  the  part  of  the  read- 
ers. See  a  similar  instance  of  anticipating  what  is  subsequently 
explained,  in  the  mention  of  Mary,  xi.  2. 

41.  He  first  findeth  (ewpKrtet  oStot  ■jt/kutot).  Rev.,  ,/En(fc«A 
first.  Re  is  the  demonstrative  pronoun,  ihii  one,  which,  with 
firgt,  Bflems  to  point  to  the  later  finding  of  his  brother  by  the 
other  disciple,  i.e.,  of  James  by  John.   Bengel  says :  "  With  the 

*  It  ii  not  ettj  to  kdjnst  >1!  the  referenoes  to  tb«  hour  of  the  di^T  'ti  John'i 
Qoipel  to  either  oi  the  two  methods  Thiu  xix.  14  plues  the  cmoiBxioa  at 
ills  lixA  hoor,  or  noun,  rockonlng  bj  the  Jewuh  mode,  while  Hark  (zt.  2-'i) 
nunei  the  third  hour,  or  betveen  8  >nd  9  A.M.  Tbe  (wo  pusagei  in  eh.  iv, 
0,  S2,  kffoTd  little  help.  eBpeoiftllj  the  latter.  Perhaps,  aft«r  all,  the  paamiie 
most  oearlj  decislTe  is  xi.  9.  There  are  titrong  autboritiee  od  both  lldee.  Fur 
the  Itoman  method,  Tholuck,  Ebrard,  Bwald,  Weihwtt;  for  tbe  Jeviih,  LUoke, 
De  Wet(«,  Hejer,  AlFord,  Lange,  aodeL 


i 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  73 

festival  freshness  of  those  dajs  beautif  ally  corresponds  the  word 
jindeth^  which  is  frequently  ased  here.'' 

His  own  (toi^  ISioy).  8ee  on  Matt.  zxiL  5 ;  zzv.  15 ;  Acts  L 
7;  IPet  i.  3. 

We  have  found  (ci/njirafMy).  This  has  been  called  the  chap- 
ter of  the  Enrekas. 

The  Messias.  Peculiar  to  this  GkMpel,  and  only  here  and 
vr.  25, 

Christ.    See  on  Matt  L 1. 

42.  Beheld.  The  same  word  as  in  ver.  36,  on  which  see. 
Bev.,  looked  tipon. 

Thou  art.    Some  read  interrogatively :  art  thou. 

Jona  (lomi).    The  correct  reading  is  ^Iwipov,  of  John. 

A  stone  {lUrpa^).  See  on  Matt  zvi.  18.  A  detached  mass 
of  rock.  CephiM  is  the  Aramaic  name,  occurring  1  Oor.  i  12; 
iii.  22 ;  ix.  5 ;  xv.  5 ;  Gal.  ii.  9. 

43.  Jesus.    The  best  texts  omit 

Would  go  forth  {vSiKn<^ey  i^Ukhi).  Bev.,  better,  woi 
minded  to  go.  On  the  constmction  see  on  Matt  xx.  14.  On 
the  verb  to  be  minded^  see  on  Matt  i.  19. 

And  findeth.  Note  the  graphic  interchange  of  tenses:  toas 
minded,  Jindeth,  The  co-ordination  of  the  two  clauses,  which 
by  other  writers  would  be  placed  in  logical  dependence,  is  char- 
acteristic of  John.  Even  where  there  is  a  real  inner  dependence 
he  uses  only  the  simple  connective  particles.  Compare  ii.  13 
sqq. 

Philip.    See  on  Mark  iii.  18.    For  hints  of  his  character 
vL  5,  7 ;  xii.  21  sqq. ;  xiv.  8,  9. 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Saith.  Tlie  best  texts  iusert  Jesus:  "  And  J^esus  said  unto 
liim," 

Follow  {aieoKovSti),  Often  itsed  in  the  New  Testament  with 
the  special  senee  of  following  as  a  disciple  or  partisan.  See 
Matt.  iv.  20,  22  ;  ix.  9  ;  Mark  i.  18 ;  John  viii.  12.  Also  with 
tlie  meaning  of  cleaving  steadfastly  to  one  and  conforming  to 
his  example.  See  Matt.  x.  38 ;  xvi.  24 ;  John  xii.  26.  The 
verb  occtii-s  but  once  outside  of  the  writings  of  the  Evangelists^ 
1  Cor,  X.  4.  It  appears  in  the  noun  acolyte,  or  acolyth,  or  at»- 
lothUt,  a  church -servant  ranking  next  below  a  subdeacon,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  trim  the  lamps,  light  the  church,  prepare  the 
sacramental  elements,  etc.  Under  the  Byzantine  emperors  the 
captain  of  the  emperor's  body-guard  was  called  Acolouthos,  or 
the  fbilmDer.     See  Scott's  "  Count  Robert  of  Paris." 

44.  Of  Bethsaida.  Rev.,  more  Iiteraily,/wm  (aTrd).  Beth- 
aaida  of  Galilee.  See  xii.  2],  and  on  ver.  28.  Philip,  being  of 
the  same  city  as  Andrew  and  Peter,  was  the  more  ready  to  wel- 
come Christ,  because  of  the  testimony  and  example  of  his  fel- 
low-citiieus.  Notice  the  change  of  preposition  :  from  Beth- 
saida  \.wwo)  and  <*u^  of{fK)  the  city.  See  on  from  the  dead, 
Luko  xvi.  31. 

4.').  Nathanael.  Probably  the  same  as  Bartholomew.  See 
on  Bartholomew,  Mark  iii.  IS. 

Moses  in  the  law,  etc.  Note  the  circomGtautial  detail  of 
this  confession  as  compared  with  Andrew's  (ver,  42), 

46i.  Come  out  of  Nazareth  (cc  Na^aper  tantj.  LiL,  "£• 
oQt  of;"  a  characteristic  expression  of  John.  See  iiL  31 ;  iv, 
33;  Tii  17.  as ;  viiL  S3 :  xv.  19 ;  xviii.  36,  33,  etc  It  means 
more  than  to  comt  oot  of :  rather  to  come  out  of  as  that  vhicA 
u  fff;  to  be  identified  with  something  so  as  to  come  forth  hear- 
ing its  impress,  mor&l  or  otherwise.  See  especially  iii,  31 :  "He 
that  irM^the  earth  is  of  the  earth;"  »,«..  partakes  of  iu  quality. 
Oonpare  Christ's  words  to  Nicodeitiiis  (iii.  6k  and  I  djr.  xv.  47. 

1ft  the  Graok  order,  <na  ^Jfamnlk  sUods  tirst  in  the 


he  aea-  I 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  75 

tence  as  expreeaing  the  prominent  thought  in  NathanaePs  mind, 
surprise  that  Jesus  should  have  come  from  Nazareth,  a  poor 
village,  even  the  naiue  of  which  does  not  occur  in  the  Old 
Testament.  Contrary  to  the  popular  explanation,  there  is  no 
ovidence  that  Nazareth  was  worse  than  other  places,  beyond  the 
fact  of  the  violence  offered  to  Jesus  by  its  people  (Luke  iv.  28, 
29)j  and  their  obstinate  unbelief  in  Him  (Matt,  ziii  58 ;  Mark 
vL  6).  It  was  a  proverb,  however,  that  no  prophet  was  to  come 
from  Galilee  (John  vii.  52). 

47.  An  Israelite  indeed  {a\ffS&^  ^la-pmrfklrfisi).  Lit.,  truly 
an  IsraeUte,  An  Israelite  not  merely  in  descent,  but  in  char- 
acter, according  to  the  ideal  laid  down  in  Ood*s  law.  The  wbrd 
Israelite  itself  was  an  honorable  designation.  See  on  men  of 
I^TCLeli  Acts  iii.  12,  and  compare  remarks  on  JewB^  ver.  19. 

Guile  (S6\(k).  Properly,  a  ha/Ufor  JUhj  and  related  at  the 
root  to  heKe61^Wt  to  catch  with  a  baity  or  beguile.  See  on  bsguH- 
inffy  2  Pet.  ii.  14.  The  true  Israelite  would  be  the  true  child 
of  Israel  after  he  had  ceased  to  be  the  Supplanter.  It  is  an  in- 
teresting fact  that  in  Grenesis  xxv.  27,  Jacob  is  called ,  a  plain 
man,  i.e.y  as  some  explain  the  Hebrew,  a  perfect  or  vpright 
man,  and  others,  a  man  qf  quiet  a/nd  simple  habitey  and  that  the 
Septuagint  renders  this  adjective  by  a7rXa<rro9,  unfeignedy  withr 
cut  dieguieey  simplcy  guilelees.  The  Oreek  here  reads  literally, 
in  wham  guile  is  not. 

48.  K  no  west  {yuwrtceis)*    See  on  Acts  xix.  16. 

Under  the  fig-tree  {tnrb  r^v  avidip).  To  be  construed  with 
^Bov  a-e,  I  sa/vo  thee  ;  i.e.,  /  sanjo  thee  under  the  fig-tree.  The 
preposition  with  the  accusative  case,  which  implies  motion  to- 
ward, indicates  his  withdrawal  to  the  shade  of  the  tree  for 
meditation  or  prayer.  See  on  ver.  50.  The  Jewish  writings 
tell  of  distinguished  rabbis  who  were  accustomed  to  rise  early 
and  pursue  tlieir  studies  under  the  shade  of  a  fig-tree.  Com- 
pare Mic.  iv.  4 ;  2iech.  iii.  10.  Augustine,  in  his  "  Confessions," 
relates  of  himself :  ^^  I  cast  myself  down,  I  know  not  how, 
under  a  certain  fig-tree,  giving  full  vent  to  my  tears  ;  and  the 


"6  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMBNT. 

floods  of  mine  eyes  gQBlied  out,  an  acceptable  eacriflce  to 
Thee"  (viii,  28),  Ifatbanael  aeke,  "  Wiieuce  knoweet  tboa 
me ! "     JesQB  answers,  "  /  saw  tliee  (elSoii)." 

49.  Rabbi.  Natlianael  here  gives  the  title,  which  be  bad 
withheld  in  his  first  address. 

50.  Under  the  fiff-tree  {inro  rfj^  ovidrt).  Compare  ver.  48, 
Here  the  sfirne  prepuaition  is  used  with  the  genitive  case,  indi- 
cating rest,  without  the  suggestion  of  wUhdraioal  to. 

Beiievest  thou  7  Rightly  so,  though  some  render  afflrma- 
lively,  thou  beiievest. 

51.  Verily,  verily  (ofifiv,  ofi^v).  The  word  is  transcribed 
into  our  Amen.  Johu  never,  like  the  other  Evangelists,  uses 
the  single  verily,  and,  like  tbe  single  word  in  the  Synoptists,  it 
ie  used  only  by  Christ. 

Hereafter  (air  apri).  The  best  texts  omit.  The  worda 
literally  mean.ymm  henceforth  ;  and  therefore,  as  Canon  West- 
eott  aptly  remarks, "  if  genuine,  would  describe  tbe  communion 
between  earth  and  heaven  as  established  from  the  time  when 
the  Lord  entered  upon  Uis  public  ministry." 

Heaven  (tov  oipavov).     Kev.,  giving  tbe  article,  ihs  /ttaven. 

Open  (AivpTcfra).  Tbe  perfect  participle.  Hence  Bev., 
rightly,  opened.  The  participle  signitieB  standing  open,  and  is 
used  in  the  story  of  Stephen's  martyrdom,  Acte  vii.  56.  Com- 
pare Isa.  Ixiv,  1.  The  image  presented  to  the  true  Israelite  is 
drawn  from  tbe  history  of  his  ancestor  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  12). 

Angels.  With  the  exception  of  xii.  29  and  xx.  12,  John  does 
not  use  tbe  word  "angel"  elBewbere  in  the  Gospel  or  in  the 
Epistles,  and  does  not  refer  to  their  being  or  ministry.  Trench 
("  Studies  in  the  Gospels  ")  cites  a  beautiful  passage  of  Plato 
as  suggestive  of  our  Lord's  words.  Piato  is  speaking  of  Lova 
"  He  IB  a  great  spirit,  and  like  all  spirits  be  is  intermediate  be- 
tween the  divine  and  the  mortal.     He  interprets  between  gods 


G08PBL  OF  JOHK.  77 

and  men,  conveying  to  the  gods  the  prayers  and  sacrifices  of 
men,  and  to  men  the  commands  and  replies  of  the  gods ;  he  is 
the  mediator  who  spans  the  chasm  which  divides  them,  and  in 
him  all  is  bound  togetlier,  and  through  him  the  acts  of  the 
prophet  add  the  priest,  their  sacrifices  and  mysteries  and 
charms,  and  all  prophecy  and  incantation  find  their  way.  For 
God  mingles  not  with  man,  but  through  Love  all  the  inter- 
course and  speech  of  Ood  with  man,  whether  awake  or  asleep, 
is  carried  on  "  ("  Symposium,'*  203). 

Son  of  man.  See  on  Luke  vi.  22.  Notice  the  titles  suc- 
cessively applied  to  our  Lord  in  this  chapter :  the  greater  Sue* 
cesser  of  the  Baptist,  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Messiah,  the  King  of  Israel.  These  were  all  given  by  others. 
The  title  Son  of  man  He  applies  to  Himself. 

In  John's  Gospel,  as  in  the  Synoptists,  this  phrase  is  used 
only  by  Christ  in  speaking  of  Himself ;  and  elsewhere  only  in 
Acts  viL  56,  where  the  name  is  applied  to  Him  by  Stephen. 
It  occurs  less  frequently  in  John  than  in  the  Synoptists,  being 
found  in  Matthew  thirty  times,  in  Mark  thirteen,  and  in  John 
twelve. 

Jesns'  use  of  the  term  here  is  explained  in  two  ways. 

L  That  He  borrows  the  title  from  the  Old  Testament  to 
designate  Himself  either  (a)  as  a  prophet^  as  in  Ezek.  ii.  13 ; 
iii.  1,  etc. ;  or  (&)  as  the  Messiah^  as  prefigured  in  Dan.  vii.  13. 
This  prophecy  of  Daniel  had  obtained  such  wide  currency  that 
the  Messiah  was  called  Ana/niy  or  the  man  of  the  clovda, 

(a.)  Tliis  is  untenable,  because  in  Ezekiel,  as  everywhere  in 
the  Old  Testament,  the  phrase  Son  of  man^  or  Sons  of  meny  is 
used  to  describe  man  under  his  human  limitations,  as  weak, 
fallible,  and  incompetent  by  himself  to  be  a  divine  agent. 

(h.)  The  allusion  to  Daniel's  prophecy  is  admitted  ;  but 
Jesus  does  not  mean  to  say,  ^^  I  am  the  Messiah  who  is  pre- 
figured by  Daniel."  A  political  meaning  attached  in  popular 
conception  to  the  term  Messiah  ;  and  it  is  noticeable  through- 
out John's  Gospel  that  Jesus  carefully  avoids  using  that  term 
before  the  people,  but  expresses  the  thing  itself  by  circumlo- 
cution, in  order  to  avoid  the  complication  which  the  popular 


78  WOBD  STUDIBB  IN  THE  MBW  TESTAMENT. 

nnderstandiDg  would  have  introduced  into  hie  work.  See  viii. 
24,  25  ;  X.  24,  25. 

Moreover,  the  phrase  Son  of  man  was  not  generally  applied 
to  the  MesBiah.  On  the  contrary,  v.  27  and  xii.  34  eliow  that 
it  was  set  off  against  that  term.  Compare  Matt,  xvi,  13,  15. 
Son  of  God  is  the  Messianic  title,  which,  with  one  exception, 
appears  in  confessions  (i.  34,  49 ;  xi.  27  ;  xx.  31),* 

In  Daniel  the  reference  is  exclusively  to  the  final  stage  of 
human  affairs.  The  point  is  the  final  establishment  of  the 
divine  kingdom.  Moreover,  Daniel  does  not  say  "iA«  Son  of 
man,"  but  "one  like  a  Son  of  man."  Compare  Apoc.  i.  13  ; 
xiv.  14,  where  also  the  article  is  omitted. 

II.  The  second,  and  correct  explanation  is  that  the  phrase 
Son  of  man  is  the  expression  of  Christ's  self- consciousness  aa 
being  related  to  humanity  as  a  whole  :  denoting  Ilia  I'eal  parti- 
cipation in  human  nature,  and  designating  Himself  as  the  rep- 
resentative man.  It  thus  corresponds  with  the  passage  in 
Daniel,  where  the  eartlily  kingdoms  are  represented  by  beasts, 
but  the  divine  kingdom  by  a  Son  of  man.  Hence,  too,  the 
word  avSptnTTO'i  is  purposely  used  (see  on  a  tnan,  ver.  30,  and 
compare  John  vlii.  40), 

While  the  human  element  was  thus  emphasized  in  the 
phrase,  the  consciousness  of  Jesus,  as  thus  expressed,  did  not 
exclude  His  divine  nature  and  claims,  but  rather  regarded 
these  through  the  medium  of  His  humanity.  He  showed  Him- 
self divine  in  being  thus  profoundly  human.  Hence  two 
aspects  of  the  phrase  appear  in  John,  as  in  tlie  Synoptists. 
The  one  regards  Ilis  earthly  life  and  work,  and  involves  Hie 
being  despised ;  His  accommodation  to  the  conditions  of  hu- 
man life;  the  partial  veiling  of  His  divine  nature;  the  lov- 
ing character  of  His  mission  ;  His  liability  to  misinterpreta- 
tion ;  and  His  outlook  npon  a  consummation  of  agony.  On 
the  other  hand.  He  is  possessed  of  supreme  authority;  He  is 
about  Uis  Father's  work ;  He  reveals  glimpses  of  His  divine 


*  la  John  ix.  85,  whers  Jeias  liimsolf  tonuulateB  »  oonfeBaton,  the  readin 
it  disputed;  three  of  the  leuliiig  MSS,  rsidiDg  Son  ^  man.  S«e  on  till 
pauage. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  79 

nature  throagh  His  hnmanitj ;  His  presence  and  misBion  en- 
tail serious  responsibility  upon  those  to  whom  He  appeals ;  and 
He  foresees  a  consummation  of  glory  no  less  than  of  agony. 
See  Matt  viii.  20  ;  xi.  19  ;  xii.  8,  82  ;  xiii.  37 ;  xvi.  13  ;  xx. 
18  ;  xxvi.  64 ;  Mark  viii.  31,  38 ;  xiv.  21 ;  Luke  ix.  26,  68 ;  xii. 
8  ;  xviL  22  ;  xix.  10  ;  xxii.  69. 

The  other  aspect  is  related  to  the  future.  He  has  visions  of 
another  life  of  glory  and  dominion ;  though  present  in  the 
flesh,  His  coming  is  still  future,  and  will  be  followed  by  a  judg- 
ment which  is  committed  to  Him,  and  by  the  final  glory  of 
His  redeemed  in  His  heavenly  kingdom.  See  Matt.  x.  23 ;  xiiL 
40  sqq. ;  xvi.  27  sqq. ;  xix.  28 ;  xxiv.  27,  37,  44 ;  xxv.  31  sqq. ; 
MarkziiL26;  Luke  vL  22;  xvii.24,30;  xviiiS;  xxi.  27. 


CHAPTER  11. 

1.  The  third  day.  Beckoning  from  the  last  day  mentioned 
(i.  43). 

A  marriage  (7<^ao9).  Or  marriage  feHvoal^  including  a 
series  of  entertainments,  and  therefore  often  found  in  the 
plural.     See  on  Matt.  xxii.  2. 

Cana  of  Galilee.  To  distinguish  it  from  Cana  in  Ocslo- 
Syria. 

Mother  of  Je8U8.    Her  name  is  never  mentioned  by  John. 

Was  there.  When  Jesus  arrived.  Probably  as  an  intimate 
friend  of  the  family,  assisting  in  the  preparations. 

2.  Was  called.  Rev.,  hidden.  After  His  return  from  the 
Baptist. 

His  disciples.    In  honor  of  Jesus. 

3.  They  wanted  wine  {v<rreprf<Tcano<;  olvov).  Lit,  when  the 
wine  failed.    So  Rev.    Wye,  and  wine  failing.     Some  early 


80  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  TH£  N£W  TESTAMENT. 

authorities  read :  ^'  they  had  no  wine,  for  the  wine  of  the  mar 
riage  was  consumed."  Marriage  festivals  sometimes  lasted  a 
whole  week  (Gen.  xxix.  27 ;  Judg.  xiv.  15 ;  Tobit  ix.  12  ;  x.  1). 

They  have  no  wine.  Implying  a  request  for  help,  not 
necessarily  the  expectation  of  a  miracle. 

4.  Woman.  Implying  no  severity  nor  disrespect.  Compare 
XX.  13,  15.  It  was  a  highly  respectful  and  affectionate  mode  of 
address. 

What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  (rl  ifuA  koX  aoX).  Lit.,  what  is 
there  to  me  and  to  thee.  See  on  Mark  v.  7,  and  compare  Matt, 
yiii.  29 ;  xxvii.  19 ;  Mark  i.  24 ;  Luke  viii.  28.  It  occurs  often 
in  the  Old  Testament,  2  Sam.  xvi.  10 ;  1  Kings  xvii.  18,  etc 
Tiiough  in  a  gentle  and  affectionate  manner,  Jesus  rejects  her 
interference,  intending  to  supply  the  demand  in  His  own  way. 
Compare  John  vi.  6.  Wye,  TFAo^  to  me  and  to  thee^  thou 
woman  f 

Mine  hour  is  not  yet  come.  Compare  viii.  20;  xii.  23 ; 
xiii.  1.  In  every  case  the  coming  of  the  hour  indicates  some 
crisis  in  the  personal  life  of  the  Lord,  more  commonly  His  pas- 
aion.     Here  the  hour  of  His  Messianic  manifestation  (ver.  11). 

5.  Unto  the  servants  (Suucovov;).  See  on  Matt.  xx.  26; 
Mark  ix.  35. 

6.  Water.pots  {vSploi).  Used  by  John  only,  and  only  in  the 
Oospel,  ver.  7 ;  iv.  28.  TTo^-pots  is  literally  correct,  as  the 
word  is  from  iBmp,  water. 

Of  stone.  Because  less  liable  to  impurity,  and  therefore 
prescribed  by  the  Jewish  authorities  for  washing  before  and 
after  meals. 

After  the  nfianner  of  the  purifying,  etc.  That  is,  for  the 
purifications  customary  among  the  Jews. 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  81 

Containing  (x^pawroi).  From  x^f>a^,  a  place  or  space. 
Hence,  to  niake  roam  or  gioe  plaoe^  and  bo,  to  Aow  space  or 
room  far  holding  eomsthing. 

Firkins  (jierptp-h^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
From  fjLerpi^,  to  fnecuure;  and  therefore,  properly,  a  m^aeurer. 
A  liquid  measure  containing  nearly  nine  gallons. 

7.  Fill  {yefjklaare).  Compare  Mark  iv.  37,  and  see  on  Luke 
xiv.  23. 

8.  Draw  out  (oyrXi^o-are).  From  &nrXo9,  the  hold  of  a  ship 
where  the  bilge-water  eettleSy  and  hence,  the  bUge-wcUer  Ueelf. 
The  verb,  therefore,  originally,  means  to  hale  out  bilge-water; 
thence,  generally,  to  drawj  as  from  a  well  (iv.  15).  Canon 
Westcott  thinks  that  the  water  which  was  changed  into  wine 
was  not  taken  from  the  vessels  of  purification,  but  that  the  ser- 
vants were  bidden,  after  they  had  filled  the  vessels  with  water, 
to  continue  drawing  from  the  well  or  spring. 

Ruler  of  the  feast  {apx'^TpucKivfp).  From  apxta^,  to  be  chiefs 
and  TpucKivoVj  Lat.,  tridinvum^  a  banqueting-hall  with  three 
couches  (see  on  Mark  vi.  39).  Some  explain  the  word  as  mean- 
ing M^  superintendent  of  the  banquetingchamiber^  a  servant 
whose  duty  it  was  to  arrange  the  table-furniture  and  the 
courses,  and  to  taste  the  food  beforehand.  Others  as  meaning 
one  of  the  guests  selected  to  preside  at  the  banquet  according 
to  the  Oreek  and  Roman  usage.  This  latter  view  seems  to  be 
supported  by  a  passage  in  Ecclesiasticus  (xxxv.  1,  2) :  ^'  If  thou 
be  made  the  master  of  a  feast,  lift  not  thyself  up,  but  be  among 
them  as  one  of  the  rest ;  take  diligent  care  for  them,  and  so 
sit  down.  And  when  thou  hast  done  all  thy  ofSce,  take  thy 
place,  that  thou  mayst  be  merry  with  them,  and  receive  a 
crown  for  thy  well  ordering  of  the  feast."  According  to  the 
Oreek  and  Roman  custom,  the  ruler  of  the  feast  was  chosen  by 
throwing  the  dice.  Thus  Horace,  in  his  ode  to  his  friend 
Sestius,  says,  moralizing  on  the  brevity  of  life :  '^  Soon  the 
home  of  Pluto  will  be  thine,  nor  wilt  thou  cast  lots  with  the 
dice  for  the  presidency  over  the  wine."  He  prescribed  the 
Vol.  n.-4J 


82  WORD  8TDDIB8  IN  THE  FEW  TEBTAMBNT. 

proportions  of  wine  and  water,  aud  could  also  impose  fines  for 
failures  to  guess  riddles,  etc.  As  tbe  eucceaa  of  the  feast  de- 
pended largely  upon  liiin,  his  selection  was  a  matter  of  some 
delicacy.  Plato  says,  "Must  we  not  appoint  a  sober  man  and 
a  wise  to  be  our  master  of  the  revels!  For  if  the  ruler  of 
drinkers  be  himself  young  and  drunken,  and  not  over-wise,  only 
by  some  special  good  fortune  will  he  be  saved  from  doing  some 
great  evil "  ("  Laws,"  640).  The  word  occurs  only  here  and  ver. 
9.     Wye.  simply  transcribes  :  arcAitriclyn. 

10.  Have  well  drunk  {Me3iw5wo-().  Wyc^hejilled.  Tynd., 
he  dnmk.  The  A.  V,  and  Tynd.  are  better  than  the  Kev.,  when, 
7nen  hm:e  drunk  freely.  The  ruler  of  the  feast  means  that 
when  the  palates  of  the  guests  have  become  less  sensitive 
through  indulgence,  an  inferior  quality  of  wine  is  offered.  In 
every  instance  of  its  use  in  the  New  Testament  the  word 
means  intoxication.  Tlie  attempt  of  the  advocates  of  the  unfer- 
mented-wine  theory  to  deny  or  weaken  this  sense  by  citing  the 
loeU-'watered  garden  (Isa.  Iviii.  11  ;  Jer.  xxsi.  12)  scarcely  re- 
quires comment.  One  might  answer  by  quoting  Plato,  who 
uses  ^airrli^eaBat,  to  he  haj>ti3ed,  for  being  drtmk  ("  Sympo- 
sium," 176).  In  the  Septuagtnt  the  verb  repeatedly  occurs  for 
watering  (Pa.  Ixv,  9,  10),  but  always  with  the  sense  of  drench- 
ing or  soaking;  of  being  drunken  or  surfeited  with  water.  In 
Jer.  xlviii.  (Sept.  xxxi.)  ii6,  it  is  found  in  the  literal  sense,  to 
he  drunken.  The  metaphorical  use  of  the  word  has  passed  into 
common  slang,  as  when  a  drunken  man  is  said  to  be  wetted  or 
soaked  {so  Plato,  above).  The  figurative  use  of  the  word  in  the 
Septuagint  has  a  parallel  in  the  use  of  iror^fw,  to  give  to  drink^ 
to  express  the  watering  of  ground.  So  Gen.  ii.  6,  a  mist 
watered  the  face  of  the  earth,  or  gave  it  drink.  Conjpare  Gen. 
xiii.  10 ;  Dent.  xi.  10.  A  curious  use  of  the  word  occurs  in 
Homer,  where  he  is  describing  the  stretching  of  a  bull's  hide, 
which,  in  order  to  make  it  more  elastic,  is  soaked  (jit^vowrav) 
with  fat  ("  niad,"  xvii.,  390). 

Worse  (eXoiTffca).  Lit.,  smaller.  Implying  both  worse  and 
weaker.  Small  appears  in  the  same  sense  in  English,  as  smallheer. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  83 

Hast  kept  (renjpfftaK).    See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4^ 

11.  This  beginning.    Or,  more  strictly,  this  as  a  heginning. 

Of  miracles  (917/bteW).  Rev.,  correctly,  signs.  See  on  Matt. 
zL  20 ;  xziv.  24.  This  act  was  not  merely  a  prodigy  {riptK^ 
nor  a  wonderful  thing  {^nufiAauiv^  nor  a  power  (Swctfju<:\  bnt 
distinctively  a  sign^  a  mark  of  the  doer's  power  and  grace,  and 
divine  character.  Hence  it  falls  in  perfectly  with  the  words 
manifested  His  glory. 

Believed  on  Hinfi  {iwlarevaav  ek  aMv).  See  on  i.  12. 
lit,  believed  into.  Canon  Westcott  most  aptly  says  that  it 
conveys  the  idea  of  "  the  absolate  transference  of  tmst  from 
one's  self  to  another." 

12.  He  went  down  {Karififj).  Capernaum  being  on  the  lake 
shore,  and  Nazareth  and  Cana  on  the  higher  gronnd. 

13.  The  Jews'  passover.  On  John's  use  of  the  term  Jews, 
see  on  i.  19.  So  it  is  nsed  here  with  an  under-reference  to  the 
national  religion  as  consisting  in  mere  ceremonies.  The  same 
hint  underlies  the  words  in  ver.  6,  "  after  the  Jews'  manner 
of  purifying."  Only  John  mentions  this  earliest  passover  of 
Christ's  ministry.  The  Synoptists  relate  no  incident  of  his 
ministry  in  Judsea,  and  but  for  the  narrative  of  John,  it  could 
not  be  positively  asserted  that  Jesus  went  up  to  Jornsalem  dur- 
ing His  public  life  until  the  time  of  His  arrest  and  crucifixion. 

14.  The  temple  (i^pw).  The  temple  indosure:  not  the 
sanct^ulry  (vaosi).     See  on  Matt.  ix.  5 ;  Mark  xi.  16. 

Those  that  sold  (roiff;  iroaiKovvTa^).  The  article  defines  them 
as  a  well-known  class. 

Changers  of  money  {/ecpfuiTurrd^).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  kindred  noun  /eipfia,  moneys  which  occurs 
only  in  ver.  15,  is  from  Kelpw,  to  cut  into  hits^  and  means  there- 
fore small  coin ;  "small  change,"  of  which  the  money-changers 
would  require  a  large  supply.   Hence  cliangers  (f  money  means, 


84  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

etrictly,  dealers  in  small  change.  Matthew  and  Mark  use  koX, 
Xi;(9ii7T»J?  (see  ver,  15),  of  wliich  the  meaniug  is  substantially 
the  same  bo  far  as  regards  the  dealing  in  small  coin  ;  but  with 
the  difference  that  koXXvjSo?,  the  noun  from  which  it  ia  derived, 
and  meaning  a  small  com,  is  also  used  to  denote  the  rate  of  ex- 
change. This  latter  word  therefore  gives  a  liint  of  the  premi- 
um on  exchange,  which  John's  word  here  does  not  convey. 
The  money-changers  opened  their  stalls  in  the  country  towns  a 
month  before  the  feast.  By  the  time  of  the  first  arrivals  of 
passover-pilgrims  at  Jemsalera,  the  country  stalls  were  closed, 
and  the  money-changers  sat  in  the  temple  (see  on  Matt.  xvii. 
24;  xxi.  12;  Mark  xi.  15).  John's  picture  of  this  incident  is 
more  graphic  and  detailed  than  those  of  the  Sjnoptists,  who 
merely  state  summarily  the  driving  out  of  the  traders  and  the 
overthrow  of  the  tables.  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  12, 13;  Mark  xi. 
15-17 ;  Luke  xix.  45,  46.* 

15.  A  scourge  (t^partkXKtov).  Only  here  id  the  New  Testa- 
ment    Only  John  records  this  detail. 

Of  small  cords  (ex  iT\oiv{av).  The  Rev.  omits  smaU,  bat 
the  word  is  a  diminutive  of  ir^olvot,  a  rush,  and  thence  a  ropa 
of  twisted  rushes.  The  A.  V.  is  therefore  strictly  literal.  He- 
rodotus Bays  that  when  Crojsus  besieged  Ephesus,  the  Eplieaians 
made  an  offering  of  their  city  to  Diana,  by  stretching  a  small 
rope  {(Typivlov)  from  the  town  wall  to  the  temple  of  the  goddess, 
a  distance  of  seven  furlongs  (i.,  26).  The  schoene  was  aa  Egyp- 
tian measure  of  length,  marked  by  a  rush-rope.  See  HerodotuB, 
ii.  6.     Some  find  in  this  the  etymology  of  skein. 

Drove  out  {e^i^oKev).  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  cast  out.  See  on  Matt. 
X.  34 ;  xii.  35  ;  Mark  i.  12 ;  Jas.  ii.  25. 

All.  Referring  to  the  animala.  The  A.  Y.  makes  the  ref- 
erence to  the  traders ;  but  Rev,,  correctly,  "cast  all  out — both 
the  sheep  and  the  oxen." 

*  I  do  not  rsiM  tlie  queatlon  whether  the  nuratlveB  of  John  mud  of  the 
fijnoptlata  refer  to  the  same  event. 


G06PBL  OF  JOWSL  85 

Money.    See  on  ver.  14. 

Tables.    Wjc.fturfiediymdedofjmthedoardB.  See  on  Luke 
28. 


16.  My  Father's  house.  See  on  Faiher^s  husinesSj  Luke  iL 
49,  and  compare  Matt,  xxiii.  38,  where  Jesns  speaks  of  the 
temple  as  yotsr  house.  The  people  had  made  Ood's  house  their 
own. 

Merchandise  {ifjimtptou).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
The  Synoptists  say  a  den  of  robbers. 

17.  It  was  written  {yeypofAfUvov  iarlv).  lit,  it  stande  wrU- 
ten.  This  form  of  the  phrase,  the  participle  with  the  snbstan- 
tiye  verb,  is  peculiar  to  John  in  place  of  the  more  common 
T^poimu.    For  a  similar  construction  see  iiL  21. 

The  zeal  of  thine  house.  Jealousy  for  the  honor  of  Ood's 
house.    Zealj  {^Xo9,  from  {Hiv,  to  boil.    See  on  Jas.  iiL  14. 

Hath  eaten  me  up  {xari^arfi  fU).  So  the  Sept,  Ps.  IxviiL 
(A.  y.,lxix.  9).  But  the  best  texts  read  scara^xirferiu,  shall  eat 
up.  So  Rev.,  Wye.,  ^'The  fervor  of  love  of  thine  house  hath 
eaten  me." 

18.  Answered.  Often  used  in  reply  to  an  objection  or 
criticism,  or  to  something  present  in  another's  mind,  as  xix.  7, 
or  iii.  3,  where  Jesus  answers  with  reference  to  the  error  in 
Nicodemus'  mind,  rather  than  in  direct  reply  to  his  address. 

Destroy  this  temple  (Kvaare  rbv  vahv  rovrov).  Destroy, 
lit.,  loosen.  Wye,  undo.  See  on  Mark  xiii.  2 ;  Luke  ix.  12 ; 
Acts  V.  38.  Notice  that  the  word  for  temple  is  vcAv,  sa/nctuary 
(see  on  ver.  14).  This  temple  points  to  the  literal  temple,  which 
is  truly  a  temple  only  as  it  is  the  abode  of  God,  hence  sanctu- 
ary^ but  with  a  typical  reference  to  Jesus'  own  person  as  the 


86  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  MEW  TEBTAMKTTT. 

holy  dwelling-place  of  God  who  "  was  in  Christ."  Compare  1 
Cor.  iii.  16,  17.  Christ's  death  waa  therefore  the  pulling  down 
of  the  temple,  and  His  resurrection  its  rebuilding.  Tlie  imper- 
ative in  destroy  is  of  the  nature  of  a  challenge.  Compare  j£tf 
ye  up,  Matt,  xslii.  32. 

20.  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  in  building 
{reiTtiapdKOVTa  ncal  ?f  eretriv  ^o&on^Srj  6  ww5  ofiros).  Lit.,  In 
forty  and  six  years  was  this  temple  huiU.  It  was  spoken  of  as 
completed,  although  uot  finished  until  thirtj-six  years  later. 

Thou.  The  position  of  the  Greek  pronoun  makes  it  em- 
phatic. 

21.  He  (e'xeu'o;).  See  on  i.  IS.  Emphatic,  and  marking  the 
contrast  between  the  deeper  meaning  of  Jeeue  and  the  literal- 
ism of  the  Jews  and  of  Ilis  disciples  (see  next  verse).  For 
other  illustrations  of  John's  )x>inting  out  the  meaning  of  words 
of  Jesus  which  were  not  at  first  understood,  see  vii.  39;  xiL 
33 ;  xxi.  19. 

22.  Was  risen  (rrf^p^)-  Rev.,  more  correctly,  was  raised. 
The  same  verb  as  in  vv.  19,  20, 

Had  said  {eKeytv).    Rev.,  more  correctly,  He  spake.    The  best 

texts  omit  unto  them. 

Believed  the  Scripture  {hr'urrevaav t^  fpa^^).  Notice  that 
evlirrevaav,  belie^oed,  is  used  here  with  the  simple  dative,  and 
not  with  the  preposition  ei;,  into  (see  on  i.  12).  The  meaning 
is,  therefore,  they  believed  tJiat  tbe  Scripture  was  true.  On 
fpair^.  a  passage  or  section  of  Scripture,  see  on  Mark  xii.  10. 

In  John,  as  elsewhere,  the  word  almost  always  refers  to  a 
particular  passage  cited  in  the  context.  The  only  two  excep- 
tions are  xvii.  12;  xx.  9.  For  the  Old  Testament,  as  a  whole, 
John  always  uses  the  plural  ai  ypa<f>a(.  The  passage  referred  to 
here  is  probably  Ps.  xvi.  10.     Compare  Acts  ii.  27,  31 ;  xiii.  35. 

The  word.  The  saying  just  uttered  concerning  the  destmo- 
tion  of  the  temple. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK.  87 

23.  At  the  passover.  Note  the  omission  oi  qf  the  Jew% 
(ver.  13). 

In  the  feast-day  {jtif  rv  iopif).  Rev.,  during  the  feast.  The 
feast  of  unleavened  bread,  during  the  seven  days  succeeding  the 
actual  passover  (see  on  Mark  ziv.  1). 

Believed  on  {hrUrreuaav  ew).  The  stronger  expression  of 
faith  (i.  12). 

His  name.  See  on  i.  12.  With  the  phrase  believe  on  Sis 
namej  compare  believe  on  Him  (viii.  30),  which  is  the  stronger 
expression,  indicating  a  casting  of  one's  self  upon  Him ;  while 
to  believe  on  the  name  is  rather  to  believe  in  Him  as  being  that 
which  he  claims  to  be,  in  this  case  the  Messiah.  It  is  believing 
recognition  rather  than  appropriation.  ^' Their  faith  in  His 
name  (as  that  of  the  Messiah)  did  not  yet  amount  to  any  de- 
cision of  their  inner  life  for  Jesus,  but  was  only  an  opinion 
produced  by  the  sight  of  His  miracles,  that  He  was  the  Mes- 
siah "  (Meyer). 

When  they  saw  {B^apovyre^).  Rev.,  literally  and  rightly, 
beholding  (see  on  i.  14,  29). 

He  did  (hroUi),  Better,  was  doing;  the  imperfect  denoting 
the  wonderful  works  as  in  progress. 

24.  But  Jesus  {ainh^  hk  6  'Ii^o-ou?).  The  avr^,  which  does 
not  appear  in  translation,  has  the  force  of  on  His  party  marking 
the  contrast  with  those  just  mentioned. 

Did  not  commit  {ov/e  hrUrrevev).  Bev.,  trust.  There  is  a 
kind  of  word-play  between  this  and  hrlarewrav,  believed^  in  the 
preceding  verse.  Wye.  reproduces  it :  "  Jesus  himself  believed 
not  himself  to  them."  He  did  not  trust  His  person  to  them. 
Tynd.,  put  not  himself  in  their  hands.  ^^  He  had  no  faith  in 
theu*  faith  "  (Godet). 

Because  He  knew  (Si^  rh  airrov  y^vwc/ecip).  Lit,  on  aooouni 


88  WORD  8TUDIE8  IN  THE  NEW  TB8TAMEST. 

ofthefact  of  His  hwv>ing.  John  describee  the  Lord's  knowl- 
edge by  two  words  which  it  is  important  to  distiTtguish. 
rtvwa-Keip,  as  here,  implies  aofuired  knowlege ;  knowledge  which 
is  the  result  of  discernment  and  whicli  may  be  enlarged.  This 
knowledge  may  be  drawn  from  external  facts  (v.  6  ;  vi,  15)  or 
from  spiritual  sympathy  (x.  H,  27  ;  xvii.  25).  ElSevai  (i.  26) 
implies  absolitte  knowledge  :  the  knowledge  of  intuition  and  of 
satisfied  conTiction.  Ilence  it  is  used  of  Christ's  knowledge  of 
divine  things  (iii.  11 ;  v.  32  ;  vii.  29),  of  the  facts  of  His  own 
being  (vi.  6  ;  viiL  14  ;  xiii.  1),  and  of  external  facts  (vi.  61,  64 ; 
xiii.  11).  In  xxi.  17  the  two  words  appear  together.  Peter  says 
to  Jesus,  appealing  to  His  absolute  knowledge,  "  Thou  knowett 
(plZa<i)  all  things :  "  appealing  to  his  discer/unent,  "  Tliou  kiiow- 
eat  or  perceiveat  {^iwiiaKei^')  that  I  love  Thee." 

25.  He  needed  not  (ov  ■}(pelav  elx"')-    ^^-^  ^  ^^  "''^  need. 

Testify  {jtaprup^trri).    Rev.,  better,  hear  witness.    The  same 
word  is  in  i.  7,  8,  15,  32  (see  on  i.  7). 

Of  man  {wepl  tov  avSpamov).     Better,  as  Kev.,  concerning 


He  knew  (avro;  iyivaxrictv).  The  pronoun  is  expressed,  and 
with  a  view  to  emphasis,  as  Bev.,  "  He  himself  knew."  The 
imperfect  expresses  continuance  :  He  was  all  along  cognizani, 
as  the  successive  cases  presented  themselves;  thus  falling  in 
with  the  next  words,  "  what  was  in  the  man,"  i.e.,  in  each  par- 
ticular man  with  whom  He  had  to  do.  No  such  characteristic 
as  this  was  attributed  to  the  gods  of  Paganism.  "  While,  then, 
the  gift  of  anything  like  general  foreknowledge  appears  to  be 
withheld  from  all  the  deities  of  invention,  that  of  '  the  discerner 
of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,'  is  nowhere  found ;  nor 
was  it  believed  of  any  member  of  the  Olympian  community, 
as  it  was  said  of  One  greater  than  they,  '  He  knew  all  men,  and 
needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man,  for  He  knew  what  was 
in  man,' "  (Gladstone, "  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age,"  ii.,  366). 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  89 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  A  man.  With  a  reference  to  the  last  word  of  the  pre- 
vious chapter.  The  interview  with  Nioodemns  is,  apart  from 
the  important  trnth  which  it  embodies,  an  illustration  of 
Christ's  knowledge  of  what  was  in  man.  Oodet  truthfully  ob- 
serves that  John  reminds  us  by  the  word  avBpanro^  {man\  that 
Kicodemus  was  a  specimen  of  the  race  which  Jesus  knew  so 
welL 

Named  Nicodemua.  lit,  Nioodemns^  the  name  unto  him. 
The  name  means  conqueror  of  the  people  {vitcrf^  victory^  and 
59/bio9>  pe€ple\  though  some  give  it  a  Hebrew  derivation  mean- 
ing innocent  Hood. 

A  ruler.    A  member  of  the  SanhedriuL 

2.  To  Jesua.    The  best  texts  substitute  irpi^  airrhvt  to  him. 

By  night.  Through  timidity,  fearing  to  compromise  his 
dignity,  and  possibly  his  safety.  The  fact  is  noticed  again,  xix. 
39  (see  on  viL  50).  By  nighty  ^^  when  Jewish  superstition 
would  keep  men  at  home."  Ue  could  reach  Jesus'  apartment 
without  being  observed  by  the  other  inmates  of  the  house,  for 
an  outside  stair  led  to  the  upper  room. 

Rabbi.  The  teacher  of  Israel  (ver.  10)  addresses  Jesus  by 
the  title  applied  by  his  own  disciples  to  himself — my  master 
(see  on  i.  38).  ^'  We  may  be  sure  that  a  member  of  the  sect 
that  carefully  scrutinized  the  Baptist's  credentials  (i.  19-24) 
would  not  lightly  address  Jesus  by  this  title  of  honor,  or  ac- 
knowledge Him  as  teacher  "  (Milligan  and  Moulton). 

We  know  (oiSa/icy).  Assured  conviction  based  on  Jesus' 
miracles  (see  on  ii.  24). 

Thou  art  a  teacher.  According  to  the  Oreek  order,  that 
thou  oH  com^from  Ood  as  teacher. 


90  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  SEW  TE3TA11EST. 

From  God.  Tliese  words  stand  Srst  io  the  senteDce  ae  em- 
pliatic.     It  is  from  God  that  thou  hast  come. 

3.  Answered  and  said.    See  on  ii  18. 

Verily,  verily.     See  od  i.  51. 

Be  born  again  {yevp-q^  aifo^ev).     See  on  Luke  i.  3.     Lit., 

from  the  krp  (Matt.  .\.xvii.  51),  Expositors  are  divided  on  the 
rendering  of  aixD^eu,  some  translating, ynjw  above,  and  others, 
Offain  or  anew.  The  word  is  used  iu  the  following  senseB  in 
the  New  Testament,  where  it  occurs  tliirteeu  times  : 

1.  F}-am  th^  top:  Matt,  xxvii.  51 ;  Mark  xv,  38 ;  John  xix. 
23. 

2.  From  above :  John  iii.  31  ;  lix.  11 ;  Jas.  i.  17 ;  iii.  15, 17. 

3.  J^om  the  beginning :  Luke  i.  3 ;  Acts  xxvi.  5. 

4.  Again:  Gal.  iv.  9,  but  accompanied  by  iraKiv,  again. 

In  favor  of  the  rendering  frmn.  above,  it  is  urged  that  it  cor- 
responds to  John's  habitual  method  of  describing  the  work  of 
spiritual  regeneration  as  a  birth  from  God  (i.  13;  1  John  iii. 
9  ;  iv.  7  ;  v.  1,  i,  8) ;  and  further,  that  it  is  Paul,  and  not  John, 
who  describes  it  as  a  new  birth. 

In  favor  of  the  other  rendering,  again,  it  may  be  said :  1. 
that  from  above  does  not  describe  thefat-t  but  thenaiure  of  the 
new  birth,  which  in  the  logical  order  would  be  stated  after  the 
fact,  but  which  iafrst  announced  if  we  render  /Vowt  above.  If 
we  translate  anew  or  again,  the  logical  order  is  preserved,  the 
nature  of  the  birth  being  deaeribed  in  ver.  5.  2.  That  Nico- 
demua  clearly  understood  the  word  as  meaning  again,  since,  in 
ver.  i,  he  tranaJated  it  into  a  second  tiine.  3.  That  it  seems 
strange  that  Nicodemua  should  have  been  startled  by  the  idea 
of  a  birth  from  heaven. 

Canon  Westcott  calls  attention  to  the  traditional  form  of  the 
saying  in  which  the  word  avayevvavSai,  whicli  can  only  mean 
reborn,  is  used  as  its  equivalent.  Again,  however,  does  not 
give  the  exact  force  of  the  word,  which  is  ratlier  as  Rev.,  anew, 
or  afresh,  llender,  therefore,  as  Uev.,  except  a  man  he  bom 
anew.     The  phrase  occurs  only  in  John's  Gospel. 


k 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  91 

See  (^!y).  The  things  of  Qod's  kingdom  are  not  apparent 
to  the  natural  vision.  A  new  power  of  sight  is  required,  which 
attaches  only  to  the  new  man.    Compare  1  Oor.  ii.  14. 

Kingdom  of  God.    See  on  Luke  vi.  20. 

4.  When  he  ia  old  {yipwv  &v).    Lit.,  being  an  old  man. 

Can  he  (/^^  ivvariu).  The  interrogative  particle  anticipates 
a  negative  answer.     Surdy  he  ccmnoL 

Second  time.  Nicodemns  looks  at  the  subject  merely  from 
the  physical  side.  His  second  time  is  not  the  same  as  Jesus' 
anew.  As  Godet  remarks,  ^'  he  does  not  understand  the  differ- 
ence between  a  second  beginning  and  a  different  beginning." 

5.  Born  of  water  and  the  Spirit.  The  exposition  of  this 
much  controverted  passage  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of 
this  work.  We  may  observe,  1.  That  Jesus  here  lays  down  the 
preliminary  conditions  of  entrance  into  His  kingdom,  expanding 
and  explaining  Mis  statement  in  ver.  3.  2.  That  this  condition 
is  here  stated  as  complex,  including  two  distinct  factors,  water 
and  the  S^rit.  3.  That  the  former  of  these  two  factors  is  not 
to  be  merged  in  the  latter ;  that  the  spirihuU  element  is  not  to 
exclude  or  obliterate  the  external  and  rittud  element.  TVe  are 
not  to  understand  with  Calvin,  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  purifying 
water  in  the  spiritual  sense  :  "  water  which  is  the  Spirit."  4. 
That  water  points  definitely  to  the  rite  of  baptism,  and  that 
with  a  twofold  reference — to  the  past  and  to  the  future. 
Water  naturally  suggested  to  Nicodemus  the  baptism  of  John, 
which  was  then  awakening  such  profound  and  general  interest ; 
and,  with  this,  the  symbolical  purifications  of  the  Jews,  and  the 
Old  Testament  use  of  washing  as  the  figure  of  purifying  from 
sin  (Ps.  li.  2,  7 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25  ;  Zech.  xiii.  1).  Jesus'  words 
opened  to  Nicodemus  a  new  and  more  spiritual  significance  in 
both  the  ceremonial  purifications  and  the.  baptism  of  John 
which  the  Pharisees  had  rejected  (Luke  vii.  30).  John's  rite 
had  a  real  and  legitimate  relation  to  the  kingdom  of  God 
which  Nicodemus  must  accept.    5.  That  while  Jesus  asserted 


92  WORD  8TDDIE8  IN  THE  NBW  TE8TAMBNT. 

the  obligation  of  tlie  outward  riie.  He  asaerted  likewise,  ae  its 
necesearj' complement,  the  preeence  and  creating  and  iitfoimiDg 
energy  of  the  Spirit  with  which  Jolin  had  promiBed  that  the 
coming  one  should  baptize.  That  aa  John's  baptism  had  been 
unto  repentance,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  so  the  new  life  muet 
include  the  real  no  less  than  the  symbolic  cleansing  of  the  old, 
sinful  life,  and  the  infnsion  by  the  Spirit  of  a  new  and  divine 
principle  of  life.  Thus  Jesus'  words  included  a  prophetic  ref- 
erence to  the  complete  ideal  of  Christian  baptism — "the  wash- 
ing of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Tit. 
iii.  5  ;  Eph.  v.  26} ;  according  to  which  the  two  factors  are  in- 
separably blended  (not  the  one  swallowed  up  by  the  other),  and 
the  new  life  is  inaugurated  both  gymholicaUy  in  the  baptism 
with  water,  and  actuaUy  in  the  renewing  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
yet  BO  as  that  the  riie,  through  its  association  with  the  Spirit's 
enei^,  is  more  than  a  mere  symbol :  is  a  veritable  vehicle  of 
grace  to  the  recipient,  and  acquires  a  substantial  part  in  the  in- 
auguration of  the  new  life.  Baptism,  considered  merely  as  a 
rite,  and  apart  from  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  does  not  and  can- 
not impart  the  new  life.  Without  the  Spirit  it  is  a  lie.  It  is  a 
truthful  sign  only  as  the  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  grace. 
6.  That  tlie  ideal  of  the  new  life  presented  in  our  Lord's  words, 
includes  the  relation  of  the  regenerated  man  to  an  organization. 
The  object  of  the  new  birth  is  declared  to  be  tliat  a  man  may 
see  and  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  the  kingdom  of 
God  is  an  economy.  It  includes  and  implies  the  organized 
Christian  community.  This  is  one  of  the  facts  which,  with  its 
accompanying  obligation,  is  revealed  to  the  new  vision  of  the 
new  man.  He  sees  not  only  God,  but  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
God  as  King  of  an  organized  citizenship ;  God  as  the  Father  of 
the  family  of  mankind  ;  obligation  to  God  implying  obligation 
to  the  neighbor;  obligation  to  Christ  implying  obligation  to 
the  church,  of  which  He  is  the  bead,  "  which  is  His  body,  the 
fulness  of  Him  that  Ulleth  all  things  with  all  things"  (£ph.  i. 
23).  Through  water  aloney  the  mere  external  rite  of  baptism,  a 
man  may  pass  into  the  outward  fellowebip  of  the  visible  church 
without  seeing  or  entering  the  kingdom  of  God.  Through 
water  and  the  Spirit,  he  passes  indeed  into  the  outward  fellow- 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  93 

ship,  but  through  that  into  the  vision  and  fellowship  of  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

Enter  into.  This  more  than  9ee  (ver.  3).  It  is  to  become 
partaker  of ;  to  go  in  and  possess,  as  the  Israelites  did  Canaan. 

6.  That  which  is  born  (rh  yeyewtffUvov).  Strictly,  thai 
fohich  haiA  been  bom^  and  consequently  is  now  before  us  as 
bom.  The  aorist  tense  (3,  4,  5,  7),  marks  th.%  fact  of  birth  ;  the 
perfect  (as  here),  the  state  of  that  which  has  been  born  (see  on 
1  John  ▼.  18,  where  both  tenses  occur) ;  the  neuter,  t/uU  which^ 
states  the  principle  in  the  abstract.  Compare  ver.  8,  where  the 
statement  is  personal :  everyone  that  is  bom.  Compare  1  John 
V.  4,  and  1  John  v.  1, 18. 

Of  the  fleah  {iic  t^  o-op/eo?).  See  on  ver.  14.  John  uses 
the  word  <rdp^  generally,  to  express  humanity  under  the  condi- 
tions of  this  life  (i.  14 ;  1  John  iv.  2,  3,  7 ;  2  John  7),  with 
sometimes  a  more  definite  hint  at  the  sinful  and  fallible  nature 
of  humanity  (1  John  ii.  16  ;  John  viii.  15).  Twice,  as  opposed 
to  irvei;/Mi»  Spirit  (iii.  6  ;  vi.  63). 

Of  the  Spirit  (iic  toS  irvevtiarosi).  The  Holy  Spirit  of  Oody 
or  the  principle  of  life  which  He  imparts.  The  difference  is 
slight,  for  the  two  ideas  imply  each  other ;  but  the  latter  perhaps 
is  better  here,  because  a  little  more  abstract,  and  so  contrasted 
with  ikefiesh.  Spirit  and  flesh  are  the  distinguishing  princi- 
ples, the  one  of  the  heavenly,  the  other  of  the  earthly  economy. 

7.  Unto  thee — ye  must.  Note  the  change  from  the  singu- 
lar to  the  plural  pronoun.  In  his  address  to  Nicodemus  {fJiee) 
the  Lord  had  spoken  also  to  those  whom  Nicodemus  repre- 
sented, and  whom  he  had  included  when  he  said  ^'  we  know  '^ 
(ver.  2).    His  error  was  the  error  of  his  class. 

8.  The  wind  ijo  irvevfui).  Some  hold  by  the  translation 
epirity  as  Wye,  the  spirit  breatheth  where  it  will.  In  Hebrew 
the  words  spirit  and  loind  are  identical,  tlvevfia  is  from  irvim 
to  breathe  or  blowy  the  verb  used  in  this  verse  {bloweth\  and 


94  WORD  STUDIEH  IN  THE  SEW  TESTAMENT. 

everywhere  in  tlie  New  Testament  of  the  blowing  of  the  wind 
(Matt.  vii.  25,  37 ;  Luke  xii.  55  ;  John  vi.  18).  It  frequently 
occurs  in  the  claBeics  in  the  aense  of  wind.  Thus  Aristoph- 
anee,  to  irvev/*'  it\jrrrov  ylyverai,  the  wind  is  dying  away 
{"  Knights,"  441),  also  in  the  New  Testament,  lieb.  i.  7,  where 
the  proper  translation  is,  "  who  maketh  Ills  angels  wiiuh," 
quoted  from  Ps.  ciii.  4  (Sept.).  In  the  Septuagint,  1  Kings 
xviii.  45;  xix.  II  ;  2  Kings  iii.  17;  Job  i.  19.  lu  the  New 
Testament,  in  the  sense  of  breath,  2  Theas.  ii.  8 ;  Apoc.  xi.  11. 
The  usual  rendering,  wind^  is  confirmed  liere  by  the  use  of  the 
kindred  verb  ■jtvel,  blowetk,  and  by  tfmivijv,  sound,  voice.  Tho- 
hick  thinks  that  the  figure  may  have  been  suggested  to  Jesus 
by  the  sound  of  the  night-wind  sweeping  through  the  narrow 
street. 

Where  it  listeth  (oirov  3i\fi).  On  the  verb  diXm.  to  wUl 
or  determiTie,  see  on  Matt.  i.  19.  Zisteth  is  old  English  for 
pleaaeth  or  willeth,  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  Imi,  meaning  pleae- 
wro.     Chaucer  has  the  forma  leste,  lust,  and  list. 

"Strong  woe  the  wyn,  and  wel  to  drjnke  tu  le»tt  (j^ltatat)." 

■'  Cuiterburi'  Talet,"  758. 

"Lore  if  Iheeiiwf." 

■*  CtnUrbury  TkleB,"  118S. 

"  She  Talk«lh  ap  and  dotm  whsr  u  hire  list  (tcAffr#r«r  »?uf  pletutt)." 

"  Csnlerburj  T»le»,"  1064. 

"  A  wretch  bj  fww,  not  force,  like  Hinnibal, 
DrlTea  buk  oar  troopn,  and  conqaere  u  she  iuU." 

Sbahipewe.  "HenrjVI.,''  Ft.  L,  1.,  y.,S&. 

Hence  listless  is  devoid  of  desire.  The  statement  of  Jesus  is 
not  meant  to  be  scientifically  precise,  but  is  rather  thrown  into 
a  poetic  mould,  akin  to  the  familiar  expression  "free  ae  the 
wind."  Compare  1  Cor.  xii.  11 ;  and  for  the  more  prosaic  de- 
scription of  the  course  of  the  wind,  see  Eccl.  i.  6. 

Sound  {ifKavtjv).  Rev,,  voice.  Used  both  of  articulate  and 
inarticulate  utterances,  as  of  the  words  from  heaven  at  Jesua' 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  95 

baptism  and  trangfigaration  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  2  Pet.  i.  17, 18) ;  of 
the  trumpet  (Matt  xxiy.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  8),  and  of  inanimate 
things  in  general  (1  Cor.  xiv.  17).  John  the  Baptist  calls  him- 
self ^piif  a  vaicej  and  the  word  is  used  of  the  wind,  as  here,  in 
Acts  ii  6.  Of  thonder,  often  in  the  Apocalypse  (vi.  1 ;  xiv.  2, 
etc.). 

Canst  not  tell  {ovk  oZSck).  Better,  as  Be  v.,  knawest  not 
Socrates,  (Xenophon's  *^  Memorabilia),"  says,  *^  The  instmments 
of  the  deities  jon  will  likewise  find  imperceptible ;  for  the  thun- 
der-bolt, for  instance,  though  it  is  plain  that  it  is  sent  from 
above,  and  works  its  will  with  everything  with  which  it  comes 
in  contact,  is  yet  never  seen  either  approaching,  or  striking,  or 
retreating;  the  winds,  too,  are  themselves  invisible,  though 
their  effects  are  evident  to  us,  and  we  perceive  their  course  " 
(iv.,  3,  14).    Compare  £ccl.  xi.  5. 

So.  So  the  subject  of  the  Spirit's  invisible  influence  gives 
visible  evidence  of  its  power. 

9.  These  things.    Such  as  the  new  birth. 
Be  {yevia-Sai).     lit.,  come  to  pass. 

10.  Answered  and  said.    See  on  il  18. 

Art  thou  a  master  of  Israel  (<ru  e!  6  SiBdtr/eaXo^  rot)  lapaifX). 
The  aif,  thou^  is  emphatic.  A  master  is  more  correctly  rendered 
by  Bev.,  the  teacher.  Not  ironical,  but  the  article  marks  Nieo- 
deinus'  official  relation  to  the  people,  and  gives  additional  force 
to  the  contrast  in  the  following  words.  Similarly  Plato  :  '*  Will 
you  {aif,  emphatic),  O  professor  of  true  virtue,  pretend  that  you 
are  justified  in  this?"  ("  Crito,"  51).  On  "Israel,"  see  on  i.  47. 
The  word  occurs  four  times  in  John's  Gospel ;  here,  i.  31,  47, 
49. 

Knowest  not  {ov  yivdnrKcis;).  See  on  ii.  24.  Nicodemus  is 
not  reproved  for  the  want  of  previous  knowledge,  but  for  the 
want  of  perception  or  understanding  when  these  truths  are  ex- 
pounded to  him.     Kev.,  better,  tmderstandest  not. 


WORD  8TDD1E8  IN  THB  HBW  TB8TAMRNT. 

11.  We  Speak— we  know— we  have  seen.  After  the  use 
of  the  singular  number  in  w.  3,  5,  T,  12,  the  plural  here  is 
noteworthy.  It  is  not  merely  rhetorical — "  a  plural  of  majesty  " 
— but  is  explained  by  ver.  8,  "  every  one  that  is  born  of  the 
Spirit."  The  new  birth  imparts  a  new  vision.  The  man  who  is 
bom  of  the  Spirit  liath  eternal  life  (_ver.  36) ;  and  life  eternal 
is  to  know  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  bath  sent  (xvii.  3). 
"  Ve  have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  hwiD  (oiSarc) 
all  things"*  (1  Jcjlin  ii.  20),  He  who  is  born  of  water  and  of 
the  Spirit  sees  tlie  kingdom  of  God.  This  we  therefore  includes, 
with  Jesus,  all  who  are  truly  born  anew  of  the  Spirit.  Jesus 
meets  the  we  huno  of  Nicodetnus  (ver.  2),  referring  to  the  class 
to  which  he  belonged,  with  another  we  htow,  referring  to 
another  class,  of  which  He  was  the  head  and  representative. 
We  know  {olSa/iiev),  absolutely.     See  on  ii.  24. 

Testify  (jioprvpoOfiev).  Rev.,  better,  bear  witness  of.  See 
ontT. 

12.  Have  told  ieXirav).  Rendering  the  aorist  more  strictly, 
I  told. 

Earthly  things  (ri  irrri^eia).  Compounded  of  eVt,  w/wn,  and 
77,  earth.  In  Col.  iii.  2,  the  adjective  appears  in  its  analyzed 
form,  ri  eVi  t%  7^,  things  on  the  earth.  It  is  in  this  literal 
sense  it  is  to  be  taken  here  ;  not  things  of  earthly  natu7-e,  but 
things  whose  proper  place  ia  on  earth.  Not  worldly  affairs,  nor 
things  s-infid,  but,  on  the  contrary, "  those  facts  and  phenomena 
of  the  higher  life  as  a  class,  which  have  their  seat  and  mani- 
festation on  earth ;  which  belong  in  their  realization  to  our 
present  existence ;  which  are  seen  in  their  consequences,  tike 
the  issues  of  birth ;  which  are  sensible  in  their  effects,  like  the 
action  of  the  wind ;  which  are  a  beginning  and  a  prophecy,  and 
not  a  fulfilment "  (Westcott).  The  earthly  thifiga  would  there- 
fore include  the  phenomena  of  the  new  birth. 


e  high  autboriUaa,  "  /e  kll  know." 


008PBL  OF  JOHN.  97 

Heavenly  things  (r^  hrovpAvia).  Componnded  with  M^ 
upon  or  in,  and  oufHUf&^»  heaven.  Not  holy  things  as  compared 
with  tinfulj  nor  spiritual  things  as  compared  with  temporal; 
bat  things  which  are  in  heaven,  mysteries  of  redemption,  hav- 
ing their  seat  in  the  divine  will,  realized  in  the  world  through 
the  work  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  faith  of  mankind 
(v.  14-16).  Thus  it  is  said  (ver.  13)  that  the  Son  of  man 
who  is  in  heaven  came  down  out  of  heaven,  and  in  w.  31,  32 
that  He  that  cometh  out  of  heaven  beareth  witness  (on  earth) 
of  what  He  has  seen  and  heard ;  and  that,  being  sent  from 
Ood,  He  speaketh  the  words  of  God  (ver.  34). 

It  has  been  urged  against  the  genuineness  of  the  fourth 
Oospel  that  the  lofty  and  mystical  language  which  is  there  as- 
cribed to  Jesus  is  inconsistent  with  the  synoptical  reports  of 
His  words.  That  if  the  one  represents  truthfully  His  style  of 
speaking,  the  other  must  misrepresent  it.  Oodet's  words  on 
this  point  are  worth  quoting :  ^^  It  would  be  truly  curious  that 
the  first  who  should  have  pointed  out  that  contrast  should  be 
the  Evangelist  himself  against  whose  narrative  it  has  been 
brought  forward  as  a  ground  of  objection.  The  author  of  the 
fourth  Gospel  puts  these  words  (iii.  12)  into  the  mouth  of 
Jesus.  He  there  declares  that  He  came  down  from  heaven  to 
bring  this  divine  message  to  the  world.  The  author  of  the 
fourth  Gk)spel  was  then  clearly  aware  of  two  ways  of  teaching 
adopted  by  Jesus ;  the  one  the  usual,  in  which  he  explained 
earthly  things,  evidently  always  in  their  relation  to  God  and 
His  kingdom;  the  other,  which  contrasted  in  many  respects 
with  the  first,  and  which  Jesus  employed  only  exceptionally,  in 
which  He  spoke  directly,  and  as  a  witness,  of  God  and  the 
things  of  GtKl,  always  naturally  in  connection  with  the  fate  of 
mankind.  The  instructions  of  tlie  first  kind  had  a  more  simple, 
more  practical,  more  varied  character.  They  referred  to  the 
different  situations  of  life ;  it  was  the  exposition  of  the  true 
moral  relations  of  men  to  each  other,  and  of  men  to  God. 
.  .  .  But  in  that  way  Jesus  could  not  attain  to  the  final 
aim  which  He  sought,  the  full  revelation  of  the  divine  mys- 
tery, of  the  plan  of  salvation.  Since  His  baptism  Jesus  had 
heaven  constantly  open  before  Him  ;  the  decree  of  salvation  was 
Vol.  IL— 7 


98  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TBBTAMBNT. 

disclosed  to  Him;  He  had,  in  particular,  heard  these  words: 
'  Thou  art  my  well  beloved  Son  ;'  He  reposed  on  the  Father's 
bosom,  and  He  could  descend  and  redesceud  without  ceaEing 
into  the  depths  of  the  Fatlier'a  fathoiiiteBe  love,  of  which  He 
felt  the  vivifying  power ;  and  when  He  came,  at  certain  excep- 
tional moments,  to  speak  of  that  divine  relationship,  and  to 
give  scope  to  that  fulness  of  life  witJi  which  it  supplied  Him, 
His  language  took  a  peculiar,  solemn,  mystical,  one  might  even 
say  a  heavenly  tone  ;  for  they  were  heavenly  things  which  He 
then  revealed.  Now  such  is  precisely  the  character  of  His 
language  in  the  fourth  Gospel."  Compare  Luke  x.  18,  sqq., 
where  Jesus'  words  take  on  a  character  similar  to  that  of  His 
utterances  in  John. 

13.  And  («ai')-  Note  the  simple  connective  particle,  with 
nothing  to  indicate  the  logical  sequence  of  the  thought. 

Hath  ascended.  Equivalent  to  hath  been  in.  Jeeue  eays 
that  no  one  has  been  in  heaven  except  the  Son  of  man  who 
came  down  out  of  heaven ;  because  no  man  conid  be  in  heaven 
without  having  ascended  thither. 

Which  is  in  heaven.     Many  authorities  omit. 

14.  Must  (Set).  Jfu«^  signifies  the  eternal  necessity  in  the 
divine  counsels.  Compare  Luke  xxiv.  26,  46  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  54; 
Mark  viii.  31  ;  John  xii.  34. 

Lifted  up  {vy^ti>3rivai).  The  following  are  the  uses  of  the 
word  in  the  New  Testament :  The  exaltation  of  pride  (Matt. 
xi.  23  ;  Luke  x.  15  ;  xiv.  11),  Ths  raUing  of  the  huTnhle  (Luke 
i.  52;  Jaa.  iv.  10;  1  Pet.  v.  6).  The  exaUtUivn  of  Ohrial  in 
glory  (Acts  ii.  33  ;  v.  31).  The  uplifting  on  the  croBt  (John  Jii. 
14  ;  viii.  28  ;  xii.  32,  34).  The  reference  here  is  to  the  cnici~ 
jiffion,  but  beyond  that,  to  the  glorijicaiion  of  Christ.  It  is 
character! Btic  of  John  to  blend  the  two  ideas  of  Christ's  passion 
and  glory  (viii.  28  ;  xii.  32).  Thus,  when  Judas  went  out  to 
betray  him,  Jesus  said,  "  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified  " 
(xiii.  31).     Hence  the  believer  overcomes  the  world  throngii 


QOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  99 

faith  in  Him  who  came  not  by  water  only,  but  by  water  and 
blood  (1  John  v.  4-6). 

15.  Believeth  in  Him  {wi^rrew^v  efc  airrbv).  The  best  texts 
read  iv  avr^,  constrning  with  have  eternal  Ufey  and  rendering 
may  in  Sim  have  eternal  life.     So  Rev. 

Sliould  not  perish,  but.    The  best  texts  omit 

Have  eternal  life.  A  characteristic  phrase  of  John  for  Uve 
forever.  See  vv.  16,  36 ;  v.  24 ;  vi.  40,  47,  54 ;  1  John  iiL 
15 ;  V.  12. 

The  interview  with  Nicodemas  closes  with  ver.  15 ;  and  the 
SQoceeding  words  are  John's.  This  appears  from  the  following 
facts :  1.  The  past  tenses  loved  and  gave^  in  ver.  16,  better  suit 
the  later  point  of  view  from  which  John  writes,  after  the  aton- 
ing death  of  Christ  was  an  accomplished  historic  fact,  than  the 
drift  of  the  present  discourse  of  Jesus  before  the  full  revelation 
of  that  work.  2.  It  is  in  John's  manner  to  throw  in  explan- 
atory comments  of  his  own  (L  16-18  ;  xiL  37-41),  and  to  do  so 
abruptly.  See  i.  15,  16,  and  on  and^  i.  16.  3.  Ver.  19  is  in  the 
same  line  of  thought  with  i.  9-11  in  the  Prologue ;  and  the  tone 
of  that  verse  is  historic,  carrying  the  sense  of  past  rejection,  as 
loved  darkness ;  toere  evil.  4.  The  phrase  believe  on  the  name 
is  not  used  elsewhere  by  our  Lord,  but  by  John  (i.  12  ;  ii.  23 ; 
1  John  V.  13).  5.  The  phrase  only-begotten  son  is  not  elsewhere 
used  by  Jesus  of  himself,  but  in  every  case  by  tlie  Evangelist 
(L  14,  18  ;  1  John  iv.  9).  6.  The  phrase  to  do  truth  (ver.  21) 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  1  John  i.  6.* 

16.  The  world  (kwtijlov).    See  on  i.  9. 

Gave.    Bather  than  eent;  emphasizing  the  idea  of  eacr^fioe. 
Only-begotten  Son.    See  on  i.  14. 
Have.    See  on  ver.  15. 


*  This  Tiew,  howerer,  is  oppoMd  bj  Mejer,  Lange,  De  Wetto,  Alford,  and 
Oodet 


100  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

This  attitude  of  Gkxl  toward  the  world  is  in  su^estive  oon* 
trast  with  that  in  which  the  gods  of  paganism  are  represented. 
Thos  Jano  says  to  Yolcan : 

*^  ]>eftr  son,  refrain :  it  is  not  well  thai  thns 
A  god  should  toffer  for  the  sake  of  men." 

«*  Uiad,'*  xxL»  879,  88a 

And  Apollo  to  Neptune : 

**  Thon  wonld'st  not  deem  me  wise,  should  I  contend 
With  thee,  O  Neptune,  for  the  sake  of  men, 
Who  flourish  like  the  forest-leares  awhile, 
And  feed  upon  the  fruits  of  earth,  and  then 
Decaj  and  perish.     Let  us  quit  the  field, 
And  leare  the  combat  to  the  warring  hosts.*' 

«'Iliad,'*zzL,461,4m: 

Man  has  no  assurance  of  forgiveness  even  when  he  offers  the 
sacrifices  in  which  the  gods  especially  delight.  ^^  Man's  sin  and 
the  divine  punishment  therefor  are  certain;  forgiveness  is 
uncertain,  dependent  upon  the  arbitrary  caprice  of  the  gods. 
Human  life  is  a  life  without  the  certainty  of  grace  "  (Nagels- 
bach, "  Homerische  Theologie  ").  Mr.  Gladstone  observes :  "  No 
Homeric  deity  ever  will  be  found  to  make  a  personal  sacrifice 
on  behalf  of  a  human  client"  (^^ Homer  and  the  Homeric 
Age,"  ii.,  372). 

17.  Sent  {am-iareiXeii).  See  on  i.  6.  Sent  rather  than  gtwe 
(ver.  16),  because  the  idea  of  sacrifice  is  here  merged  in  that 
of  authoritative  commission. 

His  Son.    The  best  texts  read  rbp,  they  for  ovroS,  his. 

Condemn  {tcpCvrf).  Better,  as  Kev.,  jvdge.  Canderrm  is 
KarcucpCvm,  not  used  by  John  (Matt.  xx.  18  ;  Mark  x.  33,  etc.). 
The  verb  KpUm  means,  originally,  to  separate.  So  Homer,  of 
Ceres  separating  the  grain  from  the  chaff  ('^  Iliad,"  v.,  501). 
Thence,  to  distinguish^  to  pick  aiUj  to  be  of  opiniotij  to  fudge. 
See  on  Hypocrite^  Matt,  xxiii.  13. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  101 

World.  The  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  has  a  certain 
•olemnitj.    Compare  L  10 ;  xv.  19. 

18.  Is  condemned  already  (^  ichcpirai).  Bev.,  more  cor- 
rectly,  fuUh  been  Judged  already.  Unbelief,  in  separating  from 
Christy  implies  judgment.  He  has  been  judged  in  virtue  of  his 
imbelief. 

19.  This*  That  is,  herein  cansiets  the  judgment  The  pref- 
acing a  statement  with  this  is,  and  then  defining  the  statement 
by  Sri  or  2va»  that,  is  characteristic  of  John.  See  zy.  12 ;  xviL 
8 ;  1  John  i.  5 ;  y.  11, 14 ;  3  John  6. 

Light  (to  ^€09).     Bev.,  correctly,  the  light     See  i.  4^  8. 

Men  {ol  SM^pwroCj.    lit,  the  men.    Begarded  as  a  class. 

Darkness  {rh  a-tcoro^).  See  on  i.  6.  Bev.,  correctly,  the 
darkness.  John  employs  this  word  only  here  and  1  John  L  6. 
His  usual  term  is  aieorta  (i.  5  ;  viii.  12  ;  1  John  i.  5,  etc.),  more 
commonly  describing  a  state  of  darkness,  than  darkness  as 
opposed  to  light 

Were  {9f»).  Habitually.  The  imperfect  tense  marking  con* 
tinuation. 

Evil  {jrovfipk)^  Aotvody  evil.  See  on  Mark  viL  22;  Luke 
iiil9. 

20.  Doeth  {irpda-awv).  The  present  participle,  indicating 
habit  and  general  tendency. 

Evil  {^HiSka).  Bev.,  ill.  A  different  word  from  that  in  the 
previous  verse.  Originally,  ligfU^  paltry ,  trivial^  and  so  worth' 
less.  Evil,  therefore,  considered  on  the  side  of  worthlessness. 
See  on  Jas.  iii.  16. 

Lest  his  works  should  be  reproved  {ha  fi^  ^^eyxS^  rii 
ipya  avTov).    Bather,  in  order  that  his  loorks  may  not  be  r^ 


109  WORD  STimiBS  m  the  ITEW  TESTAMEirr. 

proved.  E^>ieyj(o),  rendered  rej>rove,  has  several  phases  of 
meaniog.  In  earlier  classical  Greek  it  eignifies  to  disgrace  or 
j[ntt  to  «hame.  Thus  Ulysses,  having  succeeded  in  the  trial  o£ 
the  bow,  says  to  Telemachus,  "  the  stranger  who  sits  in  thy 
halls  disgraces  (ikiyxti)  thee  not"  ("Odyssey,  xxi,,  424). 
Then,  to  crosa-examine  or  qu^tion,for  the  purpose  of  oonvinc- 
ing,  convicting,  or  Tefutii\g;  to  censure,  accuse.  So  Herodotus : 
"In  his  reply  Alexander  became  confused,  and  diverged  from 
the  truth,  whereon  the  slaves  interposed,  cmvfuted  liis  state- 
ments {rfKeyxp*",  cross-questioned  and  caught  him  in  falsehood), 
and  told  the  whole  history  of  the  crime"  {i.,  115).  The  mes- 
senger in  the  "  Antigone  "  of  Sophocles,  describing  the  consterna- 
tion of  the  watchmen  at  finding  Polynices'  body  buried,  says  : 
"  Evil  words  were  bundled  among  them,  guard  accusing 
{i\4rf)(oiv)  guard"  (260).  Of  argumenta,  to  bring  to  the  proof ; 
prove  ;  prove  by  a  chain  of  reasoning.  It  occurs  in  Pindar  in 
the  general  sense  of  to  cmiquer  or  swpass.  "  Having  descended 
into  the  naked  race  they  surpassed  {^Xey^av)  the  Grecian  band 
in  speed  ("Pythia,"  xi.,  75). 

In  the  New  Testament  it  is  found  in  the  sense  of  reprove 
(Luke  iii.  19  ;  1  Tim.  v.  20,  etc.).  Convince  of  crime  or  fault 
(1  Cor,  xiv.  24 ;  Jsa.  ii.  9).  To  bring  to  light  or  erpose  by  con- 
viction (Jaa  iii.  20 ;  Eph.  v.  11,  13 ;  John  viii.  46 ;  see  on  that 
passage).  So  of  the  exposure  of  false  teachers,  and  their  ref- 
utation (Tit.  i.  9,  13  ;  ii.  15).  To  test  and  eapose  with  a  view 
to  correction,  and  so,  nearly  equivalent  to  chasten  (Heb.  xii.  5). 
The  different  meanings  imite  in  the  word  convict.  Convic- 
tion is  the  result  of  examinaiion,  testing,  argument.  The  teat 
enposes  and  demonstrates  the  error,  and  refutes  it,  thus  convinc- 
ing, convicting,  and  rebuking  the  subject  of  it.  This  conviction 
issues  in  chastening,  by  which  the  error  is  corrected  and  the 
erring  one  purified.  If  the  conviction  is  rejected,  it  carries 
with  it  condemnation  and  punishment.  The  man  is  thus  con- 
victed of  sin,  of  right,  and  oijudgmejU  (John  xvi.  8).  In  this 
passage  the  evil-doer  is  represented  as  avoiding  the  light  which 
tests,  that  light  which  is  the  offspring  of  love  (Apoc.  iii.  19), 
and  the  consequent  exposure  of  liis  error.  Compare  Eph.  v. 
13  i  John  i.  9-11.     This  idea  of  loving  darkness  rather  than 


L. 


GOBPEL  OF  JOHN.  103 

light  is  graphically  treated  in  Job  xxiv.  and  rons  through  vv. 
13-17. 

21.  Doeth  the  truth  {muiv  riip  AXT^eiov).  The  phrase 
occurs  only  here  and  in  1  John  i.  6.  Note  the  contrasted 
phrase,  dosth  evil  (ver.  20).  There  the  plural  is  used :  doeth 
evil  things;  evil  being  represented  by  a  number  of  bad 
works.  Here  the  singular,  ^  truths  or  truth;  truth  being  re- 
garded as  one,  and  ^^  including  in  a  supreme  unity  all  right 
deeds."  There  is  also  to  be  noted  the  di£Eerent  words  for  do- 
ing in  these  two  verses :  doeth  evil  (wpdaa-wp) ;  doeth  truth 
(voi&v).  The  latter  verb  contemplates  the  cbjeot  and  end  of 
action  ;  the  former  the  meaner  with  the  idea  of  continuity  and 
repetition.  Updaafov  is  the  practice^  while  iroiAv  may  be  the 
doing  once  for  cUl.  Thus  woieiv  elprpniv  is  to  condvde  a  peace: 
irpiaa^iv  elpi^vtfv,  to  negotiate  a  peace.  So  Demosthenes:  **He 
will  do  {irpd^i)  these  things,  and  will  accomplish  them  (iro*- 
i7<r€»)."  In  the  New  Testament  a  tendency  is  observable  to  use 
iroielv  in  a  good  sense,  and  vp^aa-eiv  in  an  evil  sense.  Compare 
the  kindred  word  wpa^i^,  deed  or  toorky  which  occurs  six  times, 
and  in  four  out  of  the  six  of  evil  doing  (Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  Luke 
xxiii.  51 ;  Acts  xix.  18 ;  Rom.  viii.  13 ;  xii.  14 ;  Col.  iii.  9). 
With  this  passage  compare  especially  v.  29,  where  the  two  verbs 
are  used  with  the  two  nouns  as  here.  Also,  Bom.  vii.  15,  19. 
Bengel  says :  ^^  Evil  is  restless :  it  is  busier  than  truth."  In 
Bom.  i.  32  ;  ii.  3,  both  verbs  are  used  of  doing  evil,  but  still  with 
a  distinction  in  that  irpdaato  is  the  more  comprehensive  term, 
designating  the  j>ur8uit  of  evil  as  the  aim  of  the  activity. 

21.  Cometh  to.  In  contrast  with  hateth  (ver.  20).  His 
lo7)e  of  the  light  is  shown  by  his  seeking  it. 

In  God.  The  element  of  holy  action.  Notice  the  perfect 
tense,  have  heen  wroitght  (as  Bev.)  and  abide. 

22.  The  land  of  Judaea  {riiv  ^lovSalav  yrjv).  Lit,  the  Jth 
dcsan  land.  The  phrase  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment 


104  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Tarried  (SUrpifiev),  The  verb  originally  means  to  ruby 
hence  to  i/oear  away^  consume;  and  so  of  spending  or  pass- 
ing time. 

Baptized  {ifidirr^^eii).  The  imperfect  tense  agrees  with  the 
idea  of  tarrying.    Ue  continued  baptizing  daring  His  stay. 

23.  Was  baptizing  {^  fiwirrOjnv).  The  substantive  verb 
with  the  participle  also  indicating  continuous  or  habitual 
action  ;  was  engaged  in  baptizing. 

iEnon,  near  to  Salim.  The  situation  is  a  matter  of  con- 
jecture. The  word  JShwn  is  probably  akin  to  the  Hebrew 
iyvn^  an  eye^  a  sprvng.     See  on  Jas.  iii.  11. 

Much  water  {i^ra  woXKik).  Lit,  many  waters.  Probably 
referring  to  a  number  of  pools  or  springs. 

Came — were  baptized.    Imperfects.    They  kept  coming. 

24.  Prison  (r^y  ^'kaudpf).    See  on  Acts  v.  18,  21. 

25.  Then  (o&/).  Not  a  particle  of  time  but  of  consequence ; 
therefore,  because  of  both  Jesus  and  John  baptizing. 

Question  ((T'friTcn?).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  questioning. 
Qtiestion  would  be  ^i^fia,  always  in  the  sense  of  a  question  in 
debate.    The  word  here  represents  the  jn'ooees  of  inquiry. 

Between  (i/e).  Rev.,  correctly,  on  the  part  of.  Lit,  pro- 
ceeding from.  The  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  does  not  show  with 
which  party  the  discussion  originated.  The  Greek  distinctly 
states  Uiat  the  question  was  raised  by  the  disciples  of  the 
Baptist. 

The  Jews.  The  best  texts  read  ^lov^lov,  with  a  Jew.  Pos- 
sibly one  who  asserted  that  John's  baptism  might  now  be  dis- 
pensed  with. 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  105 

Purifying.  Probably  not  abont  the  familiar  ceremonial 
parifications,  bat  as  to  wiiether  the  baptism  of  Jesns  or  of  John 
had  the  greater  purifying  power. 

26.  Behold  (Se).  Used  by  both  Matthew  and  Mark,  not  by 
Lake,  but  very  frequently  by  John. 

Baptizeth — come.  The  present  would  be  better  rendered 
by  is  baptizing^  are  coming. 

27.  Receive.    Answering  to  given. 

Be  given  (i  B^fUvov).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  have  heem 
gwen. 

From  heaven.    Lit,  otU  ^heaven  {i/e). 

29.  The  bride.  A  common  figure  in  the  Old  Testament 
prophecies,  of  the  relation  between  Jehovah  and  His  people 
(Ezek.  xvi. ;  Hos.  ii.  19 ;  Mai.  ii  11).  See  also  on  Matt.  i.  21, 
concerning  Hosea: 

Friend  of  the  bridegroom.  Or  groomsman.  The  term  is 
appropriate  to  Judaea,  the  groomsmen  not  being  customary  in 
Galilee.  See  Matt.  ix.  15,  where  the  phrase  children  of  the 
bridechaimher  is  used.  (See  on  Mark  ii.  19).  In  Judaea  there 
were  two  groomsmen,  one  for  the  bridegroom,  the  other  for  his 
bride.  Before  marriage  they  acted  as  intermediaries  between 
the  couple ;  at  tlie  wedding  they  offered  gifts,  waited  upon  the 
the  bride  and  bridegroom,  and  attended  them  to  the  bridal 
chamber.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  to 
present  him  to  his  bride,  after  marriage  to  maintain  proper 
terms  between  the  parties,  and  especially  to  defend  the  bride's 
good  fame.  The  Rabbinical  writings  speak  of  Moses  as  the 
friend  of  the  bridegroom  who  leads  out  the  bride  to  meet 
Jehovah  at  Sinai  (Ex.  xix.  17);  and  describe  Michael  and 
Gabriel  as  acting  as  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom  to  our  first 
parents,  when  the  Almighty  himself  took  the  cup  of  blessing 


106  WORD  STDDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMEITr, 

aud  spoke  the  beaedicCion.     The  Baptist  repreeenta  himself  as 
standing  in  the  same  relation  to  Jesus. 

Rejoiceth  freatly  (;^a^a  x^^P^')-  ^*-t  rejoicetli  with  joy. 
A  Hebrew  idiom.  See  on  Luke  xxii.  15,  and  compare  Acta 
xxiii,  li ;  Jaa.  v.  ]  7.     Only  here  in  John's  writings. 

This  my  joy  (own?  ^  x'V^  V  ^m4)*  ^  ^^^ry  emphatic  ex- 
pression :  this,  the  joy  which  is  mine.  The  change  of  style  in 
the  following  verses  seems  to  indicate  that  the  words  of  the 
Baptist  break  off  at  this  point,  and  are  taken  up  and  com- 
mented npon  by  the  Evangelist. 

31.  He  that  cometh  (o  epxofieiKK).  The  present  participle. 
The  coming  regarded  as  still  in  process  of  maoifestation.  Com- 
pare vi.  33. 

From  above  (ava^).    See  on  iil  2. 

Above  {ewdva).     Sapreme. 

Of  the  earth  («  r^^y^).  lit.,  out  of  the  earth;  of  earthly 
origin. 

Is  earthly.  The  same  phrase,  o^tt  of  the  earth,  is  repeated, 
signifying  of  earthly  nature.  On  the  characteristic  phrase 
elvcu  «,  tobeqf,eeeoa\.  46. 

Spealceth  of  the  earth.  Out  of  the  earth.  His  words  have 
an  earthly  source.     On  XoKel,  speaks,  see  on  Matt,  xzviii.  18. 

32.  Receiveth  {Xafi^dvu).  Once  only  John  uses  £^o^uu 
for  receive,  of  the  GalilEeans  receiving  Christ  (iv,  45).  The 
distinction  between  the  two  ia  not  sharply  maintained,  but 
iexofMi  commonly  adds  to  the  idaa  of  tahiTig,  that  of  melcom- 
ing.  Thns  Demosthenes  says  that  the  Theban  elders  did  not 
receive  (iSi^amo)  i.e.,  with  a  welcome  pleasure,  the  money 
which  was  offered  them,  nor  did  they  take  it  {^Kaffov).  Aafi^ 
^dvei  also  includes  the  retaining  of  what  is  taken.     Hence  of 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  107 

receiving  Christ  (i.  12;  y.  43;  xiii.  20).    The  phrase  receive 
the  uninese  is  peculiar  to  John  (ver.  11 ;  v.  34 ;  1  John  y.  9). 

33.  Hath  set  to  his  seal  {iat^pSfurw).  To  eet  tOy  is  to  qffuo. 
To  eeito  A  seal  is  therefore  to  attest  a  docament.  The  expres- 
sion is  retained  from  Coyerdale's  yersion  (1535).  So,  ^^Thej 
mnst  eet  to  their  hands,  and  shall  set  to  their  hands."  Compare 
also  the  old  l^al  formala:  "In  wittenesse  qwherof  I  hane  eet 
to  myfi  seele."  Rey.,  better,  hath  eet  hie  seal  to  this.  The 
meaning  here  is,  has  sclemnly  attested  and  confirmed  the  state- 
ment "  God  is  true."  Only  here  in  this  sense.  Elsewhere  of 
closing  np  for  secoritj;  hiding;  marking  a  person  or  thing. 
See  on  Apoc.  xxii.  10.  The  aorist  tense  here  denotes  an  accom- 
plished act. 

34.  The  words  {rii  j^fiara).  Not  words^  nor  individual 
words,  bnt  the  words — ^the  complete  message  of  Gk>d.  See  on 
Luke  I  37. 

God  giveth.  The  best  texts  omit  God.  Bey.,  Be  gvveth. 
Bey.  also,  rightly,  omits  the  italicized  to  Hvra.  The  personal 
object  of  the  yerb  gvveth  is  indefinite.  Render,  He  giveth  not 
the  Spirit  hy  measwre. 

In  order  to  conyey  the  full  force  of  the  terms  gvveth  and  hy 
measurej  it  will  be  necessary  to  attempt  an  explanation  of  the 
general  scope  and  meaning  of  this  yery  difficult  and  much  dis- 
puted passage.  The  starting-point  of  the  exposition  mnst  be 
yer.  30,  the  Baptist's  noble  resignation  of  his  own  position  and 
claims  to  Jesus :  Se  must  vncreasSj  hut  1  must  decrease.  At 
this  point  the  Eyangelist,  as  we  haye  seen,  takes  up  the  dis- 
course. The  Baptist's  declaration  that  Jesus  ^^  must  increase  " 
— that  He  is  a  messenger  of  a  transcendently  higher  character, 
and  with  a  far  larger  and  more  significant  message  than  his 
own — furnishes  the  Eyangelist  with  a  text.  He  will  show  why 
Jesus  ^^must  increase."  He  must  increase  because  He  comes 
from  ahcvSj  and  is  iherefore  supreme  over  aU  (yer.  31).  This 
statement  he  repeats ;  defining  from  above  {aimBev)  by  out  of 
heaven  (ix  rot)  oifpavov)^  and  emphasizing  it  by  contrast  with  a 


108  WORD  STiroiEB  IN  THE  NEW  TEBTAMKNT, 

mere  earthly  witness  {o  «  t^  7^9)  whose  words  bear  Ilie  stamp 
of  his  earthly  origin  (eV  1%  7^  XaX«().  Being  from  heaven, 
lie  teatifiee  of  heavenly  things,  as  an  eye-  and  ear-witness. 
"  Wliat  lie  hath  seen  and  fteard,  of  that  he  beareth  witness,"  It 
is  indeed  true  that  men  reject  this  teBtimony.  "No  man  re- 
ceiveth  His  witness"  (ver.  32).  None  the  less  it  is  worthy  of 
implicit  credence  as  the  testimony  of  God  himself.  He  that 
has  received  that  testimony  has  solemnly  attested  it  as  God's 
own  witness ;  "  hath  set  his  seal  to  this,  that  God  is  true."  To 
declare  Jesus'  testimony  untrue  is  to  declare  God  untrue  (ver. 
33).  For  He  whom  God  hath  sent  utters  th^  whole  divine  mes- 
sage {t/ie  iDords  of  God,  ver.  34). 

Thus  far  the  reasoning  is  directed  to  the  conclusion  that 
Jeaus  ought  to  increase,  and  tliat  His  meeaage  ought  to  be  re- 
ceived, lie  is  God's  own  meeeeuger  out  of  heaven,  and  speaks 
God's  own  words. 

The  common  explanation  of  the  Eucoeeding  claase  is  that 
God  bestows  the  Spirit  npon  Jesns  in  His  fnlness,  "not  by 
measure." 

But  this  is  to  repeat  what  has  already  been  more  than  im- 
plied. It  would  seem  to  be  superfluous  to  say  of  one  who  comes 
out  of  heaven,  who  is  supreme  over  all  things,  who  bears  wit- 
ness of  heavenly  things  which  He  has  seen  and  heard,  and  who 
reveals  the  whole  message  of  God  to  men— that  God  bestows 
tipon  Him  the  Spirit  witliout  measure. 

Take  up,  then,  the  chain  of  thought  from  the  first  clause  of 
ver.  34,  and  follow  it  on  another  line.  The  Messenger  of  God 
speaks  the  words  of  God,  and  thus  shows  himself  worthy  of 
credence,  and  shows  this  further,  by  dispensing  the  gift  oftfte 
Spirit  in  fvR  measure  to  His  disciples.  "He  giveth  not  the 
Spirit  by  measure."  This  interpretation  adds  a  new  link  to  the 
chain  of  thought ;  a  new  reason  why  Jesns  should  increase,  and 
His  testimony  be  received ;  the  reason,  namely,  that  not  only 
is  He  himself  divinely  endowed  with  the  Spirit,  bnt  that  He 
proves  it  by  dispensing  the  Spirit  in  full  measure. 

Thus  ver.  35  follows  in  natural  sequence.  This  dispensing 
power  which  attests  His  claims,  is  His  through  the  gift  of  the 
divine  Fathei-'s  love.     "The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  109 

given  all  things  inio  His  hcmd^  This  latter  phrase,  into  SU 
tiondj  signifies  not  ovlj  jxyaBession^  but  the  power  of  disposal. 
See  Mark  ix.  31 ;  xiv.  41 ;  Luke  xxiii.  46 ;  Heb.  x.  31.  God 
has  given  the  Son  all  things  to  administer  according  to  His  own 
pleasure  and  rale.  These  two  ideas  of  Christ's  reception  and 
iestowmerU  of  divine  gifts  are  combined  in  Matt.  xi.  27.  ^'  All 
things  €Mre  delivered  tmto  me  of  my  Father  ;  and  no  man  know- 
eth  the  Son  bat  the  Father,  neither  knoweth  any  man  the 
Father  save  the  Son,  and  He  to  whomsoever  the  Son  may  de- 
termine {fiovKMfToi)  to  reveal  Him." 

Therefore  John  the  Baptist  mast  decrease,  and  Jesus  most 
increase.  A  measure  of  the  Spirit  was  given  to  the  Baptist, 
sufficient  for  his  preparatory  work,  but  the  Baptist  himself  saw 
the  Spirit  descending  in  a  bodily  form  upon  the  Son  of  God, 
and  heard  the  voice  from  heaven,  ^^  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  The  Spirit  is  thus  Christ's  own.  He 
dispenses^  gvoes  it  (S/Saio-^y),  in  its  fulness.  Hence  Jesus  said, 
later,  of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me,  for  He  shall 
recewe  of  m^iney  and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  All  things  that 
the  Father  hath  are  mine ;  therefore  said  I  that  He  shall  take 
of  mine  and  shall  show  it  unto  you  "  (John  xvi.  14,  15). 

36.  He  that  believeth  not  (o  aweil^v).  More  correctly,  as 
Rev.,  dbeyeth  not.  Disbelief  is  regarded  in  its  active  manifes- 
tation, disobedience.  The  verb  ireC^Qn  means  to  perstMdSj  to 
cause  heliefy  to  indiuje  one  to  do  som^vng  h/ perstuidingy  and 
so  runs  into  the  meaning  of  to  obet/j  properly  as  the  result  of 
persuasion.  See  on  Acts  v.  29.  Compare  1  Pet.  iv.  17 ;  Rom. 
ii.  8 ;  xi.  30,  31.  Obedience,  however,  includes  faith.  Com- 
pare Rom.  i.  5,  the  obedience  of  faith. 

Shall  not  see  (ov/c  Sy^at).  Compare  the  future  tense  with 
the  present  '^  hcUh  eternal  life,"  and  the  simple  life  with  the 
fully  developed  idea  eternal  life.  He  who  believes  is  within 
the  circle  of  the  life  of  God,  which  is  essentially  eternal.  His 
life  "  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Life  eternal  is  to  know  the 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent.  Hence, 
to  such  an  one,  eternal  life  is  not  merely  something  yn/ur^.    It 


110 


WORD  8TDDIE8  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT, 


is  aj»»etent  potaettion.  He  haiA  it.  The  anbeHeviag  and  die- 
obedient,  instead  of  liaviug  eUmal  life,  eball  not  have  l(fe: 
shall  not  even  see  it  (compare  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  iii.  3). 
He  Bliall  have  no  perception  of  life  giinpljr  considered,  niudi 
lees  of  eternal  life,  tlie  full  and  complex  development  of  life. 

The  wrath  of  God  (opy^  tou  &eav).  Both  opy^  and  Avfiott 
are  need  in  the  New  Testament  for  wrath  or  anger,  and  witli- 
ont  any  commonly  observed  distinction.  Opyi}  denotes  a  deeper 
and  more  permanent  sentiment,  a  settled  habit  of  mind  ;  while 
Svfiot  is  a  more  tnrbulent,  but  temporary  agitation.  Both 
words  are  used  in  the  phrase  wrath  of  God,  wliich  commonly 
denotes  a  distinct  manifestation  of  God's  judgment  (Rom,  i. 
18 ;  iii.  5  ;  ix.  23  ;  xii  19).  Opyif  (not  3ufi6v)  also  appears  in 
the  phrase  the  wrath  to  oome  (Matt.  iii.  7 ;  Lnke  iii.  7 ;  1  These, 
ii.  16,  etc).     Compare  wrath  of  the  Lamb  {Apoc.  vi.  16). 

Abideth  {(ih/€t).  The  present  tense.  As  the  believer  hath 
life,  80  the  unbeliever  hath  wrath  abiding  on  him.  He  lives 
continually  in  an  economy  which  is  alienated  from  God,  and 
which,  in  itself,  must  be  habitually  the  subject  of  God's  di»- 
pleaeore  and  indignation. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Thersfors.  Pointing  back  to  iii.  22,  and  the  oontroveny 
which  arose  about  the  two  baptisms. 

The  Lord.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  3. 

Knew  (eyvta),  or  perceived.     See  on  ii.  24. 

Pharisees.  John  never  alludes  to  the  Sadducees  by  name. 
The  Pharisees  represented  the  opposition  to  Jesns,  the  most 
powerful  and  dangerous  of  the  Jewish  sects. 


k 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  Ill 

Made  and  baptized.  Both  yerbs  are  in  the  present  tense. 
The  narrator  pats  himself  at  the  scene  of  the  story :  is  makings 
and  hapOzing. 

2.  Though  {tciUrotye).  Lit.,  and  yet.  The  report  of  Jesus' 
baptizing  brought  to  the  Baptist  bj  his  disciples  is  corrected. 

Baptized.  The  imperfect  tense :  it  was  not  SispracUoe  to 
baptize. 

3.  He  left  {aipfjtct).  The  verb  means  literally  to  send  away^ 
diemisB.  It  is  used  of  forgimng  cffenoes  (Matt.  yi.  43 ;  Jas.  v. 
15) ;  of  yielding  up  (Matt,  xzvii.  50) ;  of  letting  alone  (Matt. 
xix.  14) ;  of  allowing  or  permitting  (Luke  Ti.  12).  See  on 
these  passages.  Its  employment  here  is  peculiar.  Compare 
xyi.  28,  of  Christ's  leaving  the  world. 

Again.    See  i.  44. 

4.  Mutt  needs.  Because  this  was  the  natural  route  from 
Jerusalem  to  Galilee.  Possibly  with  a  suggestion  of  the  ne- 
cessity arising  from  the  Father's  will.  John  does  not  put  this 
as  a  mission  undertaken  to  the  Samaritans.  Jesus  observed  the 
law  which  He  imposed  on  His  disciples  (Matt.  x.  5). 

5.  Then  {oiv).  Not  a  particle  of  time,  but  of  logical  con* 
nection.     Therefore^  going  by  this  route,  He  must  needs^  etc. 


Ity.    Not  implying  a  place  of  great  size  or  importance. 
Compare  xL  54 ;  Matt  ii.  23. 

Sychar.  Commonly  identified  with  Schechem^  the  modem 
NablauSj  and  regarded  as  a  corruption  of  Sichem.  Some 
modem  authorities,  however,  argue  that  ^  place  so  famous  as 
Schechem  would  not  be  referred  to  under  another  name,  and 
identify  the  site  with  Aeka/Ty  about  two  miles  east  of  Nablous. 
The  name  Sychar  means  drunken4own  or  lyvng-town. 


113  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  THSTAMBWT- 

Parcal  of  ground  (j^wpiiu).     A  diminutive  from  xaipa  a 

region. 

6.  Well  (tttyi?).  Strictly,  gpring.  The  word  for  cittern  or 
well  is  ippeap,  wliicli  Jului  uses  at  vv.  11,  12.  Elaewhere  in  the 
New  Testament  always  of  a  pit.  See  Luke  xiv.  5  ;  Apoc.  ix. 
1,  2.  There  is  no  mention  of  Jacob's  Well  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  traditional  well  atill  remains.  "  At  the  mouth  of 
the  valley  of  Schechern  two  slight  breake  are  visible  in  the 
midst  of  the  vast  plain  of  corn — one  a  white  Mussulman 
chapel ;  the  other  a  few  fragments  of  atone.  The  first  of  these 
covers  the  alleged  tomb  of  Joseph,  .  .  .  the  second  marks 
the  undisputed  site  of  the  well,  now  neglected  and  choked  up 
by  the  ruins  which  have  fallen  into  it ;  but  still  with  every 
claim  to  be  considered  the  original  well  "  (Stanley,  "  Sinai  and 
Palestine").  Dr.  Thomson  says:  "I  could  see  nothing  like  a 
well — nothing  but  a  low,  modern  wall,  much  broken  down,  and 
never,  apparently,  more  than  ten  feet  high.  The  area  enclosed 
by  it  is  fifty-six  paces  from  east  to  west,  and  sixty-five  from 
north  to  south.  The  surface  is  covered  by  a  confused  mass  of 
flhapelesB  rubbish,  overgrown  with  weeds  and  nettles.  .  .  . 
The  well  is  near  the  southeastei'n  corner  of  the  area,  and,  to 
reach  the  mouth  of  it,  one  tniist  let  himself  down,  with  some 
risk,  about  ten  feet  into  a  low  vault  "  ("Land  and  Book").  Dr. 
Thomson  also  remarks  npon  the  great  discrepancy  in  the  meas- 
urements of  the  well  by  different  tourists,  owing  to  the  ac- 
cumulations of  stones  and  dtShris  from  the  ruins  of  the  build- 
ings which  formerly  covered  it.  "All  confirm  the  saying  of 
the  Samaritan  woman  that  '  the  well  is  deep.' "  Maundrell,  in 
1697,  makes  the  depth  one  hundred  and  five  feet,  with  fifteen 
feet  of  water.  Mr.  Calhoun,  in  1838,  found  nearly  the  same 
depth  of  water.  Dr.  Wilson,  in  1841,  found  the  depth  only 
seventy-five  feet,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  later  measuremeuta 
of  Captain  Anderson  in  1836,  and  of  Lieutenaut  Conder  in 
1875. 


Wearied  (i 


ui;).     See  on  Luke  v.  6. 


GOBPBL  OF  jomr.  113 

Thus.  Jnst  as  He  was;  or,  as  some  explain,  being  thus 
wearied. 

Sat.  The  imperfect  tense ;  foa$  ritUng^  when  the  woman 
came. 

Sixth  Hour.  According  to  the  Jewish  reckoning,  mid-day. 
According  to  the  Roman  mode,  between  5  and  0  p.m.  See  on 
i.  39.    Evening  was  the  nsnal  time  for  drawing  water. 

7.  A  woman.  Held  in  low  esteem  by  the  popular  teachers ; 
a  Samaritan,  and  therefore  despised  by  the  Jews ;  poor,  for 
drawing  water  was  not,  as  in  earlier  times,  performed  by  women 
of  station  (Gen  xxiv.  15 ;  xxix.  9). 


Of  Samaria.  Lit,  aui  of  Samaria  {iic).  Not  of  the  dty  of 
Samaria,  which  was  some  six  miles  distant,  but  the  country.  A 
Samaritan  by  race  and  religion. 

To  draw.    See  on  ii.  8. 

9.  The  woman  of  Samaria  (^  tui^  fi  SafAapelri^).  Differ- 
ently expressed  from  the  same  phrase  in  the  preceding  verse. 
Lit,  the  looman  the  Samaritan.  Here  the  distinctive  character 
of  the  woman,  as  indicated  by  the  race,  is  emphasized. 

Askest  {airev;)-     See  on  Matt.  xv.  23. 

Have  no  dealings  (ov  avyxp&prai).  Have  no  familiar  or 
friendly  intercourse  with.  That  they  had  dealings  of  some 
kind  is  shown  by  the  disciples  going  into  the  city  to  buy  provi- 
sions. Some  authorities  omit  far  the  Jews  have  no  dealings 
with  the  Samaritans.  The  Jews  treated  the  Samaritans  with 
every  mark  of  contempt,  and  accused  them  of  falsehood,  folly, 
and  irreligion.  The  Samaritans  sold  Jews  into  slavery  when 
they  had  them  in  their  power,  lighted  spurious  signals  for  the 
beacon-fires  kindled  to  announce  the  beginnings  of  months,  and 
waylaid  and  killed  pilgrims  on  their  road  to  Jerusalem. 

Vol.  IL— 8 


114  WORD  8TDDTB8  IS  THB  NKW  TBSTAHEirr. 

10.  If  thou  knawest,  etc.  Angwering  rather  something 
latent  in  the  question  thsn  the  qnestioo  itself,  as  in  Jceub'  first 
answer  to  Xicodemns. 

The  gift  (Smpeiv).  Only  here  in  the  (loepels,  thongh  Luke 
uses  it  in  Acts  four  timee,  and  the  kindred  adverb,  Bapeap, 
freely,  ia  found  once  in  Matthew.  The  word  carries  the  sense 
of  a  bountifui,free,  honorabU  gift.  Compare  B&ptjfui,  ^'t,  and 
see  on  James  i.  17. 

Askad  (^nja-ait),  Jesus  nses  the  same  word  for  ask  which 
t)ie  woman  had  employed  of  his  asking  her,  the  word  express- 
ing the  asking  of  the  inferior  from  the  superior.  Here  it  is 
the  appropriate  word. 

Living  water  {iiSap  ^Sip).  Fresh,  perennial.  A  familiar 
figure  to  the  Jews.  See  Jer.  ii.  13;  xvii.  13;  Zech.  xiv.  8. 
Not  necessarily  the  same  as  vxU^  of  l^<a  {6&top  fof^.  Apoc.  xxi. 
6;  xxii.  1,  17). 

11.  To  draw  with  {&vr\'r}fui).  The  noon  means  what  ie 
drawn,  the  act  of  drwunng,  and  the  thing  to  draw  toith.  Here 
the  bucket,  of  skin,  with  three  cross  sticks  at  the  moutii  tu  keep 
it  open,  and  let  down  by  a  goat's-hair  rope.  Kot  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  loat^r-pot  (iiSpia)  of  ver.  28.  The  word  is 
found  only  liere  in  the  New  Testament. 

View  {tf>p€ap).     See  or 
ing  springs  {Trrfydt). 

That  living  water  (to  SSmp  to  ^S>p).  lAt.,  the  water  the 
living. 

12.  Art  thou  greater  {^^  <n)  ntl^tov).     The  interrogative 

particle  indicates  that  a  negative  answer  is  expected ;  Surely 
thou  art  not.  The  irii.  thou,  first  in  the  sentence,  is  emphatic, 
and  possibly  with  a  shade  of  contempt. 

Our  father  Jacob.  The  Samaritans  claimed  descent  from 
Joseph,  as  representing  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh. 


It  may  have  been  fed  by  liv- 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  115 

Children  (t/col).    Bev.,  correctly,  9an$. 

Cattle  {Spififiara).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  From 
(rpi^)  to  nouriah.  A  general  term  for  whatever  is  fed  or 
nnraed.  When  used  of  animals — mostly  of  tame  ones — oatUej 
9heq>j  etc.  It  is  applied  to  children,  fowls,  insects,  and  fish,  also 
to  domestic  slaves,  which,  according  to  some,  is  tlie  meaning 
here ;  bnt,  as  Meyer  justly  remarks,  '^  there  was  no  need  specially 
to  name  the  servants ;  the  mention  of  the  herds  completes  the 
picture  of  their  nomadic  progenitor." 

13.  Whosoever  drinketh  {ira^  o  irbwp).  lit,  ewry  one 
thai  drinketh.    So  Bev. 

14.  Whosoever  drinketh  (ft9  S*  Ay  irl^).  So  Bev.  The  A.  Y. 
renders  the  two  expressions  in  the  same  way,  but  there  is  a  dif- 
ference in  the  pronouns,  indicated,  though  very  vaguely,  by 
every  one  that  and  whosoever^  besides  a  more  striking  differ- 
ence in  the  verb  drinketh.  In  the  former  case,  the  article  with 
the  participle  indicates  something  habitual;  every  one  that 
drinks  repeatedly^  as  men  ordinarily  do  on  the  recurrence  of 
their  thirst.  In  ver.  14  the  definite  aorist  tense  expresses  a 
eingle  act — something  done  once  for  all.  Lit,  A«  who  may  ha/i>e, 
dnmk. 

Shall  never  thirst  (ov  fiii  Bt^^^ci  ek  rov  ai&va).  The  double 
negative,  ov  fi^,  is  a  very  strong  mode  of  statement,  equiva- 
lent to  h/  no  m^eans,  or  in  novnse.  It  must  not  be  imderstood, 
however,  that  the  reception  of  the  divine  life  by  a  believer 
does  away  with  all  further  desire.  On  the  contrary,  it  gener- 
ates new  desires.  The  drinking  of  the  living  water  is  put  as  a 
single  act,  in  order  to  indicate  the  divine  principle  of  life  as 
containing  in  itadf  alone  the  satisfaction  of  all  holy  desires  as 
they  successively  arise ;  in  contrast  with  human  sources,  which 
are  soon  exhausted,  and  drive  one  to  other  fountains.  Iloly 
desire,  no  matter  how  large  or  how  varied  it  may  become,  will 
always  seek  and  find  its  satisfaction  in  Christ,  and  in  Christ  only. 
Thirst  is  to  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  in  both  clauses,  as  refer- 


116  WORD  STUDIEa  TS  THE  ITBW  TB8TAMEMT. 

ring  to  that  natural  craving  which  the  world  cannot  satiBfy,  and 
which  is  therefore  ever  restleBs.  Drusiiis,  a  Flemish  critic,  cited 
by  Trench  ("  Studies  in  the  Gospela  "),  saya :  "  He  who  drinks 
the  water  of  wisdom  thirsts  and  does  not  thirst.  He  thirsts, 
that  is,  he  more  and  more  desires  that  which  he  drinks.  Hs 
dooB  not  thirst,  because  he  is  so  filled  that  he  desires  no  other 
drink."  The  strong  contrast  of  this  declaration  of  our  Lord 
with  pagan  sentiment,  is  illustrated  hj  the  following  passage 
from  Plato : 

"  Socrates :  Let  me  request  you  to  consider  how  far  yon 
would  accept  this  as  an  account  of  the  two  lives  of  the  tem- 
perate and  intemperate :  Tliere  are  two  men,  both  of  whom 
have  a  number  of  casks ;  the  one  man  has  his  casks  sound  and 
full,  one  of  wine,  another  of  honey,  and  a  third  of  milk,  besides 
others  filled  with  other  liquids,  and  the  streams  which  fill  them 
are  few  and  scanty,  and  he  can  only  obtain  them  with  a  great 
deal  of  toil  and  difficulty ;  but  when  his  casks  are  once  filled  he 
has  no  need  to  feed  them  any  more,  and  has  no  further  trouble 
with  them, or  care  about  them.  The  other,  in  like  manner,  can 
procure  streams,  though  nut  without  difficulty,  but  his  vessels 
are  leaky  and  unsound,  and  night  and  day  he  is  compelled  to 
be  filling  them,  and  if  he  pauses  for  a  moment  he  is  in  an  agony 
of  pain.  Such  are  their  respective  lives :  And  now  would  you 
say  that  the  life  of  the  intemperate  is  happier  than  that  of  the 
temperate?  Bo  I  not  convince  you  that  the  opposite  ia  the 
truth  ? 

"  OaUidea :  You  do  not  convince  me,  Socrates,  for  the  one  who 
has  filled  himself  has  no  longer  any  pleasure  left ;  and  this,  as 
I  was  just  now  saying,  is  the  life  of  a  stone ;  he  has  neither 
joy  nor  sorrow  after  he  is  once  filled ;  but  the  life  of  pleasaro 
is  the  pouring  in  of  tho  stream. 

"  Socrates :  And  if  the  stream  is  always  pouring  in,  must  there 
not  be  a  stream  always  running  out,  and  holes  large  enough  to 
admit  of  the  discharge! 

"  Caiiiclea:  Certainly. 

"Sooratea:  The  life,  then,  of  which  you  are  now  speaking  is 
not  that  of  a  dead  man,  or  of  a  stone,  but  of  a  cormorant;  you 
mean  that  he  is  to  be  hungering  and  eating! 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  117 

''CaUides:  Yes. 

^^ Socrates:  And  he  is  to  be  thirsting  and  drinking? 

^^  CaUidea :  Yes,  that  is  what  I  mean ;  he  is  to  have  all  his 
desires  about  him,  and  to  be  able  to  live  happilj  in  the  gratifi- 
eation  of  them"  ("Gtorgias,"  494).    Compare  Apoc  vii.  16, 17. 

Shall  be  (Tci^a-eroi).  Bev.,  better,  8hdU  hecamej  expressing 
the  ever-developing  richness  and  fresh  energy  of  the  divine 
principle  of  life. 

In  Him.  A  supply  having  its  fountain-head  in  the  man's 
own  being,  and  not  in  something  outside  himself. 

A  well  ('Tif/^).  The  Bev.  retains  toeU,  where  spring  would 
have  been  more  correct. 

Springing  up  {aXXo/Uvov),  Lea^pi/ng  •  thus  agreeing  with 
shall  heoome.  ^^  The  imperial  philosopher  of  Rome  uttered  a 
great  truth,  but  an  imperfect  one ;  saw  much,  but  did  not  see 
all ;  did  not  see  that  this  spring  of  water  must  be  fed,  and  fed 
evermore,  from  the  ^  upper  springs,'  if  it  is  not  presently  to  fail, 
when  he  wrote :  ^  Look  within ;  within  is  the  fountain  of  good, 
and  ever  able  to  gush  forth  if  you  are  ever  digging ' "  (Plutarch, 
"  On  Virtue  and  Vice  "). 

Unto  everlasting  life.  Christ  in  a  believer  is  Ufe.  This 
life  ever  tends  toward  its  divine  source,  and  issues  in  eternal 
life. 

Come  hither  (ipx^M'*  ivSaSe),  The  best  texts  read  SUfy- 
^/uu,  the  preposition  Bid  having  the  force  of  thrcugh  the  in- 
tervening plain. 

16.  Husband  (ovSpa).     See  on  i.  30. 

17.  Well  (/coXw).  ApUy^  truly.  Compare  viii.  48 ;  Matt 
XV.  7 ;  Luke  xx.  39. 


118  WORD  STUDIE8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

19.  I  perceive  (^mpm).  See  on  i.  18.  Xot  immediate  per- 
ception, but  rather,  /perceive  as  /observe  ihee  longer  and  more 
carrfvUy. 

A  prophet.  See  on  Luke  vii.  26.  The  Qreek  order  is  a 
prophet  art  thou  ;  the  empliaais  being  on  prophet. 

30.  Our  fathers.  Probably  meaning  the  ancestors  of  the 
Samaritans,  as  far  back  as  the  buildiug  of  the  temple  on  Mount 
Gerizim  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah.  This  temple  had  been  de- 
stroyed by  John  Hyrcanua,  139  b.o.,  but  the  place  remained 
holy,  and  to  this  day  the  Samaritans  yearly  celebrate  there  the 
feast  of  the  Paasover.  See  the  graphic  description  of  Dean 
Stanley,  who  was  present  at  the  celebration  ("Jewish  Chnrch," 
vol,  i.,  Appendix  III.). 

This  mountain.  Gerizim,  at  the  foot  of  which  lies  the 
well.  Here,  according  to  the  Samaritan  tradition,  Abraham 
sacrificed  Isaac,  and  met  Melchiaedek.  By  some  convulsion  of 
nature,  the  central  range  of  mountains  running  north  and  south, 
was  cleft  open  to  its  base  at  right  angles  to  its  own  line  of  ex- 
tension, and  the  deep  fissure  thus  made  is  the  vale  of  Nablua, 
as  it  appears  to  one  coming  up  the  plain  of  El  Miikhua  from 
Jerusalem.  The  valley  is  at  least  eighteen  hundred  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  mountains  on  either  hand  tower 
to  an  elevation  of  about  one  thousand  feet  more.  Mount  Ebal 
is  on  the  north,  Gerizini  on  the  south,  and  the  city  between. 
Near  the  eastern  end  the  vale  is  not  more  than  sixty  rods  wide ; 
and  there,  I  suppose,  the  tribes  assembled  to  hoar  the  "  bles- 
sings and  cursings"  read  by  the  Levites  (Dent,  x.ivii,,  xxviii,). 
The  panorama  seen  from  the  top  of  Gerizim  is  about  the  moat 
extensive  and  imposing  in  all  Palestine.  The  summit  is  a  small 
level  plateau.  In  the  midst  of  the  southern  end  is  a  sloping 
rock,  said  by  the  Samaritans  to  be  the  site  of  the  altar  of  their 
temple,  and  on  approaching  which  they  remove  their  shoes.  At 
the  eastern  edge  of  the  plateau,  a  small  cavity  in  the  rock  is 
shown  as  the  place  on  which  Abraham  offered  up  Isaac.  Ebal 
ia  three  thousand  and  seventy-nine  feet  above  the  sea-level, 


'      GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  119 

and  more  than  two  hundred  and  thirty  feet  higher  than 
GeriainL* 

Ought  to  worship  (5e«).  Better,  mtui  worship.  She  puts 
it  as  a  divine  obligation.  It  is  the  (mly  true  holy  place.  Com- 
pare ver.  24. 

21.  The  hour  cometh  {Ipxerai  &pa).  Rather  an  hoar. 
There  is  no  article.    Is  coming;  is  even  now  on  its  way. 

Shall  ye  worship  {irpoa-KVPiia'ere).  See  on  Acts  x.  25.  The 
word  was  used  indefinitely  in  yer.  20.  Here  with  the  Father^ 
thus  defining  true  worship. 

The  Father.  This  absolute  use  of  the  title  iAe  Father  is 
characteristic  of  John.  He  speaks  of  Gk>d  as  the  Fathery  and 
tny  Father,  more  commonly  the  former.  On  the  distinction 
between  the  two  Canon  Westcott  observes:  ^'Generally  it  may 
be  said  that  the  former  title  expresses  the  original  relation  of 
God  to  being,  and  specially  to  humanity,  in  virtue  of  man's 
creation  in  the  divine  image  ;  and  the  latter  more  particularly 
the  relation  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  incarnate,  and  so  indirectly 
to  man  in  virtue  of  the  Incarnation.  The  former  suggests  those 
thoughts  which  spring  from  the  consideration  of  the  absolute 
moral  connection  of  man  with  God ;  the  latter  those  which 
spring  from  what  is  made  known  to  us,  through  revelation,  of 
the  connection  of  the  Incarnate  Son  with  God  and  with  man." 
See  vi.  46 ;  x.  30 :  xx.  21 ;  viii.  18, 19  ;  xiv.  6-10  ;  xv.  8.  John 
never  uses  our  Father;  only  once  yoitr  Father  (xx.  17),  and 
never  Father  without  the  article,  except  in  address. 

22.  Ye  know  not  what  (o  ovk  oZSare).  Lit,  what  ye  know 
not.  Kev.,  rightly,  that  which  ye  know  not  Compare  Acts 
xvii.  23,  where  the  correct  reading  is  t,  what,  instead  of  hv, 
whom  :  "  what  therefore  ye  worship  in  ignorance."    This  wor- 

*  Condensed  from  Dr.  Thomson's  *'*'  Central  Palestine  and  Phoenioia,"  in 
"The  Land  and  the  Book."  An  interesting  description  of  the  ezoaTations 
made  on  the  summit  of  Qerisim,  bj  Lieutenant  Anderson,  will  be  foond  in 
the  same  Tolnme,  pp.  126-128. 


120  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAMHNT. 

ship  of  tlie  unknown  is  common  to  vulgar  ignorance  and  to 
pliilosophic  culture ;  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  and  to  the  Athe- 
nian philoEophers.  Compare  John  vii.  28;  viii.  19,  27.  Tlie 
neuter  expresses  the  unreal  and  impersonal  character  of  the 
Samaritan  worship.  As  the  Samaritans  received  the  Penta- 
teuch onlj,  they  were  ignorant  of  the  later  and  larger  revela- 
tion of  God,  as  contained  especially  in  the  prophetic  writings, 
and  of  the  Messianic  hope,  as  developed  among  the  Jews. 
They  had  preserved  only  the  abstract  notion  of  God. 

We.  Jesus  here  identifies  Himeelf  with  the  Jewish  people. 
The  essence  of  the  true  Jewish  worship  is  represented  by  Him. 

Know  what  we  worship  {wpoaicuvovftev  b  oiBafuv).  Lit, 
and  as  Rev,,  we  worship  that  which  we  know.  On  know,  see 
on  ii.  24,  The  neuter  that  which,  is  used  of  the  true  as  of  the 
unreal  object  of  worship,  perhaps  for  the  sake  of  correspond- 
ence with  tlie  preceding  clause,  or  because  the  object  of  wor- 
ship is  conceived  abstractly  and  not  personally.  Compare 
liv.  9. 

Salvation  (^  vurrqpUC).  The  word  has  the  article:  the  salva- 
tion, promised  and  to  be  revealed  in  Christ. 

Is  of  the  Jews.  Rev.,  rightly,/rom  the  Jews  {ix).  Not 
therefore  belongs  to,  hat  proceeds  from.  See  Gen.  xii. ;  Isa.  ii. 
3 ;  Mic.  iv.  2.  Even  the  Old  Testament  idea  of  salvation  is 
bound  up  with  Christ.  See  Rom.  ix.  4,  5.  The  salvation  is 
from  the  Jews,  even  from  that  people  which  has  rejected  it. 
See  on  i.  19.  On  the  characteristic  is  from,  see  on  i.  46.  The 
passage  illustrates  John's  habit  of  confirming  the  divine  author- 
ity of  the  Old  Testament  revelation,  and  of  showing  its  fulfil- 
ment in  Christ. 

23.  And  now  is.  This  could  not  be  added  in  ver.  21,  be> 
cause  local  worship  was  not  yet  abolished ;  but  it  was  true  as 
regarded  the  true  worship  of  the  Father  by  His  true  worship- 
pers, for  Jesus  was  already  surrounded  by  a  little  band  of  such, 
and  more  were  soon  to  be  added  (vv.  39-42j.     Bengel  eaya 


GOSPRL  OF  JOHN.  121 

that  the  words  a/nd  now  is  are  added  lest  the  woman  should 
think  that  she  most  seek  a  dwelling  in  Jadsea. 

True  {akq^woi),    Healy  genuine.    See  on  L  9. 

Worshippers  (irpoaxviniTai).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

In  spirit  and  in  truth  {iv  irpevfiari  teai  oKffBelif).  Spirii 
{nvaifia)  is  the  highest,  deepest,  noblest  part  of  our  humanity, 
the  point  of  contact  between  God  and  man  (Rom.  i.  9) ;  while 
aoul  {^vxq)  is  tlie  principle  of  individuality,  the  seat  of  personal 
impressions,  haviug  a  side  in  contact  with  the  material  element 
of  humanity  as  well  as  with  the  spiritual  element,  and  being 
thus  the  mediating  element  between  the  spirit  and  the  body. 
The  phrase  in  spirit  and  in  tnUh  describes  the  two  essential 
characteristics  of  true  worship :  in  spirU,  as  distinguished  from 
place  or  form  or  other  sensual  limitations  (ver.  21) ;  in  truths 
as  distinguished  from  the  false  conceptions  resulting  from  im* 
perfect  knowledge  (ver.  22).  True  worship  includes  a  spiritual 
sense  of  the  object  worshipped,  and  a  spiritual  communion 
with  it ;  the  manifestation  of  the  moral  consciousness  in  feel- 
ings, motions  of  the  will,  ^^  moods  of  elevation,  excitements,'^ 
etc  It  includes  also  a  truthful  conception  of  the  object.  In 
Jesus  the  Father  is  seen  (xiv.  9)  and  known  (Luke  x.  22). 
Thus  the  truthful  conception  is  gained.  He  is  the  Truth 
(xiv.  6).  Likewise  through  Him  we  come  to  the  Father,  and 
spiritually  commune  with  Him.  No  man  can  come  in  any 
other  way  (xiv.  6).  To  worship  in  truth  is  not  merely  to  wor- 
ship in  sinceritj/y  but  with  a  worship  corresponding  to  the 
nature  of  its  object. 

For  the  father  (/col  yhp  6  irariip).  The  A.  V.  fails  to  ren- 
der icaX  alaOy  and  Bev.  places  it  in  the  margin.  It  emphasizes 
the  conclusiveness  of  the  reason  assigned :  "  for  the  Father 
aleOy  on  Bin  part^  seeketh,"  etc.  For  a  similar  use  of  /col,  see 
on  Matt.  viii.  9  ;  also  Matt.  xxvi.  73 ;  Acts  xix.  40. 


123  WORD  STUDiKS  IN  THB  NEW  TKrfTAMKNT. 

Seeketh  such  to  worship  Him  {roiovTovs  ^rirei  Toifj  -n-pov 
icvvovpTa<!  avTov).  A  rather  peculiar  co  net  ruction.  Lit.,  aeeketh 
such  as  those  worshipping  him :  as  His  worshippers.  Such  :  i.e., 
tlioae  who  worship  iu  spirit  and  Iq  truth,  and  are  therefore  i-eal 
{a\-i}^uM>l)  worshippers  of  the  real  God  {oKti^ivov  Qew,  ivii  3). 

24.  God  is  a  Spirit  {imtvfia  6  Se«).  Or,  as  Rev.,  in  marg., 
God  is  Spint.  Spirit  is  the  eiophatic  word  ;  Spirit  is  God. 
Tiie  phrase  describes  the  nature,  not  the  personality  of  God. 
Compare  the  expressions,  God  is  light ;  God  m  love  (I  John  L 
5 ;  iv.  8). 

25.  Messiah  cometh.  The  woman  UBea  the  Jewish  name, 
which  was  known  in  Samaria.  The  Samaritans  also  expected 
the  Messiah,  basing  their  hopes  on  snch  Scriptures  as  Cieu.  iii. 
15  ;  xlix.  10 ;  INum.  xxiv.  17 ;  Deut.  xviii.  15.  They  looked 
for  Him  to  restore  the  kingdom  of  Israel  and  to  re-establish  the 
worship  on  Gerizim,  where  they  supposed  that  the  tabernacle 
was  hidden.  They  called  Uim  ILtshab  or  Hathah,  tneaning  the 
Converter,  or,  accoi-ding  to  some,  the  Returning  One.  The 
Samaritan  idea  was  less  worldly  and  political  than  the  Jewish. 

Which  is  called  Christ.  Added  by  the  Evangelist.  Com- 
pare i.  41. 

He  is  come  (eiwiwts).  Emphatic;  pointing  to  Messiah  as 
contrasted  with  all  other  teachers. 

He  will  tell  {avarffeXei).  Lit.,  proclaim  or  announce.  The 
compounded  preposition  ic«,  the  radical  meaning  of  which  is 
vp,  signifies  throughout,  from  bottom  to  lop.  Tlie  verb  is  used 
in  xvi.  13,  of  the  revelations  of  the  Comforter. 

26.  I — am  He  (e^i*i)-  Lit.,  lam.  The  less  political  con- 
ception of  the  Samaritan  Messiah  made  it  possible  for  Jesus  to 
announce  Himself  to  the  woman  without  fear  of  being  misun- 
derstood as  He  was  by  the  Jews.     Compuru  Matt.  viii.  4 ;  xvi. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  123 

ThiB  incident  fnmishes  a  notable  illnstration  of  onr  Lord's 
love  for  hnman  soals,  and  of  His  skill,  tact,  and  firmness  in 
dealing  with  moral  degradation  and  ignorant  bigotry.  He  con- 
ciliates the  woman  bj  asking  a  favor.  Her  hesitation  arises 
less  from  prejudice  of  race  tlian  from  surprise  at  being  asked 
for  drink  bj  a  Jew  (compare  the  storj  of  Zacchsens).  He 
seizes  upon  a  near  and  familiar  object  as  the  key-note  of  His 
great  lesson.  He  does  not  overwhelm  her  with  new  knowledge, 
bat  stimnlates  qnestion  and  thought.  He  treats  her  sin  frank- 
ly, but  not  harshly.  He  is  content  with  letting  her  see  that  He 
is  aware  of  it,  knowing  that  through  Him,  as  the  Discemer^  she 
will  by  and  by  reach  Him  as  the  Forgwer.  Even  from  her 
ignorance  and  coarse  superstition  He  does  not  withhold  the 
sublimest  truth.  He  knows  her  imperfect  understanding,  but 
He  assumes  the  germinative  power  of  the  truth  itself.  He  is 
not  deterred  from  the  effort  to  plant  His  truth  and  to  rescue  a 
soul,  either  by  His  own  weariness  or  by  the  conventional  senti- 
ment which  frowned  upon  His  conversation  with  a  woman  in  a 
public  place.  Godet  contrasts  Jesus'  method  in  this  case  with 
that  employed  in  the  interview  with  Nicodemus.  '^With 
Kicodemus  He  started  from  the  idea  which  filled  every  Phari- 
see's heart,  that  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  deduced  therefrom 
the  most  rigorous  practical  consequences.  He  knew  that  He 
had  to  do  with  a  man  accustomed  to  the  discipline  of  the  law. 
Then  He  unveiled  to  him  the  most  elevated  troths  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  by  connecting  them  with  a  striking  Old  Testa- 
ment type,  and  contrasting  them  with  the  corresponding  feat- 
ures of  the  Pharisaic  programme.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  with 
a  woman  destitute  of  all  scriptural  training.  He  takes  His  point 
of  departure  from  the  commonest  thing  imaginable,  the  water 
of  the  well.  He  suddenly  exalts  it,  by  a  bold  antithesis,  to  the 
idea  of  that  eternal  life  which  quenches  forever  the  thirst  of 
the  human  heart.  Spiritual  aspiration  thus  awakened  in  her 
becomes  the  internal  prophecy  to  which  He  attaches  His  new 
revelations,  and  thus  reaches  that  teaching  on  tme  worship 
which  corresponds  as  directly  to  the  peculiar  prepossessions  of 
the  woman,  as  the  revelation  of  heavenly  things  corresponded  to 
the  inmost  thoughts  of  Kicodemus.     Before  the  latter  He  un- 


124 


WORD  STUDIHS  TS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


veils  Himself  as  tbe  onty-begotten  Son,  but  this  while  avoiding 
the  title  of  "  Cbriet."  With  tlie  woman  He  boldly  uses  tliie 
term;  but  be  does  not  dream  of  initiating  into  the  mysteriee 
of  incarnation  and  redemption  a  bouI  which  ie  yet  only  at  the 
first  elements  of  religiouB  life  and  knowledge  "  ("  Commentary 
on  tbe  Gospel  of  John  "), 

27.  Came — marvelled  {^\Sav — iSavfia^ov).  The  tense  of 
each  verb  is  different:  tbe  aorist,  came,  marking  ae  in  a  single 
point  of  time  tbe  diseiples'  arrival,  and  tbe  imperfect,  they  were 
wondering,  marking  something  continued :  they  stood  and  con- 
templated him  talking  with  the  woman,  and  all  tbe  while  were 
wondering  at  it. 


He  talked  (iXoKfi). 
So  Kev. 


Tbe  imperfect  tense,  he  was  BpeaJemg. 


The  woman.  Rev.,  correctly,  a  woman.  They  were  sur- 
prised, not  at  bis  talking  with  that  woman,  but  that  their 
teacher  sbonld  converse  with  a/ny  woman  in  public.  The  Rab- 
binical writings  taught  that  it  was  beneath  a  man's  dignity  to 
converse  with  women.  It  was  one  of  the  six  things  which  a 
Rabbi  might  not  do.  "  Let  no  one,"  it  is  written,  "converse 
with  a  woman  in  the  street,  not  even  with  his  own  wife."  It 
was  also  held  in  these  writings  that  a  woman  was  incapable  of 
profound  religious  instruction.  "  Rather  burn  the  sayings  of 
the  law  than  teacb  them  to  women." 


26.  Water.pot.     See  on  ii.  6. 

29.  All  things.  Jesus'  insight  in  the  one  case  convinced 
her  that  He  knew  everything,  and  to  her  awakened  conscience 
it  seemed  as  though  He  had  U^  everything. 

Is  not  tbie  the  Christ  (/*>jt(  iariv) !  Rather,  as  Rev.,  can 
this  he.  The  particle  suggests  a  negative  answer.  Surely  this 
oanTWt  he,  yet  with  some  hope. 

30.  Then.     Omit. 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  125 

Went  out— came  unto  Him  {i^fjIKSov — fifyxpvro  irp^aMv). 
Went  out  is  the  aorist  tense,  denoting  the  coming  forth  from 
the  city  as  a  single  act  at  a  point  of  time.  Came  is  the  imper- 
fect, denoting  action  in  progress.  The  observance  of  the  dis- 
tinction makes  the  narrative  more  graphic.  They  were  coming. 
Onto  should  be  toward {vpit^).  The  imperfect  also  is  required 
bj  the  following  words :  ^^  In  the  mean  while  "  (while  the  woman 
was  still  absent  and  the  Samaritans  toere  coming  toward  Him) 
^^  the  disciples  were  praying  ^^  Him  to  eat.  This  last  imperfect 
is  overlooked  bv  the  Rev. 

32.  Meat  (fipSHriv),  Originally  the  act  ofeatmg  (Col.  ii.  16), 
'but  often  of  that  which  is  eaten.  A  parallel  is  found  in  the 
vulgar  phrase,  a  thing  is  good  or  poor  ealvng.  The  word  is 
jtlwajs  used  bj  Paul  in  its  original  sense. 

Know  not  of  (ovk  olSare).  Incorrect.  Bev.,  rightly,  ye 
know  not ;  i.e.,  you  do  not  know  its  virtue. 

33.  Said  (IXcToy).  Imperfect  tense :  hega/n  to  eay^  or  were 
eayvng.    The  question  was  discussed  among  them. 

One  to  another.    Fearing  to  ask  Jesus. 

34.  Meat  (fip&fui).  A  difiPerent  word  from  that  in  ver.  32, 
^signifying  what  is  eaten. 

To  do  {Zva  TroMt)).  Lit.,  in  order  that  I  do.  Emphasizing 
the  end  and  not  the  process.  Frequently  so  used  in  John.  See 
on  iii.  19. 

Finish  {reXeuSxTto).  Better,  as  Bev.,  acconyplish.  Not  merely 
bring  to  an  end,  hxit  perfect.  From  riXeu)^,  perfect.  The  verb 
is  characteristic  of  John,  and  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
See  V.  36 ;  xvii.  4 ;  xix.  28 ;  1  John  ii.  5 ;  iv.  12 ;  Heb.  ii.  10 ; 
T.  9,  etc. 

35.  Say  not  ye.  In  what  follows,  Jesus  is  contrasting  the 
natural  harvest-time  with  the  spiritual,  which  was  immediately 
lo  take  place  in  the  ingathering  of  the  Samaritans.     Ye  is  em- 


WORD  STUDIBS  W  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

phatic,  marking  what  the  disciples  expect  according  to  tlie 
order  of  natnre.  As  you  look  on  these  green  fields  between 
Ebal  and  Gerizim,  ye  say,  it  is  yet  four  months  to  harvest. 


There  are  four  months  [rerpdftfjvov  eirrw).  Properly,  it 
is  a  apace  of  four  months.     Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

Harvest  (Stpiv/un).     See  on  Luke  x.  2. 

White  {Xevicai).     See  on  Luke  ix.  29. 

Already  unto  harvest.  Spiritual  harvest  The  crowd  of 
Samaritans  now  pouring  out  toward  the  well  was  to  Jeens  as  a 
ripe  harvest- field,  prefiguring  the  larger  harvest  of  mankind 
which  would  be  reaped  by  His  disciples.  By  the  best  texts 
the  already  is  joined  with  the  next  verse,  and  the  «ol,  and,  at 
the  beginning  of  that  verse  is  omitted :  Already  he  that  r6WpeiJ\. 
receifveth,  etc 

Wages  ifLia^v).     See  on  2  Pet  ii.  13. 

Unto  life  eternal.  This  is  explained  either,  which  shall  not 
perish  btU  endure  unto  eternal  life,  or  into  life  eternal,  as  into 
a  granary.     Compare  ver.  14. 

Together  (d^S).  The  construction  is  peculiar:  that  both 
the  sower  may  rejoice  together  and  the  reaper.  Together  signi- 
fies not  in  common,  but  simultaneously.  So  quickly  does  the 
harvest  follow  the  gospel-seed  sown  among  the  Samaritans, 
that  the  sower  and  the  reaper  rejoice  together. 

37,  Herein  (^i*  rourp).  Lit,  in  this.  In  this  relation  be- 
tween sower  and  reaper. 

Is  that  saying  true  (o  \6yo<!  earlii  6  aXrjStvm).  Rev.,  prop- 
erly, the  saying ;  the  common  proverb.  True :  not  only  aaya 
the  truth,  but  the  saying  is  completely  fulfilled  according  to  the 
ideal  in  the  sowing  and  reaping  of  which  Jesus  speaks.  The 
literal  rendering  of  the  Greek,  as  given  above,  is,  "  the  saying  is 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  127 

the  true  (saying) ; "  but  several  high  authorities  omit  the  article 
before  true. 

38.  I  sent  (iyi^  afiri<rr€£Ka).  The  /is  emphatic.  The  aorist 
tense  points  back  to  the  mission  of  the  disciples  as  involved  in 
their  original  call. 

Other  men.  Jesus  himself  and  all  who  had  prepared  the 
way  for  Him,  such  as  John  the  Baptist 

Labored  {teeicowidieeuri)^  The  perfect  tense.  Bev.,  rightly, 
have  labored,  their  labor  showing  its  effects  in  the  present  case. 
On  the  word  laboTf  see  on  Luke  v.  6.    Compare  Josh.  xxiv.  13. 

39.  The  saying  (rhv  Xoyw).  Bev.,  better,  the  word.  It 
does  not  refer  merely  to  the  woman's  statement,  He  told  me, 
etc.,  but  to  her  whole  testimony  (jAafrrvpovarf^)  concerning  Christ. 

40.  To  tarry  (fLeivai).     Better,  as  Bev.,  to  abide. 

41.  Many  more  {woXX^  wXeiovi).  Lit,  more  by  much;  i.e., 
far  more,  with  reference  to  the  simple  iroXXol,  many,  in  ver.  39. 

42.  Said  (IXeyoy).  The  imperfect  tense :  said  to  the  woman 
as  they  successively  met  her. 

Saying  {KaXtiai),  Another  word  is  designedly  substituted  for 
Xirfovy  word  (vv.  39,  41).  In  ver.  39  Xoyo^j  word,  is  used  of  the 
woman,  from  the  Evangelist's  standpoint,  as  being  a  testimony 
to  Christ.  Here  the  Samaritans  distinguish  between  the  more 
authoritative  and  dignified  v)ord  of  Jesus,  and  the  talk  of  the 
woman.  Bev.,  speaking.  Compare  the  kindred  verb  X.aXio>,  in 
vv.  26,  27 ;  also  viii.  43 ;  Matt  xxvi.  73. 

The  Christ.    The  best  texts  omit. 

The  Saviour  (6  o-orr^p).  John  uses  the  word  only  here  and 
1  John  iv.  14.  See  on  Jesus,  Matt.  i.  21.  It  is  significant  that 
this  conception  of  Christ  should  have  been  first  expressed  by  a 
Samaritan. 


138  WORD  BTUDIBB  IK  THB  NBW  TB9TAMRNT. 

44.  For — in  His  own  country  (7^^ — iv  rp  iSi'^  -n-aTpiSt). 
Fo>-  assigns  the  reaeoii  wiiy  Jeeus  went  iuto  Qalilee.  By  IIi» 
own  coufUrt/,  Judtea  seems  to  be  meant,  though  almost  tlia 
eame  phrase,  His  country,*  is  used  by  the  three  Synoptista  of 
Nazareth  in  tialilee.  John's  Gospel,  however,  deals  with  the 
Jitdtean  rather  than  with  the  Galilean  inioistiy  of  Jesus,  and 
the  phrase,  His  own  country,  is  appropriate  to  Judasa  as  "  the 
true  home  and  fatherland  of  the  prophets,  the  land  which  con- 
tained the  city  of  Messiah's  birtli,  the  city  associated  with 
Ilim  alike  in  ancient  prophecy  and  in  p>opular  expectation." 
Hence,  at  Jernsalem,  the  people  said,  "  ilath  not  the  Scriptures 
said  that  Christ  coiiieth  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  out  of  the 
town  of  Bethlehem,  where  David  was"  (vii.  42}?  In  vv.  1-3 
it  is  stated  that  Jesus  left  Judaea  because  of  a  controversy  ex- 
cited by  the  Pharisees,  whom  John  always  marks  as  the  leaders 
of  tho  opposition  to  Jesus.  Further,  we  are  told  that  at  Jeru- 
salem, though  many  believed  on  His  name,  yet  Jesns  did  not 
trust  them  (ii.  23,  24).  According  to  this  explanation,  yiip,for, 
is  used  in  its  natnral  and  most  obvious  sense  as  assigning  the 
reason  for  Christ's  departure  into  Galilee.  The  proverb  is 
naturally  suggested  by  the  reference  to  Galilee,  where  Jesus 
had  used  it  at  Nazareth  (see  Matt.  xiii.  57).  The  ort  a^.  when 
then  {(hen  indicating  logical  sequence  and  not  time)  of  ver.  45 
follows  naturally  upon  the  citation  of  the  proverb,  signifying 
a  correspondence  between  the  character  of  His  reception  in 
Galilee  and  the  motive  of  His  going  thither.  Finally,  if  we 
understand  by  HU  own  country,  Nazareth,  we  are  compelled 
to  explain  7^,  for,  from  ver.  46 ;  Jesus  went  to  Cana  (north 
of  Nazareth)  without  passing  through  His  native  place,  for  the 
reason  mentioned.     Tliis  seems  forced  and  arbitrary.f 


*  In  Halt,  xili.  S7,  Tisohendorf  reads  as  here,  ir  ry  tllff  mrrpfSh  in  hU  own 
anmtry.      Wesloott  and  Hart,  ir  if  nrrpii,  alrroi. 

\  I  Lave  glren  what  «uems,  on  th«  w^ole.  the  mciit  simple  and  natural  ei- 
plsnatlon.  though  agalnal  a  hoat  ot  high  authoriliea.  The  variouB  interpreta- 
tions form  ■  bewllderln;  jungle.  All  of  them  ore  open  to  objection.  0ns 
of  the  moat  clear  and  Bimple  disauuiona  of  the  pugagn  ma;  be  found  \a 
SohafTfl  Popular  Commentary  on  the  Oofipel  ot  John,  edited  bj  Profi^ssoni 
Uilligan  aud  Moultau,  wliHru  this  exptauation  is  adopted,  though  Professor 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  129 

46.  Received  {iSi^airro).    See  on  iii.  32. 

46.  Jesus.    The  best  texts  omit. 

Cana  (ri^vKaua).  Note  the  article  the  Cans,  and  see  on  ii. 
1.    The  article  defines  the  Oana  previously  referred  to. 

Nobleman  (ficuriKuco^),  Properly  an  adjective,  meaning 
roi/cUj  from  ficuriXei^,  king.  It  occurs  in  John  only,  here  and 
ver.  49 ;  and  in  all  other  passages  is  used  as  an  adjective  (Acts 
xii.  20,  21 ;  Jas.  iL  8).  Literally  here,  a  kinj^s  officer.  Wye, 
litUe  Kmg. 

Was  sick  (i/cr^ii^i).     See  on  infirmUieaj  Luke  v.  15. 

47.  He  went  {ainjK^ev).  Lit,  went  away  {inri).  Leaving 
his  son  for  the  time. 

Heal  (Id^rffrai).     See  on  Matt  viii.  7,  and  Luke  vi.  19. 

At  the  point  of  death  {fifAeXKev  MvSviia'ieeai).  Lit,  toae 
about  to  die.  Compare  Mark's  uncouth  phrase,  iaxdrtt^  ix<U9 
lieth  at  the  jmnt  ofdeathj  v.  23,  on  which  see  note.  Compare 
also  John  xii.  33. 


48.  Said  unto  him,  Except  ye  see.  Addressing  the  noble- 
man {him\  but  having  in  mind  the  Galilean  population  which 
he  represents  {ye). 

Signs  and  wonders  {ofiiieia  icaX  ripara).  See  on  Matt 
xxiv.  24.  SfffJi^'ia^  signSj  and  ipya,  worhsy  are  John's  character- 
istic words  for  miracles.  See  v.  20 ;  vii.  21 ;  xiv.  10 ;  ii.  23 ; 
ri.  2,  etc. 

Ye  will  not  {ovfiii).  The  double  negative  is  correctly  given 
by  Rev.,  "  ye  will  in  nounse.^^ 


Schaff  in  Lange  calls  it  *'  far-f etched."  This  is  also  the  view  of  Canon  West- 
cott.  Other  explanations  are:  Galilee  generallj;  Kaiareth;  Lower  Galilee, 
in  which  Nazareth  wai  situated,  as  distingniBhed  from  Upper  Galilee,  in  which 
was  Capernaum. 

Vol.  IL— 9 


130  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NEW  TE8TAMBNT. 

49.  Child  {nmUav).  Dimiuntive.  Dt,  vi>/  little  one;  a 
toueli  of  tenderneea. 

50.  Went  his  way  {eiroptvero).  But  thus  the  force  of  the 
imperfect  ifl  lost,  whicit  harmonizeB  with  the  flucceediiig  sen- 
tence :  he  waa  proceeding  on  liis  waj*,  aud  as  he  ivas  naw  going 
down,  etc 

51.  Servants  (SoOXo*).  Properly,  hondrservarUa.  See  on 
Matt.  IX.  2B ;  Mark  ix.  35. 

Thy  son  liveth  (o  vl6s  aov  ^).  The  beet  texts,  however, 
read  aiirov,  his.  So  Rev.,  that  his  son  lived.  Christ  uses  vw^, 
son,  inetead  of  vtuZiav.  liiile  one,  expreeeing  the  worth  of  the 
child  as  representing  the  family.     See  on  i.  12. 

52.  Then  (oSi').  Not  a  particle  of  time,  bat  of  sequence. 
Kev.,  so  he  inquired. 

Began  to  amend  {jcoiv^repov  iayev).  A  pecaliar  phrase, 
occnrring  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Lit.,  had  Aimself 
better.  Kofii^repov  ie  from  Ko/i^ro?,  weJi-dreesed,  well-cared- 
for,  elegant;  and  this  from  leofUa,  to  take  ca/re  of.  The  idea, 
of  the  phrase  is  conveyed  in  the  familiar  Engheli  expression: 
He  is  doing  well,  cr  nicely,  or  bravely.  A  parallel  is  cited  by 
the  commentators  from  Arrian :  "  When  the  doctor  comes  in, 
yon  must  not  be  afraid  as  to  what  he  will  say ;  nor  if  he  says, 
'  You  are  doing  bravely  *  (ico/i^roK  ^ew),  must  you  give  way  to 
excessive  joy." 

At  the  seventh  hour  {Sipav  edSofirjv).  The  accusative  case 
denotes  not  a  point  of  time,  but  duTotion :  during  the  seventh 
hour. 

Fever  (Trupero?).  From  irvp.ji/re.  So  the  Latin /eSrw,  which 
is  iorferhris,  from  Jerveo,  to  glow  with  heat. 

Left  (a^Kev),     Lit.,  sent  hiyn  away.     See  on  ver.  3. 

54.  This  is  again  the  second  miracle,  etc.     Lit,  this  did 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  131 

Je9u%  again  as  a  second  sign.  The  pleonasm  in  agai/n^  the  sec- 
aruij  is  only  apparent.  Other  miracles  had  indeed  been  wrought 
between  these  two  ;  but  John  emphasizes  these  two  as  marking 
Jesus'  coming  from  Judsea  to  Oalilee.  The  healing  of  the 
nobleman's  cliild  was  the  second  miracle,  only  in  respect  of  its 
taking  place  upon  Jesus'  withdrawal  from  Judsa  into  Oalilee. 
Hence  the  again.  He  wrought  a  miracle  again,  when  He 
again  came  into  Oalilee,  and  this  miracle  was  the  second,  aa 
marking  His  second  coming. 


CHAPTER   V. 

1.  A  feast  (hprrii).  Or  festmal.  What  festival  is  uncer- 
tain. It  has  been  identified  with  the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ;  also  with  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the 
Feast  of  Dedication,  and  the  Feast  of  Purim. 

2.  Sheep-market  (t$  trpofiaruc^).  The  word  is  an  adjec- 
tive pertaining  to  sheep,  which  requires  to  be  completed  with 
another  word,  not  with  arfopq,,  market,  but  with  inSX^,  gate.  This 
gate  was  near  the  temple  on  the  east  of  the  city.  See  Neh.  iiL 
1,  32 ;  xii.  39.  Some  editors  join  the  adjective  with  the  fol- 
lowing KoKvfi/SiiSpaj  pool,  making  the  latter  word  icoXvfifi'qBpff 
(the  dative  case),  and  reading  the  skeeppocl.  Wye,  a  standing 
water  of  hearts. 

Pool  {/coXufifiiiSpa).  In  the  New  Testament  only  in  this 
chapter  and  ix.  7,  11.  Properly,  a  pool  for  swimmingy  from 
Ko\vfifida>,  to  dive.  In  Ecel.  ii.  6  (Sept.)  it  is  used  of  a  reser- 
voir in  a  garden.  The  Hebrew  word  is  from  the  verb  to  kneel 
down,  and  means,  therefore,  a  kneeling-plsLce  for  cattle  or  men 
when  drinking.  In  ecclesiastical  language,  the  baptismal  fimt, 
and  the  baptistery  itself. 

Called  (hriKeyofihnf).  Strictly,  sumam>ed,  the  name  having 
perhaps  supplanted  some  earlier  name. 


132  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Bethasda  {Bj)3etrSd,).  Commonly  interpreted  House  of 
Meroy;  otiiers  Hottse  of  the  Portico.  The  readinge  also  vary. 
Tisclieiidorf  and  Westcott  and  Hort  give  BifS^ia^,  BethscUfia, 
House  of  the  Olive.  The  eite  cannot  be  identified  with  any 
certainty.  Dr.  RobioBuii  thinks  it  may  be  the  Fountain  of  tlie 
Virgin,  the  npper  fountain  of  Siloain.  See  Tiionison's  "Lund 
and  Book,"  "  Southern  Paiestine  and  Jenisalein,''  pp.  468— i61. 

Porches  (o-to^^).     Cloieters,  covered  porticoes. 

3.  Great  multitude.     The  best  texts  omit  grecU. 

Impotent  {aaAevovvrwv).  Kev.,  sick.  Yet  the  A.  V,  gives 
the  literal  ma&mug,  people  wUhovi  strength.  Wye,  languish- 
ing. 

Withered  (f^pwc).     Lit.,  dry.     So  Wye. 
The  following  words,  to  the  end  of  ver.  4,  are  omitted  by 
the  best  texts. 

5.  Had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight  years.  lit.,  hm^ing 
thirty  and  eight  years  in  hie  injirmiiy. 

6.  Had  been  now  a  long  time  {iroKvv  ^  -xpovov  ex*i). 
Lit.,  he  hath  already  much  time. 

Wilt  thou  (5«X«?).  Not  merely,  do  you  wish,  bot  are  you  in 
earnest  f  See  on  Matt.  1.  19.  Jesus  appeals  to  the  energy  of 
his  will.  Not  improbably  he  had  fallen  into  apathy  through 
his  long  sickness.     Compare  Acts  iii.  4;  John  vii.  17. 

Whole  {irfiiji;).     Sound. 

7.  Put  OaXji).  Lit,,  oaw(;  indicating  the  haaty  movement 
required  to  bring  him  to  the  water  before  its  agitation  should 
have  ceased.     See  on  Mark  vii.  30 ;  Luke  xvi.  20. 

8.  Bed  {Kpa^^arov).  Used  by  both  Mark  and  Luke.  See  od 
Mark  ii.  4,  and  compare  Acta  v.  15;  ix.  33. 


kk 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  133 

10.  Cured  {reSepam-eufiivf).  See  on  Matt  yiii.  7;  Luke  v. 
15 ;  Acts  xvii.  26. 

To  carry  (2/mu).  Rev.,  more  correctlj,  to  take  up.  It  is 
Jesos'  own  word  in  ver.  8. 

11.  He  that  made — ^the  same  (o  iraiii<ra^ — itceuH)^).  The 
demonstrative  pronoun  points  with  emphasis  to  the  subject  of 
the  preceding  clause.  A  characteristic  usage  of  John.  See  L 
18,  33 ;  ix.  37  ;  x.  1 ;  xii.  48,  etc. 

12.  Then.    Omit 

What  man  is  he,  etc.  ^'See  the  cunning  of  malice.  Thej 
do  not  say,  ^  Who  is  he  that  healed  thee  ? '  but,  ^  Who  bade  thee 
take  up  thy  bed  ? ' "     (Qrotius,  in  Trench,  "  Miracles.") 

Take  up  thy  bed.    Omit  hed.    Lit,  take  up  and  undk. 

13.  He  that  was  healed  (laSek).  Oompare  ver.  10,  and 
note  the  different  word  for  healing.     See  references  there. 

Who  it  was  {rk  iar^v).    The  present  tense,  who  it  is. 

Had  conveyed  Himself  away  (ifei^euo-ev).  The  verb  means, 
literally,  to  turn  the  head  aaide^  in  order  to  avoid  something. 
Hence,  generally,  to  retire  or  withdraw.  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament. 

14.  Findeth — said.  Note  the  lively  interchange  of  the 
tenses,  as  in  ver.  13. 

Sin  no  more  (jiv/cen  ofidfrrave).  Ko  longer  continue  to  sin. 
See  on  Matt.  i.  21.  Jesus  thus  shows  His  knowledge  that  the 
sickness  was  the  result  of  sin. 

A  worse  thing.  Than  even  those  thirty-eight  years  of  suf- 
fering. 

Come  unto  thee  {a-oi  yhnrrai).  Rev.,  better,  hefaU  thee. 
Lit,  come  to  pass. 


134  WORD  BTCTDIBS  IN  THE  NSW  TBSTAMKNT. 

15.  Told  {av^yyeiKev).  See  on  iv.25.  The  best  texU,  bow* 
ever,  read  uirev,  said. 

16.  Did  the  Jews  persecute.  The  imperfect  tense  (iBiet- 
«oc)  niigiit  be  reudered  began  to  peraeeute,  as  this  is  an  open- 
ing of  hostilities  against  Jesus,  or,  more  probably,  corresponds 
witli  the  same  tenee  in  iiraUi,  he  did,  or  better,  waa  woni  to  do. 
AuoKa,  to  persecute,  is  originally  to  ran  after^  to  jmreue  wiA 
hostile  purpose,  and  thence  to  harass. 

And  sought  to  kill  Him.    The  best  texts  omit, 

H«  did.  See  above.  Godet  observes:  "the  imperfect  ma- 
lignantly expresses  the  idea  that  the  violation  of  the  Sabbath 
has  become  with  Rim  a  sort  of  maxim." 

17.  Worketh,  The  diBciission  tnrned  on  work  on  the  Sab- 
bath. Tho  Fatlier's  work  in  maintaining  and  redeeming  the 
world  has  continued  from  the  creation  until  the  present  mo- 
ment (efti9  dpTi) :  uniil  now,  not  interrupted  by  the  Sabbath. 

And  I  work  (leiyw  epya^o/iai.).  Or,  I  also  -work.  The  two 
clauses  are  co-ordinated.  The  relation,  as  Meyer  observes,  is 
not  that  of  imitation,  or  eiavvpley  but  of  eqaaliiy  of  vnil  and 
procedure.  Jesus  does  not  violate  the  divine  ideal  of  the  Sab- 
bath by  His  holy  activity  on  that  day.  "  Man's  trne  rest  is  not 
a  reatfrom  human,  earthly  labor,  but  a  rest /or  divine,  heavenly 
labor.  Thus  tho  merely  negative,  traditional  observance  of  the 
Sabbath  is  placed  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  positive,  final  ful- 
filment of  spiritual  service,  for  which  it  was  a  preparation" 
(Westcott). 

18.  Had  broken  (?Kve).  Lit,  wtw  loosing:  the  imperfect 
tense.  See  on  He  did,  ver.  16.  Not,  broke  the  Sabbath  in 
any  particular  case,  bnt  was  annulling  the  law  and  duty  of  Sab> 
bath  observance. 


His  Father  {-Traripa  iStov).     Properly,  His  oton  Father, 
Rev. 


8o 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK.  136 

19.  Verily,  verily.    See  on  i.  61. 

But  what  He  seeth.  Referring  to  oan  do  nothing j  not  to 
of  himself.  Jesus,  being  one  with  Qod,  can  do  nothing  apart 
&om  Hun. 

The  Father  do  {top  irartpa  iroioihrra).  Bev.,  rightly,  doing. 
The  participle  brings  out  more  sharply  the  coincidence  of  action 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son  :  '^  the  inner  and  immediate 
intuition  which  the  Son  perpetually  has  of  the  Father's  work** 
(Meyer). 

Likewise  {ofjLoin^).  Better,  as  Rev.,  in  like  manner.  Idke- 
wise  is  popularly  understood  as  equivalent  to  also ;  but  the 
word  indicates  identity  of  action  based  upon  identity  of  nature. 

20.  Loveth  (^iXeS).  To  love  is  expressed  by  two  words  in 
the  New  Testament,  0iXic»  and  arfam-6M.  ^A^airdw  indicates  a 
reasoning,  discriminating  attachment,  founded  in  the  conviction 
that  its  object  is  worthy  of  esteem,  or  entitled  to  it  on  account 
of  benefits  bestowed.  $4Xia>  represents  a  warmer,  more  in- 
stinctive sentiment,  more  closely  allied  to  feeling,  and  imply- 
ing more  passion.  Hence  arfaircuo  is  represented  by  the  Latin 
diligOy  the  fundamental  idea  of  which  is  seleotion^  the  deliberate 
choice  of  one  out  of  a  number,  on  sufficient  grounds,  as  an  object 
of  regard.  Thus  ^\€o>  emphasizes  the  affectional  element  of 
love,  and  af^foiraoi}  the  intelligent  element.  Socrates,  in  Xeno- 
phon's  "Memorabilia,"  advises  his  friend  Aristarchus  to  allevi- 
ate the  necessities  of  his  dependents  by  furnishing  means  to 
set  them  at  work.  Aristarchus  having  acted  upon  his  advice, 
Xeuophon  says  that  the  women  in  his  employ  loved  {i<f>tKoini) 
him  as  their  protector,  while  he  in  turn  loved  (jf^/dira)  them 
because  they  were  of  use  to  him  ("  Memorabilia,"  ii.,  7,  §  12). 
Jesus'  sentiment  toward  Martha  and  Mary  is  described  by 
fiydira^  John  xi.  5.  Men  are  bidden  to  love  (hyawav)  God 
(Matt.  xxii.  37  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  3) ;  never  <f>i\€iv,  since  love  to  God 
implies  an  intelligent  discernment  of  His  attributes  and  not 
merely  an  affectionate  sentiment.     Both  elements  are  combined 


136  WORD  BTDDIKS  TS  THE  NBW  TB8TAMBHT. 

in  the  Father's  love  for  the  Son  (Matt.  iii.  17  ;  Jolm  iii.  35  ;  v, 
20).  'AyaTTii  is  used  thronghout  the  panegyric  of  love  in  1  Cor. 
xiii.,  and  an  examination  of  that  chapter  will  show  how  large  a 
part  the  discrioiinating  element  plays  in  the  Apostle's  concep- 
tion of  love.  The  noun  ar/dm)  nowhere  appears  in  classical 
writings.  As  Trench  remarks,  it  "  is  a  word  bom  within  the 
bosom  of  revealed  religion."  'Epda,  in  which  the  idea  of  sen- 
eaal  passion  predominates,  is  nowhere  used  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Trench  has  some  interesting  remarks  on  its  tendency 
toward  a  higher  set  of  associations  in  the  Platonic  writinga 
("  SynonymB,"  p.  42). 

Greater  works  will  He  show  Him.  As  Jeeus  does  what- 
ever He  sees  the  Father  do  (ver.  19),  the  showing  of  greater 
works  will  be  the  signal  for  Jesus  to  do  them.  On  works,  ae  a 
characteristic  word  in  Jolm,  see  on  iv.  47. 

Ye  may  marvel.  The  ye  is  emphatic  (u/Mtf)  and  is  ad- 
dressed to  those  who  questioned  His  authority,  whose  wonder 
would  therefore  be  that  of  astonishment  rather  than  of  admir- 
ing faith,  but  might  lead  to  faith.  Plato  saya,  "  Wonder  is  the 
feeling  of  a  philosopher,  and  philosophy  begins  in  wonder " 
("  Theffitetus,"  155);  and  Clement  of  Alexandria,  cited  by 
Westcott,  "  He  that  wonders  shall  reign,  and  he  that  reigns 
shall  rest"     Compare  Acts  iv.  13. 

21.  Raiseth — quickeneth.     Physically  and  spiritaally. 

The  Son  quickeneth.  Not  rotseiA  and  quickeneth.  The 
quickening,  however  {i^wviroiel,  ioaketh  alive),  includes  the 
raising,  so  that  the  two  clauses  are  coextensive.  In  popnlar 
conception  the  raising  precedes  the  quickening;  but,  in  fact, 
X\\%  snaking  ali/oe  is  the  controlling  fact  of  the  raising.  ^Eyeipei, 
raiaetA,  means  primarily  awaketh. 

22.  For  the  Father  {ov&i  jitp  6  irar^p).  Tlie  A.  V.  misBes 
the  climax  in  ovBe ;  not  even  the  Father,  who  might  be  expected 
to  be  judge. 


60BPBL  OF  JOHN.  137 

Hath  committed  (S^&o/cei/).  Rev.,  given.  The  habitual 
word  for  the  beBtowment  of  the  privileges  and  functions  of  the 
Son.     See  ver.  36 ;  iii.  35 ;  vi.  37,  39 ;  x.  29,  etc. 

All  judgment  (r^y  KpUrw  waa-av).  lit,  the  judgment 
voihMy, 

23.  Which  sent  Him.  A  phrase  peculiar  to  John,  and  used 
only  by  the  Lord,  of  the  Father.  See  iv.  34 ;  vi  38,  39 ;  vii 
16,  28,  33,  etc 

24.  Heareth.    Closely  connected  with  helAeneik. 
Hath  eternal  life.     See  on  iii.  36. 

Shall  not  come  into  condemnation  (ew  icpltrw  ovk  !pxenu). 
The  present  tense,  cometh  not  So  Rev.  Not  oondemnoHon^ 
but  judgment,  as  Rev.  See  on  iii.  17.  Wye,  ccymeth  not  into 
doom.  The  present,  cometh,  states  the  general  jynncijjle  or 
order. 

From  death  {iic  Sapdrov).  Rev.,  correctly,  out  of  deaths 
pointing  to  the  previous  condition  in  which  he  was. 

Life  (t^i^  &^v).     The  life ;  the  ideal  of  perfect  life. 

25.  The  dead.     Spiritually. 

26.  As — so  {&air€p — ovtw:).  The  correspondence  is  that  of 
fact,  not  of  degree. 

Hath  he  given  {iZoncev).  Rev.,  more  strictly,  game^  the 
aorist  tense  pointing  back  to  the  eternal  past. 

27.  Authority.     See  on  i.  12. 

Also.    Omit. 

The  Son  of  man.  Better,  a  son  of  man.  The  article  is 
wanting.    The  authority  is  assigned  to  Him  as  being  very  man. 


k 


WORD  STDDIEB  IN  THB  KBnV  TKBTAHRNT. 

John  uses  the  article  everywhere  with  this  phrase,  except  here 
aad  Apoc.  i.  13  ;  xiv.  14.     See  on  Luite  vi.  22. 

28.  The  graves  {to« /ii^/ieii>«).  Rev.,  better;  tomia.  Two 
words  are  used  in  the  New  Testament  for  the  place  of  burial, 
To^of,  and  fivtjfieiov  or  fiin}/ta.  The  former  emphasizes  the 
idea  of  burial  (^oittw,  to  bury);  the  latter  of  preserving  the 
tnemmy  of  the  dead ;  from  fiifunja-Kta,  to  remind. 

29.  Have  done  good— have  done  evil.  Note  again  the 
use  of  the  different  verba  for  doing  with  good  and  evil.  See 
on  iii.  21.     On  the  word  for  eail  (^ouXa),  see  on  iii.  20. 

Resurrection  of  life  {dvovrao-u'  C<'*^)-  1^)i»  phrase  occurs 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament:  eo  remrrecUon  of  judgment 
{avdaraaw  KpLtrfoK). 

30.  Of  the  Father.    Omit.    Utrr^o/BimtAatseta. 

31.  If  I  (e^f  eyo)).     The  /expressed  for  emphasis:  lalone. 
True  (oXijdiJt).     As  distinguished  from  false.     See  on  i.  d. 

33.  Ye  sent.  Rev.,  rightly,  hwve  sent.  The  perfect  tense, 
with  allusion  to  something  abiding  in  its  results.  Similarly, 
hare  wUne«8  should  be  hoik  borne.  Note  the  expressed  ye 
(u/ici«),  emphatically  marking  the  contrast  between  the  human 
testimony  which  the  Jews  demanded,  and  the  divine  testimony 
on  which  Jesus  relies  (ver.  34). 

34.  But  I  («7o«  6^).     Emphatic,  in  contrast  with  ye  (ver.  33). 

Receive  (Xti^atw).    See  on  iii.  32. 

Testimony  (t^v  fiaprvplav).  Rev.,  properly  the  witness. 
The  restoration  of  the  article  is  important.  It  has  the  force  of 
my,  marking  the  witness  as  characteristic  of  Chrisfa  work. 
The  only  testimony  which  I  accept  as  proof. 

From  man.    Or  from  a  man,  with  a  primaiy  reference  te 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  139 

the  Baptist.    Kev.  renders,  the  toUness  which  I  receive  is  not 
Jram  man. 

These  things.    With  reference  to  the  Baptist. 

Ye  maj  be  saved.  The  ye  {vfiek\  marking  them  as  those 
who  might  be  influenced  by  the  inferior,  homan  testimony, 
though  they  did  not  apprehend  the  divine  testimony. 

35.  A  burning  and  shining  light  (o  Xdxyo^  o  Kcuofxevo^  tcai 
^Mlvtev).  Bev.,  correctly,  the  lamp  thai  bumeth  cmd  ehineth, 
Avyyo^,  lampy  as  contrasted  with  the  light  (^£9).  See  i.  5,  7, 
8,  9 ;  and  compare  viii.  12 ;  ix.  5 ;  xii.  46.  Wye,  lantern. 
The  Baptist  did  not,  like  Jesus,  shine  by  his  own  light.  The 
definite  article  with  lamp^  points  to  it  as  a  familiar  household 
object.  Bitming  hints  at  the  fact  that  the  lamp  gives  but  a 
transitory  light.    In  burning  the  oil  is  consumed. 

Ye  were  willing.    Again  the  emphatic  v/i€i9,  ye. 

To  rejoice  {oyfaXKiaa'Sfivai).  The  word  signifies  eandtant^ 
lively  joy.  See  Matt  v.  12 ;  Luke  i.  47 ;  z.  21 ;  1  Pet.  i.  6. 
The  interest  in  the  Baptist  was  a  frivolous,  superficial,  and 
short-lived  excitement.  Bengel  says,  ^^  they  were  attracted  by 
his  brig/UneeSj  not  by  his  warmth^ 

36.  Greater  witness  {n]v  fuifyrvplav  i^et^).  The  article, 
omitted  in  A.  Y.,  has  the  force  of  my,  as  in  ver.  84.  Bev.,  the 
witness  which  I  have  is  greater. 

Hath  given.     See  on  ver.  22. 

To  finish  (Zva  reXeuMrai).  Lit,  in  order  that  I  should  ao- 
4xmiplish.    Bev.,  accomplish.    See  on  iv.  34. 

The  same  works  {airrii  r^  ipya).  Bev.,  more  correctly,  the 
very  works. 

37.  Himself  (a vT^).  The  best  texts  substitute  ^/ccuhk,  he; 
reading,  ^  the  Father  which  sent  me,  He  hath  borne  witness." 
So  Bev. 


140 


WOED  STODDB  IW  THB  JIBW  THBTAKBUT. 


Voice^shape.  Not  referring  to  the  descent  of  tlie  dove 
and  the  voice  from  heaven  at  Jeeiis'  baptism,  but  generally  and 
figuratively  to  God's  witneee  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptiiree. 
This  is  in  harmony  with  the  succeeding  reference  to  the  word. 

38.  His  word.  Emphatic,  commencing  the  sentence.  Com- 
pare xvii.  6  sqq. ;  1  John  i.  10 ;  ii.  14. 

30.  Search  {epcvvdre).  Rev.,  rightly,  ye  search.  Jesus  is 
appealing  to  a  familiar  practice  of  which y*or  in  them  ye  think 
is  explanatory.  See  1  Pet.  i.  11 ;  Rom.  viii,  27 ;  1  Cor.  1).  10  j 
Apoc.  ii.  23. 

The  scriptures  (t^  yptuft^).  Lit,  the  vtritingB ;  pofliiUj' 
with  a  hint  at  the  contrast  with  the  word  (ver.  38). 

They  ieKelvat).    Those  very  acriptnres. 

40.  Aiid.  More  than  a  simple  copula.  Bather  and  j/et. 
See  on  Luke  xviii.  7. 

Ye  will  not  (ov^cXerc).  Indicating  Btobboni  deterroiDatioo. 
See  on  Matt.  i.  19. 

41.  I  receive  not  honor  from  men.  The  Greek  order  is: 
glor;/  from  men  I  receive  7U)t.  Compare  ver.  34.  Uis  glory 
consists  in  his  loving  fellowship  with  God.  Men  who  do  not 
love  God  are  not  in  sympathy  with  Him. 

42.  I  know  (eyvuxa).     See  on  ii.  24. 

The  love  of  God.  Love  toward  God.  This  was  the  snm- 
mary  of  their  own  law.  The  plirase  occurs  elsewhere  in  the 
Gospels  only  in  Luke  xi.  42. 

In  you  {ev  eauTOK).  Rev.,  rightly,  in  youraelvea.  Compare 
H.  53 ;  1  John  v.  10 ;  Mark  iv.  17. 

44.  Ve  believe.  Again  the  emphatic  ye,  the  reason  for  the 
emphasis  being  given  in  the  succeeding  clause. 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  141 

Which  receive  (Kafifidvovre^).  Lit,  reoewing  (as  ye  do): 
eeeing  that  je  receive. 

Seek  not  the  honor  that  cometh  from  God  only  {ical  riflf 
So^op  rijv  ircLph  roS  ijl6vov  Seov  oi  ^ffreire).  The  Bev.  gives  it 
eapitalljy  following  the  Greek  order :  cmd  the  glory  that  cometh 
from  the  only  Ood  ye  seek  not.  Not  Chd  only^  which  entirely 
overlooks  the  force  of  the  definite  article ;  but  the  only  Ood. 
Compare  1  Tim.  vi.  15,  16 ;  John  xviL  3 ;  Bom.  xvi.  27. 

45.  I  will  accuse  {xarfiyopi^acBi).  From  /card,  agamety  and 
wyop€v»,  to  speak  in  the  assembly  (a^opd).  Hence,  properly,  to 
bring  an  accusation  in  court.  John  uses  no  other  verb  for 
(uxmse^  and  this  only  here,  viii.  6,  and  Apoc.  xii.  10.  Once  in 
the  New  Testament  Bui/SdWM  occurs  (Luke  xvi.  1,  on  which 
see  note),  signifying  malicious  accusation,  and  secrety  as  distin- 
guished from  publicj  accusation  (icwnffopla).  AlndofAoi  occurs 
once  in  the  compound  irpofyriaadfLeBa,  toe  before  laid  to  the 
charge  (Bom.  iii.  9).  This  has  reference  especially  to  the  ground 
of  accusation  (alrla).  'EytcaXia  occurs  only  in  Acts,  with  the 
exception  of  Bom.  viiL  33.  It  means  to  accuse  pubUdyj  but 
not  necessarily  before  a  tribunal.  See  Acts  xxiii.  28,  29; 
xxvi.  2,  7. 

In  whom  ye  trust  {ek  hv  v^U  riKirUard).  A  strong  expres- 
sion. Lit.,  into  whom  ye  have  hoped.  Bev.,  admirably,  on 
iohom  ye  have  set  your  hope, 

47.  Writings  {ypdfAfiaaiv).  It  is  important  to  understand 
the  precise  sense  of  this  word,  because  it  goes  to  determine 
whether  Jesus  intended  an  antithesis  between  Moses'  writings 
and  His  own  wordsy  or  simply  between  Moses  {itcelvov)  and 
Himself  (e/iofe). 

FpdfifjLa  primarily  means  what  is  written.  Hence  it  may  de- 
scribe either  a  single  cha/ra>cter  or  a  document.  From  this 
general  notion  several  forms  develop  themselves  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  word  occurs  in  its  narrower  sense  of  charao- 
tersy  at  Luke  xxiii.  38;  2  Cor.  iii.  7;  Gal.  vi.  11.  In  Acts 
jcxviii.  21,  it  means  official  communications.    Paul,  with  a  sin- 


142  WORD  STODIBB  IN  THE  NEW  TKSTAMKNT. 

gle  exception  (2  Cor.  iii.  7),  nses  it  of  the  letter  of  scriptDre  as 
contrasted  with  its  epirit  (Rom.  ii.  27,  29;  vH.  6;  2  Cor.  iii.  6). 
In  Luke  xvj.  6,  7,  it  denotes  a  debtor's  bond  (A.  V.,  bill).  In 
John  vii.  15,  Acts  xxvi.  24,  it  in  used  in  the  plural  as  a  general 
term  ioi  acriptural  aiid  Jiahbinicai  leamiiig.  Compare  Sept 
Isa.  xxix.  11,  12,  where  a  learned  man  is  described  ai>  evurrA^ 
fievot  ypafifiara,  acquainted  with  Utters.  Onue  it  is  used  col- 
lectively of  the  sacred  writinga — tite  seripiures  (3  Tim.  iii.  15), 
though  some  give  it  a  wider  reference  to  Rabbinical  exegesio, 
as  well  as  to  scripture  Itself.  Among  the  Alexandrian  Ui-eeks 
the  term  ia  not  confined  tu  elementary  instruction,  but  includes 
ejyjosition,  baaed,  however,  on  critical  study  of  the  text.  The 
tendency  of  such  exegesis  was  often  toward  mystical  and  alle- 
gorical interpretation,  degenerating  into  a  petty  ingenuity  in 
fixing  new  and  recondite  meanings  upon  the  old  and  familiar 
forms.  This  was  illustrated  by  the  Neo-PIatonists'  expositiona 
of  Homer,  and  by  the  Kabbinical  exegesis.  Men  unacquainted 
with  such  studies,  especially  if  they  appeared  as  public  teach- 
ers, would  be  regarded  as  ignorant  by  the  Jews  of  the  times  of 
Christ  and  the  Apostles.  Hence  the  question  respecting  our 
Lord  Himself :  How  knoweth  this  man  letters  (ypafifiara,  John 
vii.  15)?  Also  llie  comment  upon  Peter  and  John  (Acts  iv. 
13)  that  they  were  unlearned  {aypdfi.fia70i.).  Thus,  too,  those 
who  discovered  in  the  Old  Testament  scriptures  references  to 
Christ,  would  be  stigmatized  by  Pagans,  as  following  the  in- 
genious and  fanciful  method  of  the  Jewish  interpreters,  which 
they  held  in  contempt  Some  such  feeling  may  have  provoked 
the  words  of  Festus  to  Paul :  Much  leanmig  (■jroXXd  ypd/J-fUiTa) 
doth  make  thee  mad  {Xcta  xxvi.  24).  It  is  well  known  with 
what  minute  care  the  literal  transcription  of  the  sacred  writ- 
ings was  guarded.  The  Scribes  (ypafifiaTeK)  were  charged  with 
producing  copies  according  f-o  the  letter  f«aT^  to  ypdfifM). 

The  one  passage  in  second  Timothy  cannot  be  urged  in  favor 
of  the  general  use  of  the  term  for  the  scriptures,  especially  since 
the  best  texts  reject  the  article  before  lepk  ypd/i/iara,  so  that 
the  meaning  is  apparently  more  general:  "thou  hast  known 
sacred  writings."  The  familiar  formula  for  the  acripiuren  waa 
ai  ypaJHiA,  07^.     A  aiiigle  hook  of  the  collection  of  writings 


QOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  148 

was  known  as  fiipklav  (Luke  iv.  17),  or  fitpKo^  (Lake  xz.  42) ; 
never  ^pa/^^  which  was  the  term  for  a  particular  jpoMo^tf.  See 
on  Mark  xii.  10.* 

It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  antithesis  between  the 
wrtimgs  of  Moses,  snperstitionslj  reverenced  in  the  letter,  and 
minutely  and  critically  searched  and  expounded  by  the  Jews, 
and  the  living  words  (piifiaaiv,  see  on  Luke  i.  37),  is  to  be  rec- 
ognized. This,  however,  need  not  exclude  the  other  antith- 
esis between  Moses  and  Jesus  personally. 


CHAPTER 

1-14.    Compare  Matt  xiv.  18-21 ;  Mark  yL  80-44 ;  Luke 
ix.  10-17. 

1.  The  sea.    See  on  Matt  iv.  18. 

2.  Multitude  (^Xo9).    See  on  i  19. 

Followed  {fjfcoXouSei).  Lnperfect  tense,  denoting  not  meidy 
the  following  on  this  occasion,  but  generally. 

Saw  (impwv).    Bev.y  beheld.    See  on  i.  18. 

His  miracles.    Omit  his.    Bender,  as  Bev.,  the  signs. 

He  did  {hroleC).    Imperfect,  vxjts  doing^  from  time  to  time. 

8.  A  mountain  {ro  Spo^).  Strictly,  the  mountain.  The 
writer  speaks  as  one  familiar  with  the  district 

He  sat  (iKoSfiro).  Imperfect:  wassittingy  when  he  saw  the 
multitude  approaching  (ver.  5). 

*  Bishop  Lightfoot  (Commentary  on  Galatians  lit  22)  orges  with  mnoh 
force  that  this  is  invariably  its  meaning.  The  passages  cited  in  opposition  to 
this  Tiew  by  Professor  Thayer  (Lexicon  of  the  New  Testament),  John  vii.  88  ; 
z.  35 ;  Rom.  iv.  8  ;  Gal.  iii.  22  ;  iv.  80 ;  Jas.  ii.  8  ;  1  Pet  ii.  6  ;  2  Pet.  i.  20, 
do  not  appear  to  me  to  be  oonolnsiTe  ;  on  the  contrary,  soTeral  of  them  seem 
to  make  rather  for  Bishop  Lightfoot*8  riew. 


1*4  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TE6TAMKNT. 

4.  A  feast  (^  €0^x17).  With  the  defiQite  article,  the  feast ; 
pointing  to  Boiuething  well  kaown. 

5.  Come  {eJci^eTat).  Better,  is  coming.  Unto  Rim  {irpm)  is 
rather  toward. 

Bread  (afyrov;).     Properly,  iTtwiea.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  X. 

6.  To  prove  {weipd^iav).  Lit.,  jfroving.  See  on  Matt.  vi.  13. 
Wye,  tempting. 

7.  Pennyworth  (^i^i'a^iW).  See  on  Matt.  xx.  2.  Two  hun- 
dred pennyworth  would  represent  between  thirty  and  thirty- 
five  dollars. 

That  every  one  may  take  a  little.    Peculiar  to  John. 

9.  A  lad  {ireuSdpiop).  Dioiinutire.  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.*     Only  John  mentione  the  lad. 

Barley  {KpiSlvow).  A  detail  peculiar  to  John.  The  word 
occure  iu  the  New  Testament  only  here  and  ver.  13.  An  in- 
ferior sort  of  bread  is  indicated  by  the  term.  Pliny  and  some 
of  the  Jewish  writers  describe  barley  as  food  fit  for  beasts. 
Suetonius  speaks  of  a  turgid  rhetorician  as  a  barley  orator,  in- 
flated like  barley  in  moisture:  sod  Livy  relates  how  cohorts 
which  had  lost  their  standards  were  ordered  barley  for  food. 

Fishes  {oi^dfHd).  The  word  occurs  only  here  and  at  xxi.  9. 
The  Synoptists  use  l-)(^vh.  The  A.  V,,  small Jishea,  is  intended 
to  render  the  diminutive. t  The  word  means  anything  that  is 
eaten  with  bread,  and  may  apply  to  meat  generally,  or  to  what 
ia  eaten  with  bread  as  a  relish.  Homer  speaks  of  an  onion  as  a 
reUah  (&^v)  for  drink  ("  Iliad,"  xi.,  630).  The  term  was  applied 

*  The  ooneot  readiog  in  Hatt.  li,  16  ii  roiNsu. 

\  Bdersbeim  ("  Life  of  JesoB  ")  b>jb  that  tbe  TalniDd  namM  oertaiu  kinds  of 
llili,  speoiall;  desigaatoil  as  tmaUJitha,  which  night  be  eaten  without  oook- 
log:  that  small  BsheB  were  reoommended  for  health,  and  that  the  lake  of 
Oalilee  was  particularly  rich  in  these,  the  MlUng  and  piakling  of  wtiloh  wh 
special  industry  amoii){  tlie  flahermen. 


^^  a  special  ini 


GOfiPBL  OF  JOHV.  145 

to  fish  par  exoellenoe.  Fish  became  among  the  Greeks  a  chief 
daintj  to  goarmands,  so  that  Demosthenes  describes  a  glatton 
and  spendthrift  as  one  who  is  extravagant  in  fish. 

But  what  are  they  among  so  many  ?    Pecnliar  to  Johoi 
though  the  idea  is  implied  in  Luke  ix.  13. 


10.  Sit  down  (atwireaeiv).    lit,  recline. 

Grass  (%opT09).  Originally  c^  enotaaure.  Thns  Homer 
speaks  of  Pelens  offering  a  sacrifice,  ovX^  iv  x^pr^,  in  the  ^ 
closiM^e  of  the  court  (^^  Iliad,"  zi.,  774).  Hence  a  feedi/ng-place^ 
and  so  grasSy  provender.  The  sense  is  merely  that  of  our  ab- 
stract paeture.  Matthew  and  Mark  mention  the  grass,  Mark 
with  the  epithet  green.    Wye,  hay. 

11.  Given  thanks.  All  the  Synoptists  relate  his  looking  up 
to  heaven  and  blessing.  Perhaps  he  used  the  familiar  f ormu]^ 
^'  Blessed  art  thou  Jehovah  our  God,  King  of  the  world,  who 
causes  to  come  forth  bread  from  the  earth." 

To  the  disciples,  and  the  disciples.  The  best  texts  omit. 
Bender,  as  Bev.,  Se  dietribiUed  to  them  that  were  set  down. 

Likewise  of  the  fishes.    So  also  Mark. 

As  much  as  they  would.    Peculiar  to  John. 

12.  Fragments  {mkAafSAra).  From  fcKim.  to  hreak.  Bjsw^ 
broken  pieces. 

That  remain  {irepica'ewrawTa).  Bev.,  remain  over.  Lit., 
exceed  the  necessary  supply.  Only  John  gives  the  Lord's  com- 
mand to  collect  the  fragments,  and  the  reason  for  it,  thai 
nothing  be  lost. 

13.  Baskets  {ico4>ipov^).    See  on  Matt.  xiv.  20.  Wye.,  coffins. 

With  the  fragments,  etc.    John  goes  into  fuller  detail  than 
tlie  Synoptists.     Mark  alone  notes  tlie  gatlieringof  the  remains 
Vol.  IL— 10 


lift  WORD   8TDDIB8  IH  THE  NEW  TB8TAMKNT. 

of  the  fishes.     John  also  Qees  iyefxiaavtJilUd,  for  they  took  up, 
or  loere  taken  up,  of  the  SjiioptietB. 

Five  barley  loaves.     A  detail  pecaHar  to  John,  einphaeizing 
the  identity  of  the  fragments  with  the  origiDal  loaves. 

Unto  them  that  had  eaten  {^e0ptoic6<TU').     Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament. 

14.  That  should  come  (o  ipxofievot).     Lit,  the  ona  coming.  - 
Rev.,  that  Cometh. 

Vv.  15-21.     Compare  Malt.  xiv.  22-36;  Mark  vi.  45-52. 

15.  Would  come   (}ii>Xavai,v  ipxetr^at).      Lit.,  <uv  o&nif  ia 
eome. 

Take  by  force  {ofmafyw).     See  on  Matt.  xL  12. 

A  king.     Better,  as  Bev.,  ting;  over  tbemselves. 

Himself  alone  {avrov  ftopoq).      Matthew  has  kot  iSiav,pri- 
vaiely,  and  both  Matthew  and  Mark  add,  topray. 

16.  Even  (Ir^ia).    An  adjective ;  6^M<t,  late,  with  &pa,  Aour, 

understood. 

17.  Ship  {irXoiop).     "Rev.,  hoot.     See  on   Luke  y.  S.     The 
best  texts  omit  the  article. 

Went  (^pxomo).     The  imperfect,  icere  going.     So  Rev. 

Capernaum.     Mark  has  Bethaaida. 

It  was  now  dark  (trKorla  ilf^  ^eyovei).    Lit.,  darkness  had 

•J  came  on.     On  darkness,  see  on  i.  5. 


18.  Arose    {hiTfyeipero).     It   is   lamentable   how  the  A.  V. 
the  graphic  force  of  these  imperfects.     Rev.,  rightly, 

Lit.,  was  being  moakened.     Tlie  imperfects  convey 
tlie  sense  of  gathering  danger,  and  throw  into  stronger  relief  the 


G08PBL  OF  JOEDT.  147 

fact  of  Jesns'  appearance.    They  were  going  ;  the  darkness  had 
already  fallen,  the  sea  was  rising^  and  Jeans  had  not  yet  come. 

That  blew  {irviovTWi).  Lit,  Uowi/ng.  That  was  Hewing 
woold  be  better.  John's  narrative  at  this  point  is  more  detailed 
and  graphic  than  the  others. 


19.  Had  rowed  {jSktiKaudresi).  lit,  had  dri^)en  or  propelled 
(the  boat). 

Five  and  twenty,  etc.  The  lake  being  about  Jbrfy  fnr- 
longs,  six  miles,  at  its  broadest,  they  had  gone  only  a  little 
more  than  half-way. 

They  see  {l^wpovai).  Bev.,  behold;  with  an  intent  gaae. 
See  on  i.  18.    Both  Luke  and  John  use  this  word  frequently. 

Drawing  nigh.  Lit.,  becoming  nigh.  Wye.,  to  be  made  nexi 
to  the  boat.  Mark  adds,  He  would  ha/ve  paeaed  by  them^  and 
Lnke  that  they  thought  Him  a  phantom. 

21.  They  willingly  received  (^Xoy  Xafiehij.  Wrong. 
Rev.,  correctly,  thej/  were  vnlling  to  receiee;  after  being  re- 
assured by  His  voice.  The  imperfect  denotes  a  continuous 
state  of  feeling,  not  a  mere  impulsive  and  temporary  wish. 

Immediately  {eiAim).  Whether  Jesus  actually  entered  the 
boat  or  not,  John  does  not  say.  The  more  natural  inference  is 
that  he  did.  Both  Matthew  and  Mark  say  so.  Their  immedi- 
ate and  miraculous  arrival  at  the  shore  was  simultaneous  either 
with  their  entertaining  the  wish  to  receive  Him,  or  with  His 
actually  coming  on  board.  Only  John  mentions  this  incident. 
Matthew  and  Mark  say  that  the  vnnd  ceased. 

They  went  {xrnif^ov).  Imperfect:  were  going.  Lit.,  were 
going  away.  The  verb  has  the  sense  of  retiring  from  some- 
thing. Compare  ver.  67;  vii.  33,  on  which  see  note;  zii.  11; 
xvin.  8. 


r 


14*1  WORD  8TUDIIW  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

32.  Which  ttood  (a  itrnjieoK)-  Having  lemained  dnring 
the  night  near  the  scene  o£  the  miracle,  and  being  there  atill. 

Boat  (irXoKE^wv).     Diminutive :  little  boat. 

That— where  into  His  disciples  were  entered.  Omit, 
and  read  ae  Rev.,  a<we  om, 

23.  Howbeit  there  came  other  boats  (oWa  &i  ^\StP 
wXoidpia).  Some  editors  omit  Si,  howbeit,  change  a\Ka,  otAar, 
into  d\X^,  but,  and  read,  frut  thare  came  boats. 

36.  The  miracles  (crtj^M).  Both  the  insertion  of  the  defi- 
nite article  and  the  translation  miraclea  in  the  A.  V.  tend  to 
obscure  the  trne  sense  of  the  passage.  Jesns  sajs :  You  do  not 
seek  me  because  you  saw  aigna.  What  you  saw  in  my  worka 
was  only  marvels.  You  did  not  see  in  them  tokens  of  my 
divine  power  and  mission. 

Were  filled  (i-jfofi^^^vrt)-  See  on  Matt  v.  6;  Lake  zr. 
16. 

27.  Meat  (fipwnp).  See  on  iv.  32.  In  Matt  vi.  19,  20,  and 
there  only,  it  ia  used  in  the  sense  of  r^ist,  that  which  eats  or 
corrodes.     Similarly,  corrode  is  from  rodo,  to  gnaw. 

Him  hath  God  the  Father  sealed.  The  Rev.  makes  the 
sentence  culminate  properly  in  God :  "  for  Him  the  Father, 
even  God,  hath  sealed."  According  to  the  strict  Greek  order  it 
is :  ^or  Sitn  the  Father  sealed,  even  God.  On  seated  {ia^tparf^ 
ffw)  eee  on  iii.  33.     Wye,  betokened  Him. 

38.  What  shall  we  do?  (r/'Trotot/fu;').  lAt..,whai  do  we  dot 
The  beet  texts  read  woiu/iev,  what  are  we  to  do  f 

Works.  The  question  is  from  the  legal  stand  point  works 
being  regarded  as  the  condition  of  obtaining  the  living  bread. 

29.  Believe.  Faith  is  put  as  a  moral  art  or  work.  The 
work  of  God  is  to  believe.     Faith  includes  ail  the  works  which 


L 


GOBPEL  OF  JOHN.  149 

Gkxl  requires.  The  Jews'  question  contemplates  nvmerous 
works.  Jesus'  answer  directs  them  to  one  work.  Canon  West- 
oott  justly  observes  that  '^  this  simple  formula  contains  the 
complete  solution  of  the  relation  of  faith  and  works." 

30.  Therefore*  Since  He  had  claimed  to  be  the  One  9erU 
of  God. 

31.  Manna.  Properly,  ths  manna,  referring  to  the  familiar 
historic  fact  A  passage  is  cited  from  a  Hebrew  commentary 
on  Ecclesiastes,  as  follows :  '^  As  the  first  Redeemer  made  the 
manna  to  descend,  as  it  is  written,  ^  Behold  I  will  rain  bread 
from  heaven  for  you ' ;  so  the  later  Bedeemer  also  shall  make 
the  manna  to  descend,  as  it  is  written,  ^  May  there  be  abun- 
dance of  corn  in  the  earth.' " 

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  (ou  Mfoatf:  SiSwctp  v^).  The 
antithesis  is  between  Moses  and  my  MUher.  So  Bev.,  rightly, 
^it  was  not  Moses  that  gave  you,"  etc. — ^^but  my  Father 
giveth,"  etc.  Some  editors  change  the  perfect  tense,  S^&»/cey» 
hath  gimen^  to  the  aorist,  IStficcy,  game. 

The  true  bread  from  heaven  {^v  dprrov  iic  rev  ovpeufov  rdy 
akffSivSv).  The  translation  would  gain  by  following  the  Greek 
order,  ^'  the  bread  out  of  heaven,  the  real  breads 

33.  He  which  cometh  down  (o  Karafialvwv),  So  it  may 
be  rendered ;  but  also  that  whichy  referring  to  ofyro^,  bread: 
and  so,  better,  as  Bev.,  since  Jesus  does  not  identify  Himself 
with  the  bread  until  ver.  35. 

35.  I  am  the  bread  of  life.  A  form  of  expression  peculiar 
to  John.  See  vv.  41,  48,  51 ;  viii.  12 ;  x.  7,  9, 11, 14;  xL  25 ; 
xiv.  6  ;  XV.  1,  5. 

Cometh — beh'eveth.  Faith  in  its  actvoe  aspect  and  in  its 
resting  aspect 

Never  (ou  iiii).  Bather,  tn  nowisej  or  by  no  means.  Bev., 
shall  not. 


150  WORD  BTUDDBB  Dl  THE  HEW  TBBTAIIKHT 

36.  But.     Though  yoa  hmre  leen  ma  jon  aaked,  I  repest 
what  I  aftid  to  joq  that  yoa  have  leen  and  do  not  believe. 


87.  All  that  (nv  S).  The  neuter  dngular  of  the  adjeetira 
and  proDoiuL  All  belioTen  are  regarded  as  one  omnplete 
whole.  Compare  xriL  S4^  aooording  to  the  ooirect  readingp 
^*  t&ai  which  Thoa  hart  given  me.^ 

Shall  come  (9^).  Emphaairing  the  idea  of  reaekimf  or 
arrimnff. 

Cometh  (^p^o^icpor).  A  diflEerent  verb,  emphaaiaing  the j»?^ 
ce$$  of  coming. 

38.  From  heaven  (&  toS  aupmnS^  Bnt  the  bert  texta  raad 
iiw6,/ramj  instead  of  ix,  out  of^  the  idea  being  rather  that  of 
depariwre  {I  came  down)  than  of  origin.  I  eame  down  ahonld 
be  aa  Rev.  (I  aim  corns  down).    The  tenae  ia  the  perfect 

39.  The  Father'a  will.  Omit  the  Father's.  Bender,  the 
wiUqfSimj  etc 


That  of  all  which  He  hath  given  me  (&»  nv  ft  USsMrf 
fiot).  The  oonatmction  is  a  peculiar  and  broken  ona  AU 
which  He  hath  gvccn,  stands  alone  as  an  absolute  nominative ; 
a  very  emphatic  and  impressive  mode  of  statement  Literally 
it  reads,  that  all  which  He  haih  given  me  lehauld  lorn  nothing 
otUqfit. 

At  the  laat  day  {<h  if  iaxctrff  4a^P?)-  ^®  phrase  oocora 
only  in  John. 

40.  And  this  (Se).  The  best  texts  read  yhp^for.  There  ia  a 
logical  connection  between  the  last  sentence  and  the  following. 
The  Father^s  will  in  preserving  and  raising  up  that  which  he  has 
given  to  the  Son,  includes  in  its  fulfilment  the  believing  con- 
templation of  the  Son  and  its  issue  in  eternal  life. 

Of  Him  that  aent  me.  The  best  texts  substitate  warpA^ 
(iou,  of  my  Father. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  151 

Seeth  {B€wp&v\  The  word  is  designedly  used.  The  Bay- 
ing vision  of  Chmt  is  not  mere  seeinffj  bat  earnest  ooniempkh 
tion,  Bev.y  hehotdeth.  See  on  i.  18.  Compare  ye  have  seen 
me,  and  believe  not  (ver.  36). 

41.  Then  (o2y).  Bev.,  rightly,  therefore:  because  of  His 
words. 

Murmured  Hhn^^K'^v)*  See  on  Jade  16,  and  compare  1 
Cor.  X.  10 ;  Philip,  ii.  14.  The  word  is  constantly  used  in  the 
Septnagint  of  the  marmaring  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  Wye, 
grudged  of  Him.  So  Chaucer,  ^' Judas  gruoohed  agens  the 
Maudeleyn  whan  sche  anoynted  the  hed  of  oure  Lord  "  (^^  Par- 
son's Tale  ") ;  and  Shakespeare, 

''Senred 
Wiihoat  or  grudge  or  gmmbUng.** 

"  Tempest,'*  1,  2,  MO. 

At  Him  (irepl  airrov).  Implying  that  they  addressed  their 
remonstrances  to  Him.  But  irepl  means  abaid  or  ooncemkig. 
So  Bev.,  properly,  oonoemmg. 

42.  We  know.  Not  implying  necessarily  that  Joseph  was 
still  alive,  but  merely  the  fact  that  Joseph  was  recognized  as 
the  father  of  Jesus. 

44.  Draw  {pucwrrf).  Two  words  for  drawing  are  found  in 
the  New  Testament,  avpfo  and  IXxtM».  The  distinction  is  not 
habitually  observed,  and  the  meanings  often  overlap.  Xvpen  is 
originally  to  drag  or  trail  along,  as  a  garment  or  torn  slippers. 
Both  words  are  used  of  haling  to  justice.  (See  Acts  viii.  3 ; 
xvii.  6 ;  xvi.  19.)  In  Acts  xiv.  19,  aipm^  of  dragging  Paul's 
senseless  body  out  of  the  city  at  Lystra.  In  John  xxi.  6,  8, 11, 
both  words  of  drawing  the  net.  In  John  xviii.  10,  i\K6<»y  of 
drawing  Peter's  sword.  One  distinction,  however,  is  observed : 
avpto  is  never  used  of  Christ's  attraction  of  men.  See  vi.  44 ; 
xii.  32.  ^EkiciHo  occurs  only  once  outside  of  John's  writings 
(Acts  xvi.  19).  Luther  says  on  this  passage :  ^'  The  drawing  ia 
not  like  that  of  the  executioner,  who  draws  the  thief  up  the 


152  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THB  KBW  TBBTAMBNT. 

ladder  to  the  gallows ;  but  it  is  a  graciooB  allnrement,  such  as 
that  of  the  man  whom  everybody  loves,  and  to  whom  every- 
body willingly  goes." 

45.  Taught  of  God  {S&BoktoI  rov  ScoO).  The  idea  is 
thrown  into  a  compomid  adjective,  SeoS&ucToi,  in  1  Thess.  iv.  9. 

46.  Hath  seen.  As  contrasted  with  hearing  and  learning, 
(ver.  45).  The  Father  is  not  seen  immediately,  bnt  through 
the  Son.    Compare  i.  18 ;  xiv.  9 ;  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Matt  xi.  27. 

Of  God  (irapi^  rov  SeoS).  More  correctly,  as  Rev.,  froniy 
with  an  idea  of  association  with :  Jrom  with  Qod.  Ilapd  is 
used  of  procession  from  Apereonal  object,  indicating  it  gen- 
erally as  the  starting-point 

49.  Are  dead  {airiSapovy,  The  aorist  points,  not  to  their 
present  condition  bat  to  the  historical  fact ;  they  died.    So  Kev. 

51.  The  living  bread  (o  dfno^  6  l^&v).  Lit,  the  bread  the 
living  {Jbread).    Wye,  quick  bread, 

I  will  give.  The  iyw,  Ij  is  emphatic,  in  contrast  with  Moses 
(ver.  32). 

Flesh.    See  on  i.  14. 

Which  I  will  give.  The  best  texts  omit  Bead,  as  Rev.^ 
fayjleehfoT  the  life  of  the  toorld. 

52.  Strove  {ifiaxovro).  The  murmuring  (ver.  41)  now 
breaks  out  into  open  contention  among  the  Jews  themselves. 

53.  Eat  the  flesh.  Appropriate  the  life.  Compare  Gal.  ii. 
20;  Eph.iii.l7. 

Drink  His  blood.  Appropriate  the  saving  merit  of  His 
death.  The  passover  was  approaching,  and  the  reference  may 
weU  have  been  to  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb. 


GOBPKL  OF  JOHN.  158 

Have  no  life  in  you  {ovk  ix^^  M^  ^  imnoU).  Not  accord- 
ing to  the  Greek.  Rightlj,  as  Kev.,  ye  hanye  not  life  in  your- 
selves.   All  true  life  most  be  in  Christ.    Compare  Col.  iii.  3. 

54.  Eateth  (rpaijoni).  Another  verb  for  eating  is  need. 
With  the  exception  of  Matt.  xxiv.  38,  it  is  found  only  in  John, 
and  always  in  connection  with  Christ  No  special  significance 
can  be  fairly  attached  to  its  use  here.  It  seems  to  be  taken  as 
a  current  word,  and  i^arfov  is  resumed  in  ver.  58. 

55.  Indeed  (oX^Sok).  Lit,  trvly.  The  best  texts  read 
oKiqBii^,  true  :  true  meat,  true  drink. 

56.  Dwelleth  (jUpei).  Bender,  as  Bev.,  dbideth.  The  word  is 
a  favorite  one  with  John,  occurring  more  frequently  than  in  all 
the  rest  of  the  New  Testament. 

57.  The  living  Father  (6  {j&y  variip).  A  phrase  found  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament    On  living  and  live,  see  i.  4. 

By  the  Father  (Sm^  rbv  waripa).  Wrong.  Bender,  because 
of,  as  Bev.  Because  the  Father  is  the  living  One.  So,  because 
of  me,  instead  of  h/  me. 

59.  In  the  synagogue  {h  awoffcayff).  But  the  definite 
article  is  wanting;  so  that  we  must  either  understand  in  a 
synagogue,  or  in  an  assembly.  See  on  Jas.  ii.  2.  Among  the 
ruins  at  Tell  MAm,  the  probable  site  of  Capernaum,  have  been 
found  among  the  remains  of  a  synagogue  a  block  of  stone, 
perhaps  the  lintel,  carved  with  the  pot  of  manna,  and  with  a 
pattern  of  vine  leaves  and  clusters  of  grapes.  See  a  full  account 
of  these  ruins  in  Thomson's  '^  Land  and  Book,  Central  Pales- 
tine and  Phoenicia,"  pp.  417-419. 

60.  Hard  {<rie\rfpo<;) ,  See  on  Matt.  xxv.  24;  Jude  14.  Ac* 
cording  to  the  Greek  order,  hard  is  this  saying. 

Hear  it  {avroO  axovew).  Airrov  may  be  rendered  Sim,  but 
this  is  not  probable.    Sear  means  a  docile  hearing,  with  a  view 


151  WOAO  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TBSTAUBNT. 

to  receiving  wliat   is   lieard.      Compare  x.  3,  16,  27;    sii,  47; 
sviii.  37. 

61.  Offend  {vKOpSaXi^u).  Rev.,  cause  to  stumHe.  See  on 
Matt.  V.  29.     Wye.,  alandereih  you. 

62.  What  and  if  ye  shall  see  {ikv  ow  ^topfjTf).  The 
question  is  marked  bj  an  aposiopeais,  i.e.,  a  breaking  off  of  the 
sentence  and  leaving  the  bearer  to  complete  it  for  liimself. 
Lit.,  if  then  ye  should  behold,  etc. — tiie  completion  would  be, 
would  not  this  gtUl  more  cause  you  to  stutable  f 

Ascend  {atmffeUpovra).  Rev.,  properly,  renders  the  participle, 
ascending. 

I  speak  (XoXw).  But  the  correct  reading  is  XeKaXttiea,  the 
perfect  tense,  /  have  spoken,  or  I  }xa,vejust  spoken,  referring  to 
the  preceding  discouree. 

61.  Should  betray  {Trapa&atatav).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  12; 
Mark  iv.  29.  Judae  is  onee  in  the  New  Testament  designated 
by  the  noun  tt/joSott^,  traitor,  Luke  vi.  16. 

66.  From  that  time  (e'«  tovtov).  Render,  as  Rev.,  upon 
this.     As  a  result  proceeding  out  of  («)  this.    Compare  xix.  12. 

Went  back  (air^\%v  ck  t^  oTritro}).  The  Greek  espresses 
more  than  the  Englieh.  They  went  away  (dwo)  from  Christ, 
lit.,  to  the  things  behind,  to  what  they  had  left  in  order  to  fol- 
low the  Lord. 

Walked  (irepierrdTovv).  Lit.,  walked  about,  with  Jesua  in 
His  wanderings  here  and  there. 

67.  The  twelve.  John  assumes  that  the  number  is  known. 
It  is  implied  in  the  twelve  baskets  of  fragments.  As  in  so 
many  other  instances  in  this  Gospel,  facts  of  the  synoptic  nar- 
rative are  taken  for  granted  as  familiar. 


L. 


OOBPEL  OF  JOHN.  155 

« 

Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  (/^^  tcaX  v/mk  ^cXere  virajeiv).  The 
interrogative  particle  /a^  shows  that  a  negative  answer  is  ex- 
pected. Surely  ye  will  not.  Will  ye  go  is  not  the  f  atare  tense 
of  the  verb  to  go^  but  is  expressed  bj  two  words,  do  ye  will 
(d^Xere),  to  go  away  (vwdrfeai).  Kev.,  would  ye.  On  the  verb 
to  go  away^  see  on  they  went  (ver.  21). 

68.  Simon  Peter.  Assailants  of  the  aathenticitj  of  John's 
Gospel  have  asserted  that  it  reveals  an  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
writer  to  claim  for  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  a  pre-emi- 
nence above  Peter.  The  assertion  is  effectually  contradicted 
by  the  narrative  itself.  See  i.  42 ;  vi.  68 ;  xiii.  6 ;  xviii.  10, 16 ; 
XX.  2,  7;  xxi.  3,  7,  11,  and  notes  on  those  passages.  Peter's 
replying  for  the  twelve,  in  this  passage,  is  a  case  in  point. 

The  words  of  eternal  life  {^yMra  (Iw^  alnviov).  There  is 
no  article.  Thou  hast  words.  Words  of  life  are  words  which 
carry  life  with  them.  Compare  the  phrases  JiTead  oflife,  light 
oflifej  water  oflife^  tree  of  life. 

69.  Are  sure  {iyvaucafjtev).  Lit.,  have  corns  to  know.  The 
order  of  the  words  believe  and  know  is  reversed  in  xviL  8 ;  1 
John  iv.  16.  In  the  case  of  the  first  disciples,ybt^,  produced 
by  the  overpowering  impression  of  Jesus'  works  and  person, 
preceded  intellectual  conviction. 

That  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  The  best  texts 
substitute  6  iyto^  rev  ©eoO,  the  holy  one  of  God.  The  other 
reading  has  resulted  from  the  attempt  to  bring  Peter's  confes- 
sion here  into  accord  with  that  in  Matt.  xvi.  16.  The  two  con- 
fessions differ  in  that  "  here  the  confession  points  to  the  inward 
character  in  which  the  Apostles  found  the  assurance  of  life ; 
there  the  confession  was  of  the  public  o£Sce  and  theocratic 
person  of  the  Lord  "  (Westcott). 

70.  A  devil  i^iafioKjo^.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  The  word  is 
an  adjective,  meaning  alanderoue^  but  is  almost  invariably  used 
in  the  New  Testament  as  a  noun,  and  with  the  definite  article. 
The  article  is  wanting  only  in  1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Acts  xiii.  10 ;  Apoc. 


156  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TEBTAMKNT. 

xii.  9;  and  perhaps  Apoc.  xx.  2.     It  is  of  the  very  essence  of 
the  derilieh  nature  to  oppose  Christ.     Compare  Matt.  xvi.  23. 

71.  Judas  Iscariot  the  son  of  Simon  (^lovSav  Si/itovov 
'laKOpimTT^v).  The  correct  reading  is  'IvKaptatTov,  Iscariot, 
freeing  in  the  genitive  caee  with  Xifiwvot,  of  Simon.  Ren- 
der, as  Ilev.,  Judas,  the  eon  of  Simon  Iscariot  Iscariot  denotes 
the  name  of  Simon's  town  :  a  man  of  Kerioth.  See  on  Matt. 
X.  6. 


CS AFTER  VII. 

1.  The  Jews'  feast  of  tabernacles.  The  Kev.  brings  cot 
the  defining  force  of  the  two  articles  :  the  feast  of  the  Jews,  the 
feast  of  tabernacles.  This  feast  occurred  in  tlie  eariy  autumn 
(September  or  early  October),  and  lasted  for  seven  days.  Its 
observance  is  eoraraanded  in  Exod.  xxiii.  16;  xxxiv.  22;  Lev. 
xxiii.  39,  42,  43 ;  Dent,  xvi,  13.  Its  significance  was  twofold. 
It  was  a  harvest-home  festival,  and  hence  was  called  ihs  Feast 
of  Ingaihering,  and  it  commemorated  the  dwelling  of  Israel  in 
tents  or  booths  in  the  wilderness.  Hence  the  name  Feast  of 
Booths  or  Tahenmdet.  Tiie  association  of  the  latter  event 
with  harvest  was  designed  to  remind  the  people  in  their  pros- 
perity of  the  days  of  their  homeless  wandering,  that  their  hearts 
might  not  be  lifted  up  and  forget  God,  who  delivered  them 
from  bondage  (Dent,  viii,  12-17).  Therefore  they  were  com- 
manded to  quit  their  permanent  homes  and  to  dwell  in  booths 
at  the  time  of  harvest.  The  festival  was  also  known  as  the 
Feast  of  Jehovah,  or  simply  the  Festival  (Lev.  xxiii.  39 ;  1  Kings 
viii.  2),  because  of  its  importance,  and  of  being  the  most  joyfnl 
of  all  festivals.  At  the  celebration  of  the  feast  at  Jerii^lem 
booths  were  erected  in  the  streets  and  squares  and  on  the 
liousetops.*  The  Greek  word  for  this  feast,  tnnjvoinjyla,  con- 
struction of  tabertuK^,  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

*  For  ■  ful)  desoription  see  the  artiela  "  Feut  of  Taberamatea,"  In  MoClio- 
took  and  Crooks'  Cfclopedia,  vol.  x.,  and  Edenheim.  "Tlie  Temple, "oh.  air. 


^1  took  and  Crooks'  Cj 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  157 

3.  Thy  disciples.  Both  those  who  had  been  gained  bj 
former  teaching  in  Jad»a  and  JeraBalem,  and  others  from 
other  parts. 

4.  Openly  {iv  wapfn^ci^).  Lit,  in  hotdnew.  The  reasoning 
is :  no  man  can  assert  the  position  which  Christ  claims,  and  at 
the  same  time  keep  secret  the  works  which  go  to  vindicate  it. 

5.  Neither  (ovSj).    Better,  as  Rev.,  not  even. 

Did  believe  {hrUrrevov).  The  imperfect,  i<^rtf  believing ;  re- 
ferring not  to  a  single  act  of  faith,  but  to  faith  as  habitual  and 
4:<mtroUing, 

6.  Time  (/oupo?).  See  on  Matt.  xii.  1 ;  Luke  i.  20 ;  Acta 
jcii.  1.    The  appropriate  season  or  jonctnre. 

Alway  ready.  The  disciples  might  at  any  time  associate 
with  the  world,  with  which  thej  were  still  in  sympathy.  Not 
:SO  Jesas,  who  was  in  essential  antagonism  to  the  world. 

7.  Cannot.  Freqnent  in  John,  and  expressing  an  inherent 
impossibility.  See  iii.  3,  5 ;  v.  19 ;  vi.  44 ;  vii.  34,  36 ;  viiL  21, 
43  ;  xii.  39  ;  xiv.  17,  etc. 

Evil  {wopffpd).     See  on  Lnke  iii.  19 ;  vii.  21. 

8.  This  feast.  For  thisj  read  they  the  first  time,  but  not  the 
second. 

Full  come  {wenXijpeiTai).  Lit.,  has  heen  fulfilled.  So  Kev., 
is  not  yetfvlfiUed. 

11.  Then  {oiv).  'ReitWy  therefore ^  because  He  did  not  come 
lip  with  the  Galilseans. 

Sought  {if^riTovv).  The  imperfect:  kept  seeking ;  persist^ 
ently  sought  for  Him. 

He  (e/ceii;o9).  Emphatic :  t?Ml  one  of  whom  we  have  heard, 
and  whom  we  once  saw. 


158  WORD  STDDIB8  IH  THE  HEW  TBBTAMENT. 

12.  Murmuring.     See  on  vi.  41. 

The  people  (toS«  Sj^k),     See  on  i.  19. 

Said  (IX^Toc).     Imperfect :  to^re  saying. 

Deceiveth  {TrXavd).  Itev.,  better,  leadetk  astray.  See  on 
Mark  xii.  24;  Jude'lS. 

13.  Openly  {irapfnja-ia).  The  word  may  mean  either  vyiiKout 
reserve  (x.  24  ;  xi.  14),  or  without  fear  (xi.  54). 

14.  About  the  midst  of  the  feast  (t^  iaprfp  /ieffoiVijs). 
A  peculiar  form  of  exprefiBton  found  only  here.  The  midst  i» 
expreBBed  by  a  participle  from  the  verb  itetrSm,  to  be  in  the 
middle.     Lit.,  the/east  being  m.idway. 

Taught  (eSlSoffKev).     Or  began  to  teach.     Imperfect  tenee. 

16.  Letters  {ypafifiaTa).     See  on  v,  47. 

16.  Doctrine  (8*80;^^).  Better,  teaching,  as  Rev.  Doctrine 
haB  acquired  a  conventional  eenBe  which  might  mislead. 

17.  Will  do  his  will  (-SeXp  to  5«Xij/ia  ainov  irotetc).  This  is 
a  notable  illustration  of  the  frequent  blunder  of  the  A.  V.  in 
rendering  SeXeiv,  to  will  or  deterjniite,  as  a  mere  auxiliary  verb. 
By  overlooking  the  distinct  meaning  o£  the  verb  to  will,  and 
resolving  wiU^h  to  do  into  wiJi  do,  it  Bacrifiees  the  real  force 
of  the  passage.  Jeans  says,  ■^  it  be  one's  ^cill  to  do  ;  if  hia 
moral  purpose  is  in  sympathy  with  the  divine  will. 

He  shall  know.  Sympathy  with  the  will  of  God  is  a  con- 
dition of  understanding  it. 

Of  God  (e«  rav  Seov).     Better,_/Wwi/  proceeding  out  of. 

Of  myself  (a-rr  4fuivTou).     Of  myself  is  misleading,  being 
umonly  understood  to  mean  concerning  myself.     Rev.,  cor- 
rectly, yro»*  myself ;  without  union  with  the  Father.     Com- 
pare V.  30. 


G08PRL  OF  JOHN.  159 

18.  His  own  glory  {ri^v  So^av  r^  IBlav).  lit,  the  glory 
which  is  His  ovm ;  the  second  article  throwiDg  His  awn  into 
sharp  contrast  with  His  thai  eerU  Him.  On  Hia  ovm^  see  on 
Acts  i.  7 ;  Matt  xxii.  5 ;  xx7.  15. 

The  same  (oSto?).  Notice  the  characteristic  use  of  the  pro- 
noun taking  ap  and  emphasizing  the  principal  subject  of  the 
sentence. 

Unrighteousness  {abucia).    See  on  2  Pet  ii.  18. 

19.  Did — give  (S^icey).  Some  texts  read  the  aorist  tense 
!So»iC€P,  in  which  case  this  rendering  is  correct  If  with  others 
we  read  the  perfect,  we  shoald  render  hath  not  Mosea  given  you 
the  law,  which  you  still  profess  to  observe. 

Keepeth  (woieZ).  Rev.,  rightly,  daeth.  Compare  do  in  ver. 
17. 

Go  ye  about  {^firelre).    Properly,  seek  ye.    So  Rev. 

20.  A  devil  {SaifAApuw).  Qr  more  correctly,  a  demon.  See 
on  Mark  i.  34.  The  name  was  applied  to  Jesus  by  the  fntdti- 
tude  (^Xo9)  and  not  by  those  whom  He  was  addressing  in  ver. 
19,  because  of  the  gloomy  suspicions  which  they  thought  He 
entertained,  and  in  entire  ignorance  of  the  design  of  the  Jews 
which  Jesus  had  penetrated.  The  same  term  was  applied  to 
John  the  Baptist,  the  ascetic,  as  one  who  withdrew  from  social 
intercourse  (Matt.  xi.  18). 

21.  One  work  (ly  Spyov).  The  healing  on  the  Sabbath  (v. 
1-8). 

23.  Are  ye  angry  (xoXare).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment From  xoXi;,  gall.  Strictly,  the  verb  means  to  hefvU  of 
HUy  hence  to  be  mda/nchcly  mad. 

Every  whit  whole  {JSKov  v^irj).  Strictly,  /  made  a  whole 
man  aoundj  in  contrast  with  the  rite  of  circumcision  which  af- 


160  WORD  STUDIES  IM  THE  ITBW  TBBTAMBMT. 

fectg  only  a  single  member,  but  which,  aevertlieleas,  the;  prac- 
tise on  the  Sabbath. 

2i.  Appaaranctt  (Jt^i*).  Primarily,  seeing  or  eu/At.  In  xi. 
44;  Apoc.  i.  IQj/itce,  and  hence  external  appearance.  The 
word  occurs  only  in  the  three  paseagea  cited. 

Righteous  judgment  {Tijv  Sucaiat'  ttpitrtv).  Properly,  the 
righteous  judgment;  that  which  is  appropriate  to  the  casein 
hand. 

25.  Them  of  Jerusalem  ( lepoa-oXvfUTwv).  Lit.,  of  the  Je- 
ruaalemites,  who  knew  better  than  the  multitude  tlie  designs 
of  the  priesthood.     The  word  occurs  only  here  and  Mark  1.  5. 

26.  Do  the  rulers  know  indeed  ?  The  interrogative  par- 
ticle n^ore  may  be  rendered  by  the  familiar  expression  they 
do  not,  do  they  f  Ilev.,  can  it  be  that  the  rulers,  etc.  Indeed 
(aXij^);  lit.,  truly. 

The  very  {tiXij-Sw).    Omit. 

97.  Howbeit  {aXKk).  BtU,  it  cannot  be  that  the  ralera 
have  made  such  a  discovery,  for  we  know  whence  this  man  is. 

We  know  (otBoftev).  Tlie  knowing  of  the  rulers  ia  expressed 
by  lyvataap ;  Aaoe  they  ascertained-  by  searching  and  watching. 
The  people's  knowledge,  oiBafiev,  is  that  of  settled  conviction. 

Whence  (7r(>.9«i/).     Referring  to  His  parentage  and  family. 

No  one  knoweth  whence  He  is.  Opinions  differ  as  to 
the  precise  reference  of  these  words.  Some  explain  by  a  popu- 
lar idea  that  the  Messiah  would  not  be  known  until  anointed  by 
Elias,  when  he  wonld  suddenly  appear.  Others  refer  to  Isa. 
liii.  8;  or  to  Dan.  vii.  13.  Meyer  says  that  while  the  popular 
belief  that  the  immediate  ancestry  of  the  Messiah  would  be  un- 
known when  lie  came  cannot  further  be  historically  proved, 
it  is  credible,  partly  from  the  belief  in  His  divine  origiuj  and 


OOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  161 

partly  from  the  obscuritj  into  which  the  Davidic  family  had 
sank. 

28.  Then  (oSv).  Rev.,  rightly,  therefarej  giving  the  reason 
for  the  succeeding  words  in  Jesns'  emotion  awakened  by  the 
misconceptions  of  the  people. 

Cried  (i/cpa^ep).     See  on  Mark  v.  5  ;  ix.  24. 

As  He  taught  {S^Biia-tcmv).  Better,  Rev.,  teaching.  The 
expression  cried  teaching  implies  speaking  in  a  pecaliarly  sol- 
emn manner  and  with  an  elevation  of  voice. 

Me — whence  I  am.  Conceding  the  truth  of  the  people's 
statement  in  ven  27,  we  know  this  man  whence  he  isj  so  far  as 
His  outward  person  and  His  earthly  origin  were  concerned. 
He  goes  on  to  show  that  they  are  ignorant  of  His  divine  rela- 
tionship. 

True  {akffSivo^).  True  to  the  ideal  of  a  sender :  a  genuine 
sender  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  term.     See  on  L  9. 

29.  From  him  (wap  airrov).     See  on  vi.  46. 

30.  Then.  Another  of  the  frequent  instances  in  which  the 
A.  v.  of  this  Oospel  renders  the  logical  particle  as  a  particle  of 
time.  Translate  as  Rev.,  therefore;  because  of  His  claim  to  be 
sent  from  God. 

To  take  (Truurai).     See  on  Acts  iii.  7. 

31.  Will  he  do  Qiifn  ironiaei).  Lit,  sureh/  he  wiU  not  at  aU 
do. 

32.  Officers  {vmfpira^).     See  on  Matt  v.  25 ;  Luke  L  2. 

33.  Unto  them.    Omit. 

I  go  (inrarfdo).     I  withdraw.     See  on  vi.  21. 
Vol.  II.— 11 


WORD  STDD1B8  IH  THE  NBW  TB8TAHRNT. 


me.     Not  as  now,  for  disputation  or 


34.  Ye  shall  seek 
violence,  but  for  help. 

Where  I  am.  In  absolute,  eternnl  being  and  fellowehip 
witli  the  Father.  /  am  {eyiii  elfn)  ie  the  formula  of  the  divine 
existence  (viii.  58).  The  phrase  carries  a  hint  of  the  essential 
nature  of  Jesus,  and  thus  prepares  the  way  for  ye  cannot  come 
(see  on  ver.  7).  The  difference  in  character  will  make  it  essen- 
tially impossible. 

35.  Will  He  go  (oStm  ftMtiXei  voptveaSai).  Lit.,  whither 
does  this  Tiian  intend  io  go,  or  whither  is  He  thinking  of  gomgt 
The  A.  v.  misses  the  contemptuous  insinuation  in  this  man 
(Eev.). 

We  shall  not  find  bim  (^/mw).  The  pronoun  is  emphatic ; 
we,  the  religious  leaders,  the  wise  men,  who  ecratinize  the 
claims  of  all  profeased  teachers  and  beep  a  watchful  eye  on  all 
impostors. 

The  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles  (t^i'  Buunropiip  rS>v 
'EXXiJwwi/).  Lit.,  ihf  dispersion  of  the  Greeks.  The  Jews 
who  remained  in  foreign  lands  after  the  return  from  the 
Captivity  were  called  by  two  names :  1.  The  Captivity,  which 
was  expressed  in  Greek  by  three  words,  viz.,  airoutia,  a  settle- 
ment far  from  home,  which  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment ;  fieroiieetTia,  change  of  abode,  which  is  found  in  Matt.  i. 
11,  12,  17,  and  always  of  the  carrying  into  Babylon  ;  aljffia- 
Xtouia,  a  taking  at  the  point  of  the  sjiear  ;  Eph.  iv.  8  ;  Apoo. 
xiii.  10.  2.  The  Dispersion  {Buunropd}.  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  1 ; 
Jas.  i,  1.  The  first  name  marks  their  relation  to  their  own, 
land ;  the  second  to  the  strange  lauds. 


The  Gentiles  ("EXXijww). 
on  Acts  vi.  1, 


Lit.,  the  Greeks.    So  Rev.    See 


36.  What  manner  of  saying  is  this    (ti's  einw  o&rof  6 
X07O7)!    Rev.,  more  simply  and  literally,  tohat  is  this  wordf 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  163 

37.  The  last  day.  The  eighth,  the  close  of  the  whole 
festival,  and  kept  as  a  Sabbath  (Lev.  xxiii.  36).  It  was  called 
the  Day  of  the  Oreat  Hoacmnay  because  a  circait  was  made 
seven  times  ronnd  the  altar  with  "  Hosanna ;"  also  Ihe  Day  of 
WUlowSj  and  the  Day  of  Beating  the  Branches,  because  all  the 
leaves  were  shaken  off  the  willow -boughs,  and  the  palm- 
branches  beaten  in  pieces  by  the  side  of  the  altar.  Every 
morning,  after  the  sacrifice,  the  people,  led  by  a  priest,  repaired 
to  the  Fountain  of  Siloam,  where  the  priest  filled  a  golden 
pitcher,  and  brought  it  back  to  the  temple  amid  music  and 
joyful  shouts.  Advancing  to  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  at 
the  cry  of  the  people,  ^'  Lift  up  thy  hand ! "  he  emptied  the 
pitcher  toward  the  west,  and  toward  the  east  a  cup  of  wine, 
while  the  people  chanted,  **  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation."  It  is  not  certain  that  this  libation 
was  made  on  the  eighth  day»  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  following  words  of  the  Lord  had  reference  to  that  cere- 
mony. 

Stood  (eum^/cet).  The  imperfect,  was  standing;  watching 
the  ceremonies.     Both  A.  Y.  and  Kev.  miss  this  graphic  touch. 

38.  The  scripture  hath  said.  There  is  no  exactly  corre- 
sponding passage,  but  the  quotation  harmonizes  with  the  general 
tenor  of  several  passages,  as  Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Iviii.  11 ;  Zech.  xiii.  1 ; 
xiv.  8 ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  1  ;  Joel  iii.  18. 

Belly  {leoiXiax;).  The  word  is  often  used  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment for  the  innermost  part  of  a  many  the  soiU  or  heart.  See 
Job  XV.  35  ;  xxxii.  19;  Prov.  xviii.  8;  xx.  27,  30.  The  rite  of 
drawing  and  pouring  out  the  water  pointed  back  to  the  smitten 
rock  in  the  desert.  In  Exod.  xvii.  6,  '^  there  shall  come  water 
out  of  ity^  is  literally,  " there  shall  come  water  from  within 
him.'*^  The  word  heily  here  means  the  inmost  heart  of  the 
believer,  which  pours  forth  spiritual  refreshment  Compare 
1  Cor.  X.  4 ;  John  iv.  14. 

Shall  flow  {peva-ova-iv).  The  word  occurs  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament. 


164  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Rivers.     A  type  of  abundance.     Compare  Num.  xx.  11. 
Living  water.     Compare  iv.  10. 

39.  The  Spirit.    The  Holy  Spirit,  personally. 

The  Hoiy  Ghost  (wevfui  Sfiov).  The  best  texts  omit  07101^ 
Aoly,  and  t)ie  definite  article  is  not  in  the  text,  eo  that  the  Btrict 
rendering  is  simp\y  spirit.  Lit.,  spirit  waut  7u>t  yet.  O^iven,  ia 
A.  Y.  and  Rev.,  is  added  to  guard  against  a  possible  misconcep- 
tion, which,  as  AIEoi-d  observes,  "  no  intelligent  reader  could 
fall  into."  The  word  spirit,  standing  thus  alone,  marks,  not 
the  personal  Spirit,  but  His  operation  or  gift  or  manifesta- 
tion. Canon  Woatcott  aptly  says;  "It  is  impossible  not  to 
contrast  t)ie  my ste  piousness  of  this  utterance  with  the  clear 
teaching  of  St.  John  himself  on  the  'unction'  of  believera 
(1  John  ii.  20  sqq-),  which  forms  a  commentary,  gained  by  later 
experience,  upon  the  words  of  the  Lord." 

Was  glorified  ieho^da^).     We  have  here  one  of  John's 

characteristic  terms,  even  as  the  idea  is  central  to  his  Gospel — 
to  show  forth  Jesus  as  the  manifested  glory  of  God  (i.  14).  The 
beginning  of  our  Lord's  miracles  was  a  manifestation  of  His 
glory  (ii.  11).  His  glory  was  the  expression  of  the  Father's 
will  (viii,  54).  By  His  work  He  glorified  the  Fatlier  upon 
earth  {sii.  38  ;  xvii.  4),  and  in  this  was  Himself  glorified  (xvii. 
10).  The  sickness  and  reaurrectioo  of  Lazams  were  for  the 
glory  of  God  (xi.  4).  The  consummation  of  His  work  was 
marked  by  the  words,  "  Now  was  the  Son  of  man  glorified, 
and  God  was  glorified  in  Him"  (xiii,  31).  His  glory  He  had 
with  the  Father  before  the  world  was  (xvii,  5).  It  ia  consum- 
mated at  His  ascension  (vii.  39;  xii.  16).  The  passion  is  the 
way  to  glory  (xii.  23,  24;  xiii.  31).  The  fruitfulness  of  be- 
lievers in  Him  is  for  the  glory  of  God  (xv.  8),  and  the  office  of 
the  Spirit  is  to  glorify  Christ  (xvi.  14). 

40.  Many.     The  best  texts  omit.     Read  as  Rev.,  some. 

This  saying  {rov  Xirfov).  The  best  texts  sabstitute  twv 
\oyatv  TovTtav,  these  words.     So  Kev. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  165 

The  prophet.    See  on  i.  21. 

41.  Shall  Christ,  etc.  (jiff  r^kp  6  Xpurr&;).  The  Bey.  gives 
better  the  force  of  the  interrogative  particle  viiih  f^kp,  for : 
What^  doih  the  Christ  come^  etc.  The  idea  in  fall  is,  '^you  can- 
not (jiv)  say  that,ybr  (7A/))  doth  the  Christ,  etc." 

Shall — come  {Sfyxereu).  The  present  tense.  Bev.,  rightly, 
doth — come. 

43.  There  was  a  division  {axlafia  iyhfero).  More  correctly, 
as  Rev.,  ^'  tliere  arose  a  division."    See  on  i.  8. 

44.  Would  have  taken  {iiBekov  iriiaai).     See  on  viL  17. 

Rather,  were  disposed  or  wished  to  take  him. 

46.  Like  this  man.    Some  of  the  best  texts  omit 
Deceived  {irewKamiaBe).    Rev.,  led  astray.    See  on  ver.  12. 

48.  Of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees.  The  Greek  order, 
as  followed  by  Rev.,  is  more  suggestive :  Hath  any  of  the  rul- 
ers believed  on  Sim,  or  (to  appeal  to  a  larger  circle)  of  the 
Pharisees? 

49.  This  people  (o  i'xKo^  oifTo<:).  Better,  muUitttdej  as  con- 
trasted with  the  orthodox  Jews.     See  on  i.  19. 

Cursed.  As  specimens  of  Rabbinical  utterances  concerning 
this  class  may  be  cited  the  expressions  venninj  people  of  the 
earth,  and  the  saying,  ^'the  ignorant  is  impious;  only  the 
learned  shall  have  part  in  the  resurrection."  Even  more 
abusive  and  abominable  is  this :  '^  He  shall  not  take  a  daughter 
of  the  people  of  the  earth,  because  they  are  an  abomination, 
and  their  wives  are  an  abomination,  and  concerning  their 
daughters  it  is  said.  Dent,  xxvii.  21 " ! 

50.  He  that  came  to  Him  by  night  {0  iX^iav  wkto^  wpi^f; 
aurov).     The  texts  vary,  either  substituting  irporepov,  before. 


166  WORD  8TUDIBS  IN  TH£  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

for  wKri^,  by  nighty  or  omitting  the  whole  claase,  and  reading, 
Nioodemus  saUh  unto  ihemj  being  one  of  them. 

51.  Any  man  {rov  cof^pwrov).  Lit,  the  man,  whoever  he 
may  be,  that  comes  before  them. 

Before  it  hear  him  {ihv  ^)f  oKowrg  ircLp  avrov),  Kev.,  more 
correctly,  except  UJirat  hear.  Hear  him  is  an  inadequate  ren- 
dering of  irap  avTov,  which  is,  as  'Rev.  j  from  himself;  irapd, 
implying  from  beside^  i.e.,  from  his  side  of  the  case. 

52.  Search.    Compare  v.  39. 

Look  (ZSe).  Some  render  see^  and  translate  the  following 
in,  ihatj  instead  of  far.  So  Rev.  The  difference  is  unimpor- 
tant 

53.  This  verse,  and  the  portion  of  Chapter  YIII.,  as  far  as 
ver.  12,  are  generally  pronounced  by  the  best  critical  authori- 
ties not  to  belong  to  John's  Gospel. 


CHAPTER  YIII. 

12.  The  light  of  the  world  (to  ^w  toO  tcoa-ftov).  Not 
Xuxvo^f  A  lampj  as  John  the  Baptist  (v.  35).  Zight  is  another 
of  John's  characteristic  terms  and  ideas,  playing  a  most  import- 
ant part  in  his  writings,  as  related  to  the  manifestation  of 
Jesus  and  His  work  upon  men.  lie  comes  from  God,  who  is 
light  (1  John  i.  5).  ^'  In  Him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the 
light  of  men"  (i.  4).  The  Word  was  among  men  as  light  before 
the  incarnation  (i.  9 ;  ix.  5),  and  light  came  with  the  incarna- 
tion (iii.  19-21 ;  viii.  12 ;  xii.  46).  Christ  is  light  through  the 
illuminating  energy  of  the  Spirit  (xiv.  21,  26 ;  xvi.  13 ;  1  John 
ii.  20,  27),  which  is  received  through  love  (xiv.  22,  23).  The 
object  of  Christ's  work  is  to  make  men  sons  of  light  (xii.  36, 
46),  and  to  endow  them  with  the  light  of  life  (viii.  12). 

In  ver.  20,  we  are  told  that  Jesus  spake  these  words  in  the 
Treasury.    This  was  in  the  Court  of  the  Women,  the  most 


OOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  167 

public  part  of  the  temple.  Four  golden  candelabra  stood 
there,  each  with  four  golden  bowls,  each  one  filled  from  a 
pitcher  of  oil  by  a  jouth  of  prieetlj  descent.  These  were 
lighted  on  the  first  night  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  It  is  not 
unlikely  that  they  may  have  suggested  our  Lord's  figure,  but 
the  figure  itself  was  familiar  both  from  prophecy  and  from 
tradition.  According  to  tradition,  Light  was  one  of  the  names 
of  the  Messiah.  See  Isa.  ix.  1 ;  xliL  6 ;  xlix.  6 ;  Ix.  1-3 ; 
Mai.  iv.  2  ;  Luke  ii.  32. 

Walk  in  darkness  (irepvirarriaei  iv  t§  a-Karltf).  This  phrase 
is  peculiar  to  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle. 

Shall  have  {i^t).  Not  only  shall  see  it,  but  shall  possess  it. 
Hence  Christ's  disciples  are  the  light  of  the  world  (Matt  v.  14). 
Compare  lights^  or,  properly,  luminaries  {<f>09<rn}p€^)y  a  name, 
applied  to  believers  in  Philip,  ii.  15. 

13.  Thou  barest  record  of  thyself.  Rev.,  witnees.  A 
technical  objection,  evading  the  real  purport  of  Jesus'  declara- 
tion. The  Rabbinical  writings  declared  that  no  man  could  give 
witness  for  himself. 

14.  Though  {k&v).    Lit.,  even  if. 

I  know  (oZSa).  With  a  clear  inward  consciousness.  See 
on  ii.  24. 

Whence  I  came  and  whither  I  go.  Two  essential  facts  of 
testimony,  viz.,  origin  and  destiny.  '^  The  question  was  one  about 
His  own  personal  consciousness,  of  which  only  Himself  could 
bear  witness "  (Lange).  "  If  the  sun  or  the  day  could  speak, 
and  should  say :  *  I  am  the  sun ! '  and  it  were  replied,  '  No, 
tiiou  mayest  be  the  night,  for  thou  bearest  witness  of  thyself ! ' 
how  would  that  sound  ?  Argue  it  away  if  thou  canst "  ("  Ber- 
lenburg  Bible,"  cited  by  Stier,  **  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus"). 

And  whitiier  I  go.     The  best  texts  read,  fj,  or. 


168  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HEW  TE8TAMBST. 

16.  True  (aXi^Sij?).  The  best  texts,  however,  read  uXt^ti^, 
true  to  the  perfect  ideal  of  judgment. 

17.  In  your  law  {iv  ra>  pa/iq>  rm  v/ierip^).  Lit.,  in  the  law, 
thai  which  is  yours.  Yours  has  an  emphatic  force  :  of  which 
jou  claim  a  monopoly.     See  vii.  49. 

It  is  written  (yiypairTtu).  The  perfect  tense:  it  hat  been 
written,  and  stands  written.  The  common  form  of  citation 
elsewhere,  but  used  b_v  John  of  the  Old  Testament  scriptures 
onlj  here.  His  UEual  form  is  feypa^LfUvov  tarlv,  the  participle 
with  the  finite  verb,  lit.,  ii  is  having  been  vrritien. 

The  witness  of  two  men.     See  Dent.  xix.  15. 


The  Father — beareth  witness  of  me.  Thus  there  are 
two  witnesses,  and  the  letter  of  the  law  is  fulfilled. 

19.  Where.  The  testimony  of  an  unseen  and  unheard  wit- 
ness would  not  satisfy  them. 

20.  The  Treasury  {ya^o<f>v\aK{p).  From  yd^,  treasure,  a 
Persian  word,  occurring  only  once  in  the  New  Testament  (Acts 
viii.  27),  and  tpvXax^,  guard.  Used  by  John  only  here.  The 
Treasury  was  in  the  Court  of  the  Women,  so  called,  not  because 
it  was  appropriated  to  the  worship  of  women  exclusively,  but 
because  they  were  not  allowed  to  jiroceed  further,  except  for 
sacrificial  purposes.  The  court  covered  a  space  upwards  of  two 
hundred  feet  square,  and  was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  within 
which,  and  against  the  wall,  were  the  thirteen  trumpet- shaped 
chests,  called  "trumpets"  from  their  shape,  for  charitable  con- 
tributions.    This  court  was  the  most  public  part  of  the  temple. 


And  no  man  laid  hands  on  Him  {teal  ovheU  eiriaaev  ai/rov). 
Notice  the  connection  with  the  previous  sentence  by  the  simple 
and,  where  another  writer  would  have  said  ami  yet :  the  sense 
being  that  though  .Jesus  was  teaching  where  He  might  easily 
have  been  apprehended,  yet  no  one  attempted  to  arrest  Ilim. 
See  on  i.  10.    Laid  hands  on  is  better  rendered,  as  elsewliere, 


<K>8PRL  OF  JOHN.  169 

took  (compare  vii.  30).  The  inooDBiBtencj  of  the  A.  V.  in  the 
renderings  of  the  Bame  word,  of  which  this  is  only  one  of  many 
instances,  is  noteworthy  here  from  the  fact  that  in  the  only  two 
passages  in  wliich  John  uses  the  phrase  laid  hands  on  (vii.  30 ; 
viL  44),  lie  employs  the  common  formula,  iwiffdXKew  t^9  x^V^» 
or  Ttfv  x^V^  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  these  passages  the  word  iruurai  is 
rendered  take.  The  use  of  this  latter  word  is  confined  almost 
exclusively  to  John,  as  it  is  found  only  three  times  elsewhere 
(Acts  iiL  7 ;  xii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  32). 

21.  Then  (oSi/).  Properly,  tAereforSy  connecting  the  fact  of 
Jesus'  continuing  to  speak  with  His  freedom  from  arrest. 

Said  Jesus.    Omit  Jesus,  and  read,  Se  said  therefore. 

Go  away  (vir^ifpo).  Withdraw  myself  trom  you;  this  sense 
being  emphasized  by  the  succeeding  words,  ye  shall  seek  me. 
In  expressing  one's  departure  from  men  or  from  sun*ounding  ob- 
jects, we  may  emphasize  merely  the  /act  of  removal,  in  which 
case  airifrxpfjuu,  to  go  away,  would  be  appropriate ;  or  we  may 
emphasize  the  removal  as  affecting  some  relation  of  the  person 
to  that  from  which  he  removes,  as  in  vi.  67,  where  Jesus  says 
to  the  disciples,  *^  wiU  ye  also  go  away,  or  vovUidra/uo  from  me," 
in  which  case  \m6rpo  is  the  proper  word.* 

In  your  sin  (^  r$  a^uiprria  vfi&p).  See  on  Matt.  i.  21.  Note 
the  singular,  sin,  not  sins.  It  is  used  collectively  to  express  the 
whole  condition  of  estrangement  from  God. 

22.  Will  He  kill  Himself  (/^i  aTroicrepel  iavrop)!  The 
mockery  in  these  words  is  alike  subtle  and  bitter.  The  inter- 
rogative particle,  /ii^ri,  signifies  surely  He  wiU  not  hy  any  chance 
kill  Himself ;  and  the  sense  of  the  whole  clause  is,  He  will  not 
surely  go  where  we  cannot  reach  Him,  unless  perchance  He 
should  kill  Himself ;  and  as  that  would  insure  His  going  to 

*  I  am  inclined,  howeyer,  to  think  that  the  distinction  between  these  two, 
and  also  between  these  and  vopc^o^ioi,  which  Canon  Westcott  claims  is  obeerred 
by  John,  will  not  bear  too  strict  pressing.  See  his  commentar/  on  John  tIL 
83. 


170  WORD  STDDIB8  m  THB  HBW  TESTAMENT, 

Gelietina,  of  course  we  could  not  go  to  Ilim  there.  Tlie  remark 
diepiaje  alike  the  scorn  and  the  Belf-rigLteousDeBs  of  tha 
fipeskers. 

23.  Ye  are  from  beneath  (e«  tS>v  k6.tus  itrri),  A  phraae 
peculiar  to  John  and  to  \\\%  Gospel.  Jesua  Btatea  the  radical 
antagonism  hetwcen  Ills  opposers  and  Himself,  as  based  upon 
ditFerence  of  origin,  aud  nature.  They  spring  from  the  lower, 
eetisual,  earthly  ecouomj ;  lie  from  the  heavenly.  Compare 
Jas.  iii.  15  sqq. 

From  above  {ix  twv  aw).  Also  peculiar  to  John's  GospeL 
Compare  Col  iii.  1.  On  the  phrase  to  be  of  {ehai  eic)  see  on 
i.  46. 

Y6  are  of  this  world  (ew  toO  Koaftav  tovtov  eari).  Peculiar 
to  John,  and  occurring  in  the  First  Epistle.  On  k6<thov. 
world,  see  on  i.  9.     Ye  are  of  this  earthly  order  or  economy. 

24.  I  am  he  {eyti  etfu).  He  is  inserted  in  the  versions  and 
is  not  in  the  text.  By  retaining  it,  we  read,  I  am  the  Messiah. 
But  the  words  are  rather  the  solemn  expression  of  His  absohito 
divine  being,  as  in  ver.  5S :  "If  ye  believe  not  tliat  /  am." 
See  Dent,  xxxii.  39 ;  Isa.  xliii.  10;  and  compare  vv.  28,  5S  of 
this  chapter,  and  xiii.  19. 

25.  Even  the  same  that  I  said  unto  you  from  the  be- 
ginning (t^c  apyrjv  0  Ti  Koi  XaXtS  vfiiv).  A  very  difficult  pas- 
sage, on  which  the  commentators  are  almost  hopelessly  divided. 
There  are  two  main  classes  of  interpretations,  according  to  one 
of  which  it  is  to  be  read  interrogatively,  and  according  to  the 
other,  affirmatively.  The  two  principal  representatives  of  the 
former  class  are  Meyer,  who  renders  "  Do  yon  ask  that  whieli 
all  along  {rijv  Apx^f)  I  am  even  saying  to  yon  ? "  and  West- 
cott,  "  How  is  it  that  I  even  speak  to  you  at  all  (r^v  o/jx^p)"! 
So  also  Milligan  and  Moulton.  This  latter  rendering  requires 
the  change  of  5  ri,  the  relative,  that  which,  into  the  conjunction 
0T(,  that. 

The  second  class  of  interpreters,  who  construe  the  passage 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN. 


ITl 


affirmatively,  vary  in  their  explanations  of  t^w  apx^v,  wliicb  they 
render  severally,  altogether^  e^tseTttially,  first  of  aU,  in  the  beffin- 
ninff.  There  is  also  a  third  class,  who  take  t^i'  apyvfv  aa  a 
noun,  and  explain  according  to  Apoc.  xxi.  6,  "lam  the  begin- 
nlnij,  tluit  which  I  am  even  S'lying  unto  yow."  This  view  is 
represented  mostly  by  tlie  older  commentators,  Augustine, 
Bede,  Lampe,  and  later  by  Wordsworth. 

I  adopt  the  view  of  Aiford,  who  renders  tmentiaUy,  explain- 
ing by  generally,  or  traced  uj)  to  its  jxt'inciple  (ap^).  Shad- 
ing off  from  this  are  Godet,  absolutely;  Winer,  throughout; 
Thayer,  wholly  or  precisely.  I  render,  I  am  essentially  that 
which  I  even  gpeak  to  you.  If  we  accept  the  explanation  of  / 
am,  in  ver.  24,  aa  a  declaration  of  Jesus'  absolute  divine  being, 
that  thoiigjit  prepares  the  way  for  this  interpretation  of  His 
answer  to  the  question,  Wlto  art  thouf  Uia  words  are  the 
revelation  of  Himself,  "  IIo  appeals  to  His  own  testimony  as 
the  adequate  expression  of  Ills  nature.  They  have  only  to 
fathom  tiie  series  of  statements  lie  has  made  concerning  llim- 
Beif,  and  they  will  find  therein  a  complete  analysis  of  His  mia- 
aion  and  essence  "  (Godet).* 

26.  I  have  many  things,  etc.    The  connection  of  thought 
seems  to  be  as  follows :  "  I  being  such  as  my  words  show  taa 
to  be,  I  must  declare  the  whole  message  of  Him  by  virtue  of  - 
my  essential  union  with  whom  I  speak.     Many  things  I  have 
to  declare  and  judge,  and  you  may  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  them ; 


*  I  km  aware  of  the  objection  to  thin  readerlng  baaad  on  the  canou  thU 
tiiw  ipx^'  bos  thin  meanlDg  onl;  in  uegatlre  Bentences,  an  objeotiaa  irhloh  U 
-cartaiol;  not  parried  bj  Godet'a  iltempl  to  explain  this  passage  as  tnenUaUy 
□BgatiTe.  But  [his  rule  is  not  absolntelj'  univerEal  laee  Thayor'a  Leiicon.iwrt. 
1,  b.),  and  this  eiplanatloa  reemB  to  ma,  ou  the  whole,  to  fall  in  better  tban 
anj  other  with  lh«  general  sense  of  the  paasa^  as  I  anderstaiid  it.  1  alwaji 
differ  from  Canon  Weatcott  with  reluctance ;  bat  without  going  so  far  as  to 
■a/,  with  Aiford,  that  his  interpretation  is  uaj/rrtmmatifitl,  I  must  confess  that 
it  seems  to  me  artificial  and  forced,  aa  also  does  Mejer'i  rendering,  which  ia 
open  besides  to  shHous  criticism  on  grammatical  gronnda.  The  student  will 
And  the  different  interpretations  well  summed  up  and  olassiSed  in  Sahara 
Lange,  and  also  more  brietljr  in  Weiteott's  additional  note  to  oh.  rUi-  8m 
also  Heyer 


172  WORD  STUDIES  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

nevertheless,  I  must  speak  the  whole  truth,  the  things  which  I 
have  heard  from  Ilim  who  sent  tne  and  who  is  true." 

I  speak  to  the  world  (Xeyw  elt  toi'  humt/mi').  The  best  texts 
read  XoXai,  which  emphasizes  not  what  Christ  says  (which  would 
be  Xejm),  but  the  fact  that  lie  speaks.  See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  18. 
The  nse  of  the  preposition  ek  here  is  peculiar.  Lit..  "I  speak 
into  the  world;"  ho  that  my  words  may  reach  and  spread 
through  the  world.  See  for  a  similar  construction  1  Thess.  ii. 
9;  iv.  8;  Heb.  ii.  3.  So  Sophocles,  where  Electra  says,  K>)/nKra^ 
/i  €('$  Sirarra; , proclaim  me  to  all:  so  that  the  report  of  me  may 
reach  all  ears  ("  Electra,"  606). 

27.  They  understood   {eyvwcav).     Perceived,  as  Rev. 

He  tpake.    Imperfect.    1F(m  «jMaX:tn^  would  be  much  better. 

26.  Lifted  up.     See  on  iii.  14. 

Ve  shall  know  [yiw<re<r3€).  Bender,  perceive,  here  u  in 
ver.  27. 

I  am  He.     As  in  ver.  24,  on  which  see  note. 

Of  myself  {air  efuiinov).  Properly,  from,  myself,  as  Iter.^ 
at  vii.  17,  but  not  here.     See  on  vii.  17. 

Hath  taught  (eS/Bofen).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  taught.  The 
aorist  tense,  regarding  the  teaching  as  a  single  act.  Compare 
f)icovaa,  J  heard,  iii.  32. 

I  speak  these  things  (ravra  \a\S}).  Not  equivalent  to  90 
I  speak  [i.e.,  as  the  Father  taught  me),  but  an  absolute  declara- 
tion with  reference  to  these  present  revelations. 

39.  The  Father.    The  best  texts  omit. 

Alone.     See  ver.  16. 

Those  things  that  please  Him  (jii  iptarii  air^.  Lit,  u> 
Rev.,  the  things  thai  are  pleating  to  Him.     Always  (irdvroTt) 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  173 

closing  the  sentence,  is  emphatic.    Jesus'  holy  activity  is  haiU' 
ual  and  corUintunu.    See  iv.  34. 

30.  Believed  on  {iwiareua'ap  ek).  See  on  L  12,  and  compare 
believed  Him^  ver.  31. 

31.  Believed  on  Him  {irewurrevKoraii  avr^).  Note  the  dif- 
ferent phrase,  distinguishing  the  Jews  from  the  mixed  com- 
pany in  ver.  30.     Rev.,  rightly,  believed  Him. 

If  ye  continue  (iitif  ifiek  lueCmfTt).  The  emphasis  is  on  the 
ye^  addressed  to  those  whose  faith  was  rudimentary ;  who  be- 
lieved ZTiiTi,  but  did  not  yet  believe  an  Him.    Rev.,  aJnde. 

In  my  word  {iv  r^  \i^  r^  ^m)-  I'it.,  in  the  word  which 
is  mine:  peculiarly  mine,  characteristic  of  me.  The  expres- 
sion is  intentionally  stronger  than  my  word.  Compare  my 
love  (xv.  9). 

Indeed  {oKri^m).  Lit,  truly ^  as  Rev.  As  those  who  believe 
on  me,  not  as  those  who  are  moved  by  temporary  excitement 
to  admit  my  claims. 

33.  Were  n^^^r  in  bon6^g%  {^^XevKafiev  iroyirtyrt).  Rev., 
better,  have  never  yet  been  in  bondage  /  thus  giving  the  force 
of  the  perfect  tense,  never  up  to  this  time^  and  of  the  ir<i,  yet. 
In  the  light  of  the  promises  given  to  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  16 ; 
xxii.  17,  18,  the  Jews  claimed  not  only  freedom,  but  dominion 
over  the  nations.  In  their  reply  to  Jesus  they  ignore  alike  the 
Egyptian,  Babylonian,  and  Syrian  bondage,  through  which  the 
nation  had  successively  passed,  as  well  as  their  present  subjec- 
tion to  Rome,  treating  these  merely  as  bondage  which,  though 
a  /acty  was  not  bondage  by  righty  or  bondage  to  which  they 
had  ever  willingly  submitted,  and,  therefore,  not  bondage  in 
any  real  sense.  Beside  the  fact  that  their  words  were  the 
utterance  of  strong  passion,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the 
Romans,  from  motives  of  policy,  had  left  them  the  semblance 
of  political  independence.  As  in  so  many  other  cases,  they 
overlook  the  higher  significance  of  Jesus'  words,  and  base  their 


174 

reply  on  a  technicality.  These  are  the  very  Jews  wlio  believed 
JIi?/t  (ver,  Zl).  Stier  remarks:  "These  poor  believers  soon 
come  to  the  end  of  their  faith."  The  hint  of  the  possible 
inconstancy  of  their  faitij,  conveyed  in  the  Lord's  words  if  ye 
abide  in  my  word,  is  tliiis  justified. 

34.  Whosoever  committeth  (tto.?  o  iromv).  Rev,,  more 
cori'ectly,  eviry  one  that  committeth. 

Sin  (T171'  afiapriav).  The  definite  article,  tAe  sin,  shows  that 
Jesiis  does  not  mean  merely  a  simple  act,  but  a  life  of  tin. 
Compare  1  John  iii.  4-8,  and  doetk  the  tmUk  (John  iii.  21); 
doeth  the  ngliieouaness  (1  John  ii.  29). 

The  servant  (SoOX^s).  Or,  a  servant.  Properly,  a  hond- 
tervant  or  slave,     fciee  on  Matt.  xx.  26. 

Of  sin.  A  few  authorities  omit,  and  read  whosoever  com- 
mitleth  sin  is  a  bondservant.     Compare  Rom.  vi.  17,  20. 

35.  Abideth  not  in  the  house  forever.  A  slave  has  no 
permanent  place  in  the  house.  He  may  be  sold,  exchanged,  or 
cast  out.  Compare  Gen.  xxi.  10;  Gal,  iv.  30.  House.  See 
Heb.  iii.  6;  John  xiv.  2.  The  elder  son  in  the  parable  of  the 
prodigal  (Luke  xv.  29),  denies  his  sonship  by  the  words, "  These 
many  years  do  I  seme  thee  (SovXeiiw)." 

36.  Indeed  (orr«?).  Used  by  John  only  here.  It  means 
essentially. 

37.  Hath  no  place  (ow  x"P**)-  Rev.,  hath  not  free  course,  or 
maketh  no  way.  This  rendering  is  in  harmony  with  vv.  30, 
31,  concerning  those  who  believed,  but  did  not  believe  on  Him, 
and  who  showed  by  their  angry  answer,  in  ver.  33,  that  the 
word  of  Jesus  had  made  no  advance  in  them.  The  rendering 
of  the  A.  V.  is  not  supported  by  usage,  though  Field  ("Otium 
Norvieense")  cites  an  undoubted  instance  of  that  sense  from 
the  Epistles  of  Alcipliron,  a  post- Christian  writer,  who  relates 
the  story  of  a  parasite  returning  gorged  from  a  banquet  and 


OOSPRL  OF  JOHN.  175 

applying  to  a  phjBician,  who  adniiniBtered  an  emetic.  The 
parasite,  describing  the  effect  of  the  medicine,  says  that  the 
doctor  wondered  where  snch  a  mess  had  place  {ix^pqat).  For 
the  rendering  of  the  Rev.,  compare  Aristophanes :  irm  oiv  ov 
X^p^^  ToUpyov ;  '*  How  is  it  that  the  work  makes  no  progress  t  ^ 
(''Peace,"  472).  Plntarch,  e^copei  hih  T79  iroKem  0  X0709, 
"  the  loord  (or  report)  spread  (or  advanced)  through  the  city  " 
(*'C8Bsar,"712). 

38.  Ye  have  seen.   The  best  texts  read  ^Kovaare,  ye  heard. 

39.  Children  (ritcva).    See  on  i.  12. 

40.  A  man  {avSponrop).  Used  only  here  by  the  Lord  of 
Himself.  To  this  corresponds  His  calling  the  Devil  a  man- 
slayer  at  ver.  44.  Perhaps,  too,  as  Westcott  remarks,  it  may 
suggest  the  idea  of  the  human  sympathy  which,  as  a  man.  He 
was  entitled  to  claim  from  them. 

This  did  not  Abraham.  In  the  oriental  traditions  Abraham 
is  spoken  of  as  '^  full  of  loving-kindness." 

41.  Ye  do.    Or,  are  doing. 

Fornication  (iropveUv:).    From  iripinffUp  to  sett. 

42.  I  proceeded  forth— from  God  {iic  rov  0€ov  i(fjjkBov). 
Rev.,  came  forth.  The  phrase  occurs  only  here  and  in  xvi.  28. 
'EfeX^ii^  airo  is  found  in  xiii.  3 ;  xvi.  30,  and  emphasizes  the 
idea  of  separation ;  a  going  from,  Ood  to  whom  He  was  to  re- 
turn {flnd  goeih  unto  Ood).  ^E^eXSeh  wapd  (xvi.  27 ;  xvii.  8), 
is  going  Jrom  heside^  implying  personal  fellowship  with  God. 
*£^X96ii^  iKt  here,  emphasizes  the  idea  of  essential  community 
of  being:  "  I  came  forth  out  of?'* 

And  am  come  (^^.     As  much  as  to  say,  and  here  I  am. 

Of  myself  (oTT  ^/Lustn-oC).  Of  my  own  self-determination^ 
independently,  but  my  being  is  divinely  derived.  See  on  viL 
17. 


176 


WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT. 


43.  Speacli — word  (XaXion — Xlr/ov).  The  former  word  re- 
fers to  the  form,  tlie  latter  to  the  substance  of  discourse.  So 
Matt.  xxvi.  T3,  of  Peter,  "  thy  speech  (XoXttt)  bewrayeth  thee ; " 
thy  mode  of  epeaking.  If  they  had  uuderstood  the  substauce, 
they  would  have  uDderetood  the  form. 

Cannot.    See  oc  vii.  7. 

44,  Ye  (w^k).    Emphatic,  in  contrast  with  fifi^U,  toe,  of  ver. 


Of  your  father  {^«).  Very  aa^eBtive,  implying  community 
of  nature,  as  in  ver.  42.     Compare  1  John  iii.  8,  10. 

The  Devil.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  JoIiq  uses  Satan  only  once 
iu  the  Gospel  (xiii.  27),  frequently  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  no- 
where in  the  Epistles.  A  few  critics  Imve  adopted  the  very 
singular  rendering,  which  the  Greek  will  bear,  ye  are  of  the  fa- 
ther of  the  devil.  This  ia  explained  by  charging  John  with 
Gnosticism,  and  making  him  refer  to  the  Demiurge,  a  mysteri- 
ous and  inferior  being  descended  from  God,  by  whom  God,  ac- 
cording to  the  Gnostics,  created  the  universe,  and  who  had 
rebelled  against  God.  and  was  the  father  of  Satan.  It  is  only 
necessary  to  remark  with  Meyer  that  such  a  view  is  both  on- 
biblical  and  un-Jobannine. 

Lusts  {eiriSv/iuv;).     See  on  Mark  iv.  19. 

Ye  will  do  (Bekert  iroiew).  Wrong.  Properly,  ye  wUl  to  do. 
Rev.,  it  M  your  will  to  do.     See  on  vii.  17. 


Murderer  (av-dfiioTroxTOtw?).  Only  here  and  1  John  iii.  15. 
Lit.,  a  maiislayer  ;  from  aiiApatTro<!,  man,  and  Kreiim,  to  kiU. 
The  epithet  is  applied  to  Satan,  not  with  reference  to  the  mur- 
der of  Abel,  bnt  to  the  fact  of  his  being  the  author  of  death 
to  the  race.     Compare  Rom.  vii.  8,  11 ;  Heb.  ii.  14. 

From  the  beginning.     Of  the  human  race. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  177 

Stood  not  {ovic  ttmf/eep).  This  may  be  explained  in  two  ways. 
The  verb  may  be  taken  as  the  perfect  tense  of  ttm^fu,  wliich  is 
the  form  for  the  English  present  tense,  /  Hcmd,  In  that  case 
it  wonld  describe  Satan's  present  standing  in  the  element  of 
falsehood  :  he  etandeth  not  in  the  truth.  Or  it  may  be  taken 
as  the  imperfect  tense  of  aTi}iM»»  I  keep  my  etandmgj  or  simply, 
/  etandj  in  which  case  the  form  will  be  iarrficep,  and  it  will  mean 
that  even  before  his  fall  he  was  not  true,  or  that  he  did  not  re- 
main trne  to  God,  bnt  fell.  Meyer,  who  takes  it  in  the  former 
sense,  observes :  ^^  Tmth  is  the  domain  in  which  he  has  not  his 
footing ;  to  him  it  is  a  foreign,  heterogeneous  sphere  of  life. 
.  .  .  The  lie  is  the  sphere  in  which  he  holds  his  place."  So 
Mephistopheles  in  Goethe's  ^^  Faust " : 

*'  I  am  the  spirit  that  denies  t 
And  justlj  so ;  for  all  things  from  the  void 
Called  forth,  deserye  to  be  destroyed; 
'Twere  better,  then,  were  naaght  created. 
Thus,  all  which  joa  as  sin  haye  rated,— 
Deetniotion, — aught  with  e^il  blent,— 
That  is  mj  proper  element.** 

When  he  speaketh  a  lie  {orav  XaX$  to  '^ftevSo^).  More 
strictly,  whenever — the  lie,  as  opposed  to  the  truth,  regarded  as 
a  whole.  Two  interpretations  are  given.  According  to  one, 
the  Devil  is  the  subject  of  speaketh :  according  to  the  other, 
the  subject  is  indefinite;  ^^when  one  speaketh;"  stating  a 
general  proposition. 

Of  his  own  {iic  rav  iSl(»p).  Lit.,  atd  of  the  things  which  are 
his  own.  '^  That  which  is  most  peculiarly  his  ethical  nature  " 
(Meyer). 

For  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it  (<t*  ^tcuotit?  i<rrl  koX 
6  irarifp  avrov).  Three  interpretations  are  given.  1.  That  of 
the  A.  V.  and  Rev.  "  He  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  lie.^^ 
2.  "  He  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  liar  (since  of  it  may 
also  be  rendered  ofhimy^  3.  Making  d  irarifp  aurov,  his  fa- 
ther^  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  and  referring  his  to  one^  the 
indefinite  subject  of  speaketh  ("  when  one  speaketh  a  lie "). 
Vol.  IL— 12 


178 


WORD  BTOOIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


I 


Thus  the  rendering  will  be,  Beca/use  hia  father  is  a  Itar.  As 
to  Jeens'  course  of  thought — if  we  accept  either  of  the  first 
two  renderings,  it  turns  on  the  character  of  Satan.  After  elat- 
ing that  the  Jews  are  children  of  the  Devil,  lie  goes  on  to  de- 
scribe the  Devil  ae  a  murderer  and  a  liar,  and  enlarges  on  the 
latter  characteristic  hy  sajing  that  falsehood  is  liis, natural  and 
peculiar  element.  Whenever  he  lies  he  speaks  out  of  hia  own 
false  nature,  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  lie  or  of  the 
liar.  If  we  accept  tiie  third  rendering,  the  thought  turns  rather 
on  the  character  of  the  Jews  as  children  of  Satan.  He  utters 
first,  the  general  charge,  ye  are  the  children  of  ilie  Devil,  and 
as  Buch  will  do  his  works.  Hence  you  will  be  both  murderers 
and  (iara.  He  was  a  murderer,  and  ye  are  seeking  to  kill  rae. 
He  stood  not  in  the  truth,  neither  do  ye;  for,  when  one  speak- 
eth  a  lie,  he  speaketh  ont  of  bis  own  false  nature,  by  a  birth- 
right of  falsehood,  since  bis  father  also  is  a  liar.^ 

45.  And  because  I  (e7ti>  he  ort).  Bender  hit,  instead  of 
and.  You  would  belieye  falsehood  if  I  sliould  speak  it,  hut 
because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  you  do  not  believe.  The  /  is 
emphatic.     /,  because  I  tell  yon,  etc. 

46.  Convinceth  (i>,.ky)(et).    See  on  iii.  20.    Rev.,  corwid^. 

Sin  (afutpTta^).  Not  fattli  or  error,  but  sin  in  general,  as 
everywhere  in  the  New  Testament. 


*  I  adopt  thig  randering,  thaiigh  wllh  fame  hasitalion,  na  best  reprcBenting 
what  seems  to  mti  the  line  of  thoaghl  in  the  whole  passige,  and  as  avoiding 
toast  of  the  grammatical  difficiiltit^B.  I,  though  grammatlcaDy  defenbiblp. 
necesEitates  the  awkwardness  of  rendering  a&rau  as  neuter,  by  infereiiae  or 
derivation  from  the  masoiilino  ^(uanii.  It  ia  much  more  natural  to  take  it  as 
masouliue.  Both  1  and  3  require  6  irirritp  to  be  taken  as  the  j>redieale,  vbere- 
as,  baring  the  article,  it  would  naturally  be  experted  tci  be  the  subject.  The 
main  objeotion  to  3.  is  the  omiRnion  of  the  subject  with  AoA^,  which  is  harsh. 
Professor  Kendrick  (Amerioan  edition  of  Mejerl  cites  as  a  parallel  ^ifirf,  in 
2  Cot.  x.  10,  and  very  justly  observes  that  "  If  any  objectioD  may  lie  against 
this  cuuBtruction.  it  does  no)  approach  in  harshness  to  that  which  makes  i 
rarhp  alnoS  a  predicate  in  the  sense  urdlnarlly  auigued  to  it.  It  ll  adopted 
bj  Weiteott,  aud  Milligan  and  Uoulton. 


pted  J 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  179 

The  truth  (oXj^ioy).  Withpat  the  article,  and  therefore 
not  the  whole  truthy  bat  that  which  is  true  as  to  anj  part  of 
divine  revelation. 

47.  He  that  is  of  (o  &v  ix).  The  familiar  constmction.  See 
on  1.  46. 

48.  Say  we  not  well.  Indicating  a  current  reproach.  Well 
(tcdKoii)  is  litenHljjJinelyy  beaiUifiUly.  Sometimes  ironical,  as 
Mark  vii.  6. 

Thou  art  a  Samaritan  {Safuipetrff^  ct  <rii).  lit,  a  Samari- 
tan art  thou :  the  o^,  ihou^  terminating  the  sentence  with  a 
bitter  emphasis :  thou  who  prof essest  sach  reverence  for  Gk)d 
and  His  law,  art  only  a  Samaritan,  hostile  to  the  tme  law  and 
kingdom  of  God. 

49.  I  have  not  a  devil.  He  ignores  the  charge  of  being  a 
Samaritan,  refusing  to  recognize  the  national  distinction.  For 
defMre^  demon. 

50.  There  is  one  that  seeketh.  That  seeks  my  hoiiar  and 
judges  between  me  and  mj  opposers. 

51.  Keep  {Tnpii<njf),     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Saying  (XcPyoi/).     Better,  toord,  as  Rev.     See  on  ver.  43. 

He  shall  not  see  death  {l^dvarov  oif  fiff  Setopiicrri).  The 
phrase  S€a>p€tv  ^dvarop,  to  see  deaths  occurs  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  double  negative  signifies  in  nowise^  hy  no 
means.  Oefopi^ajjj  see^  denoting  steady ypro^aded  vision,  is  pur- 
posely used,  because  the  promise  contemplates  the  entire  course 
of  the  believer's  life  in  Christ.  It  is  not,  shaU  not  dieforevery 
but  shall  live  eternally.  Upon  this  life,  which  is  essentially  the 
negation  and  contradiction  of  death,  the  believer  enters  from 
the  moment  of  his  union  with  Christ,  and  moves  along  its  entire 
course^  in  tim>e  no  less  than  in  eternity,  seeing  only  life,  and 
with  his  back  turned  on  death.  The  reverse  of  this  truth,  in 
connection  with  the  same  verb,  is  painfully  suggestive.    The 


ISO  WORD  aTUDisa  m  the  new  testakbitt, 

qiieetion  is  pertinent  vrhj  the  Revisers  have  retained  set,  and 
Lave  not  substituted  behold,  as  in  so  many  iustances. 

53.  Now.  Looking  back  to  ver.  48.  If  we  were  too  hasty 
then  ill  saying  that  you  hare  a  demon,  your  words  now  fully 
justify  us.  They  understood  Uiin  to  be  speaking  of  natural 
death. 


I 


Is  dead  {atriSaiv).  Better,  disd;  referring  to  the  historical 
fact. 

Taste  of  death.  They  change  the  form  of  Jeaua'  statement. 
The  Lord  himself  tasted  of  death.  See  Heb.  ii,  9.  The  phrase 
taste  of  death  does  not  occur  in  the  Old  Testaraeut,  but  is  com- 
mon in  Ttabbiuic  writings.  "The  angel  of  death,"  say  the 
Rabbis,  "lioldeth  his  Bword  in  his  hand  at  the  bed's  head, 
having  on  the  end  thereof  three  drops  of  gall.  The  sick  man, 
spying  this  deadly  angel,  openeth  his  mouth  with  fear;  and 
then  those  drops  fall  in,  of  which  one  killeth  him,  the  second 
maketh  him  pale,  the  third  rottath." 

53.  Art  thou  (M  "'*')■  Thou,  emphatic,  and  the  negative 
interrogative  particle  implying  a  negative  answer,  thou  art  ruA 
surely  greater. 

Which  is  dead  (oittk).  The  compound  pronoun  3<7t«s,  which, 
is  used  explicatioely,  according  to  a  familiar  New  Testament 
usage,  instead  of  the  simple  relative.  The  sense  is,  seeing  thai 
ha  is  dead.  The  compound  relative  properly  indicates  the  doss 
or  kitid  to  which  an  object  belongs.  Art  thou  greater  than 
Abraham,  who  is  himself  one  of  the  dead!  So  Col.  iii.  5. 
"  Mortify  covetouaness,  seeing  it  is  {^it  eWlf)  idolatry."  See 
on  Matt.  xiii.  52 ;  xxi.  41 ;  Mark  xii,  18 ;  Luke  xii.  1 ;  Acta  vii 
53;  X.  41;  1  Pet.  ii.  11. 

55.  Saying  (Xiyoi'),     Properly,  word,  as  ver.  51.     So  Rev. 

56.  Rejoiced  (^oXXioo-aro).  With  extUtant  joy.  See  oo 
1  Pet.  i.  6. 


QOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  181 

To  866  {ha  l^).  The  Greek  oonBtruction  is  peculiar*  lit, 
that  he  shotdd  &ee;  i.e.,  in  tlie  knowledge  or  anticipation  that 
he  Bhoold  eee. 

My  day.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  ezpreseion  is  altogether 
uncertain. 

57.  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old  {wevnitcavra  #ny  oiJirw 
l^€49)*  Lit.,  thou  hast  not  yet  fifty  yeare.  The  age  of  com- 
pleted manhood. 

Hast  thou  seen.    Again  misquoting  the  Lord's  words. 

58.  Was,  I  am  {yepicSai,  iyti  eifu).  It  is  important  to  ob- 
serve the  distinction  between  the  two  verbs.  Abraham's  life 
was  under  the  conditions  of  time,  and  therefore  had  a  temporal 
b^inning.  Hence,  Abraham  came  into  beings  or  toM  bom 
{ya4c!^).  Jesus'  life  was  from  and  to  eternity.  Hence  the 
formula  for  absolute^  timeleea  existence,  Ictm  (eyoi  elfu).  See 
on  i.  3 ;  vii.  34. 

59.  Going  through  the  midst  of  them,  and  so  passed 

by.    The  best  texts  omit. 


CB AFTER  IX. 

1.  From  his  birth  {U  fpverrf;).    The  word  only  here  in  the 

New  Testament 

2.  This  man,  or  his  parents.  It  was  a  common  Jewish 
view  that  the  merits  or  demerits  of  the  parents  would  appear 
in  the  children,  and  that  the  thoughts  of  a  mother  might  affect 
the  moral  state  of  her  unborn  offspring.  The  apostasy  of  one 
of  the  greatest  Rabbis  had,  in  popular  belief,  been  caused  by 
the  sinful  delight  of  his  mother  in  passing  through  an  idol 
grove. 


WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THB  NBW  TESTAUBRT. 


3.  But  that  (aXV  wa). 
bom  blind)  that. 

4.  i  must  work  (c^e  Sel  ipyd^effSai).  Tlie  best  texta  read 
tjfid^,  ua,  instead  of  i/*i,  me.  Lit.,  i^  is  necessary  Jbr  us  to 
work.  The  disciples  are  thae  associated  by  Jesus  with  nimself. 
Compare  iii.  11. 

Sent  me,  not  v 
sends  the  Son. 


There  ie  an  ellipsis :  hut  {he  waa 


The  Sod  seDds  the  disciples,  as  the  Father 


5.  A«  long  as  (otoh).  More  correctlj',  whenBoewr.  Rey., 
'U)^m.  Whether  in  my  incarnation,  or  before  my  incarnation, 
or  after  it.     Compare  John  i.  4,  10. 

Th«  light.  See  on  viii.  13.  The  article  is  wanting.  Weat- 
cott  says,  "  Ciirist  is  '  light  to  the  world,'  as  well  as  '  the  one 
Light  of  the  world.'  The  character  is  unchangeable,  but  the 
display  of  the  character  varies  with  the  occasion." 

6.  On  the  ground  {x'^/miI).     Only  here  and  xviii.  6. 

Anointed  {en-e^yjto-e).  Only  here  and  ver.  11.  The  spittle 
was  regarded  as  having  a  peculiar  virtue,  not  only  as  a  remedy 
for  diseases  of  the  eye,  but  generally  as  a  charm,  eo  that  it 
was  employed  in  incantations.  Persiua,  describing  an  old  crone 
handling  an  infant,  says:  "She  takes  the  babe  from  the  cradle, 
and  with  her  middle  finger  moistens  its  forehead  and  lips  with 
spittle  to  keep  away  the  evil  eye"  ('* Sat.,"  ii.,  32,  33).  Tacitus 
relates  bow  one  of  the  common  people  of  Alexandria  impor- 
tuned Vespasian  for  a  remedy  for  his  blindness,  and  prayed 
him  to  sprinkle  bis  checks  and  the  balls  of  his  eyes  with  the 
secretion  of  his  month  ("  History,"  iv.,  81).  Pliny  says :  "  We 
are  to  believe  that  by  continually  anointing  each  morning  with 
fasting  saliva  {i.e.,  before  eating),  inflammations  of  the  eyes 
are  prevented"  ("Natural  History,"  xxviii.,  7).  Some  editors 
read  here  hri^KSv,  put  upon,  for  eireypurev,  anointed. 

Of  the  blind  man.     Omit,  and  read  as  Rev.,  hi««y«t. 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHH.  183 

7.  Wash  (v^^).     Wash  the  eyes.     See  on  Acts  xvi.  33. 

Siloam.  By  Rabbinical  writers,  SkUoach:  Septungint,  Sir 
Xadti:  Vulgate  and  Latin  fatiiera,  Siloe.  Josepbns,  generally, 
Siha.  In  scripture  alwaya  called  a  pool  or  tan/r,  built,  and  not 
natural.  The  eite  is  clearly  identified  in  a  lecesB  at  the  sunth- 
eastern  termination  of  Zion,  near  the  junction  of  the  valley  of 
TyroptEon  with  that  of  the  Kidron.  According  to  Dr.  Thom- 
BOM,  it  is  a  parallelogram  about  fifty-three  feet  long  and  eigh- 
teen wide,  and  in  its  perfect  condition  must  have  been  nearly 
twenty  feet  deep.  It  is  thus  the  smallest  of  all  the  Jernsalem 
pools.  The  water  flows  into  it  through  a  subterraneous  conduit 
from  tlie  Fountain  of  the  Vii^n,  and  the  waters  are  marked 
by  an  ebb  and  flow.  Dr.  Itobinson  witnessed  a  rise  and  fall  of 
one  foot  iu  ten  minutes.  The  conduit  has  been  traversed  by 
two  explorers.  Dr.  Robinson  and  Captain  Warren.  See  the 
account  of  Warren's  exploration  in  Thomson, "  Southern  Falee- 
tine  and  Jerusalem,"  p.  160.      On  the  word  pool,  see   on 


Sant.  The  Hebrew  word  means  out/tow  (of  waten) ;  mistio, 
probably  with  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  temple-mount 
sends  forth  its  spring-waters.  Many  expositors  find  a  typical 
significance  in  the  fact  of  Christ's  working  through  the  pool  of 
this  name.  Thus  Milligan  and  Moulton,  after  noting  the  fact 
that  the  water  was  drawn  from  this  pool  for  pouring  upon  the 
altar  during  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ;  that  it  was  associated 
with  the  "  wells  of  salvation  "  (lea.  xii.  3) ;  and  that  the  pouring 
out  of  the  water  symbolized  the  effusion  of  spiritual  blessing  in 
the  days  of  the  Messiah,  go  on  to  say :  "  With  the  most 
natural  interest,  therefore,  the  Evangelist  observes  that  its  very 
name  correspouds  to  the  Messiah ;  and  by  pointing  out  thia 
fact  indicates  to  us  what  was  the  object  of  Jesns  in  sending  the 
man  to  these  waters.  In  this,  even  more  distinctly  than  in  the 
other  particulars  that  we  have  noted,  Jesus,  in  sending  the  man 
away  from  Him,  is  keeping  Himself  before  him  in  everything 
connected  with  his  cure.  Thus,  throughout  the  whole  narra- 
tive, all  attention  is  concentrated  on  Jesus  Himself,  who  is  the 


ISl  WORD  BTDD1B8  IN  THR  NBW  TB8TAMBMT. 

Ligitt  of  tlie  world,  who  waa  '  sent  of  God '  to  open  blind  eyes.'' 
See  also  Westcott  and  Godet, 

8.  Blind.     1\ie  heet  texts  Bubatitule  irpoa^aiTf}^,  a  beggar. 

That  sat  and  begged  (o  KoS^fi^va^  koX  irpaaairSui).  Lit, 
the  <me  siMi/iff  ami  begging.     Detiotiiig  fioiiiethiiig  cnstomarj. 

9.  H«  said  (exeunt?).  The  strong  demonBtrative  throws  the 
man  iuto  strong  relief  as  the  central  figure. 

11.  To  the  pool  of  Siloam.  The  best  texts  read  aimpl;, 
Go  to  Siloam. 

Received  sight  (aviffKei^).  Originally,  to  look  «p,  as 
Matt  xiv.  19;  Mark  xvi.  4,  and  so  some  render  it  here;  bnt 
better,  /  recovered  aighl. 

14.  It  was  the  Sabbath  day  when  {^k  Se  atiffffarov  Sre). 
The  best  texts  read,  instead  of  ore  wken,  ev  ^  VI^P^  <^  which 
day,     Ut.,  it  was  a  Sabbath  on  ths  day  on  which. 

16.  Keepeth  not  the  Sabbath.  A  Rabbinical  precept  de- 
claroa,  "  It  is  forbidden  to  apply  even  fasting-apittle  to  the 
eyes  on  the  Sabbath."  The  words  in  ver.  14,  made  tfie  day, 
also  mark  a  specific  point  of  offence. 

18.  The  Jews.  Notice  the  change  from  iAe  Pharisees. 
Tho  Pharisees  had  already  divided  on  this  miracle  (ver,  16). 
The  Jews  represent  that  section  which  was  hostile  to  Jesus. 

Of  him  that  had  received  his  sight  (auroij  rov  avap\i^v 
tot).     Properly,  ^'- of  the  very  one  who  had  received." 

22.  Had  agreed — that  {tmveTe^itno — ivd).  The  sense  is, 
Aarf  formed  an  agreement  in  order  to  bring  about  this  end,  viz., 
that  the  confessor  of  Christ  should  be  excommunicated. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHIT.  185 

Confess  {ofioXoy^vp).     See  on  Matt.  vii.  23;  x.  32. 

He  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue  {diroffwar/toyov 
fanjTtu).  The  literal  rendering  caniiut  be  neatly  given,  as 
there  is  no  English  adjective  corresponding  to  airoirvvdrfwyo^, 
which  means  excluded  fr<nn.  the  synagogue:  as  nearly  as  pos- 
sible— that  fte  should  become  banished  fr&tn  the  synagogue. 
The  adjective  occurs  only  in  John's  Gospel — here,  xii.  42  ;  xvi. 
2,  Three  kinds  of  oxcominunication  were  recognized,  of  which 
only  the  third  was  the  real  cutting  off,  the  other  two  being  dis- 
ciplinary. The  first,  and  lightest,  was  called  rebuke,  and  lasted 
from  seven  to  thirty  days.  The  second  was  called  thrusting 
out,  and  lasted  for  thirty  days  at  least,  followed  by  a  "second 
admonition,"  which  lasted  for  thirty  days  more.  This  could 
only  be  pronounced  in  an  assembly  of  ten.  It  was  accompanied 
by  curses,  and  sometimes  proclaimed  with  the  blast  of  the  horn. 
The  excommunicated  person  would  not  be  admitted  into  any 
assembly  of  ten  men,  nor  to  public  prayer.  People  would  keep 
at  the  distance  of  four  cubits  from  him,  as  if  he  were  a  leper. 
Stones  were  to  be  cast  on  his  coffin  when  dead,  and  mourning 
for  him  was  forbidden.  If  all  else  failed,  the  third,  or  real  ex- 
communication was  pronounced,  the  duration  of  which  was 
indefinite.  Tlio  man  was  to  bo  as  one  dead,  ^o  intercourse 
was  to  be  held  with  him ;  one  must  not  show  him  the  road, 
and  though  he  might  buy  the  necessaries  of  life,  it  was  forbid- 
den to  eat  and  drink  with  him.  These  severer  forms  appear 
to  have  been  of  later  introduction,  so  that  the  penalty  which 
the  blind  man's  parents  feared  was  probably  separation  from 
all  religious  fellowship,  and  from  ordinary  intercourse  of  life 
for  perhaps  thirty  days. 

21.  Give  God  the  praise  (So?  S6{ai>  r^  deoi).  Rev.,  gwe 
glory  to  Ood.  Compare  Josh.  vii.  19;  1  Sam.  vi.  5.  Thig 
phrase  addressed  to  an  offender  implies  that  by  some  previous 
act  or  word  he  has  done  dishonor  to  God,  and  appeals  to  him 
to  repair  the  dishonor  by  speaking  the  truth.  In  this  case  it  ia 
also  an  appeal  to  the  restored  man  to  ascribe  his  cure  directly 
to  God,  and   not  to  Jesus.     Palgrave,  "Central  and  Eastern 


I 


186  WOBD  STUDIES  ITS  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT 

Arabia,"  says  that  tlie  Arabic  phrase  commouly  addreBsed  to 
one  who  has  said  aomethiLg  extremely  out  of  place,  is  IstagAfir 
AUa/if  Ask  pardon  of  God. 

We  know.     The  we  is  emphatic.      We,  the  wise  men  and 

guardians  of  religion. 

28.  Reviled  {iKoiS6pi]<Tca').  The  verb  means  to  reproach  or 
scold  in  a  loud  and  abusive  manner.  Calvin,  on  1  Cor.  iv.  12, 
"  being  reviled  we  bless,"  remarks:  ^'^Aoi&opia  is  a  harsher  rail- 
ing, which  not  only  rebukes  a  man,  but  also  sharply  bites  him, 
and  stamps  him  with  open  contumely.  Hence  Xoi&opeiv  is  to 
wound  a  man  as  with  an  accursed  sting." 

His  disciple  {ftaS^jriiii  iKelvov).  Lit.,  that  man^g  disciple. 
The  pronoun  has  a  contemptuous  force  which  is  not  given  by 


29.  Spake  (\<XaX»?ieei').  Perfect  tense,  haih  spoken,  and  the 
authority  of  Moses'  words  therefore  cotitinnes  to  the  present. 
So  Rev.    AaKim  is  to  talk,  familiarly.     See  Exod.  xxxiii.  11. 

Whence  he  is.     Compare  vii.  27  ;  viii.  14. 

30.  A  marvellous  thing  {^vfuurrov).  The  correct  reading 
adds  the  article,  the  marvel.     So  Rev. 

Ye  know  not.  Ye  is  emphatic :  ye  who  might  bo  expected 
to  know  about  a  man  who  has  wrought  such  a  miracle. 

And  yet  {xaX).     See  on  viii.  20;  i.  10. 

31.  We  know.  Here  the  pronoun  is  not  expressed,  and  the 
wfl  is  not  emphatic,  like  the  pronouns  in  w.  24,  29,  but  ex- 
presses the  common  information  of  all  concerning  a  familiar 
fact 

A  worshipper  of  God  {B^fxre^^).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  kiiidi'cd  word,  3eoa-e0eia,  godli/iieas,  occurs  only 
at  1  Tim.  ii.  10.     Compounded  with  Qe6<!,  Ood,  and  ae^ofiai,  t4 


<K«PBL  OF  JOHN.  187 

v)orshipj  the  same  verb  which  appears  in  evtrefiii^,  devout  (Acta 
X.  2,  7 ;  xxii.  12),  and  eifoifieui^  godliness  (Acts  iiL  12 ;  1  Tim. 
ii.  2,  etc.).  See  on  2  Pet.  i  3.  These  two  latter  words,  while 
thej  may  mean  reverence  toward  Ood,  may  also  mean  the  due 
fulfilment  of  human  relations ;  while  deoaefiifi,  toorsh'^^per  of 
Chd,  is  limited  to  piety  towards  God. 

32.  Since  the  world  began  {ite  rou  al&po^).  The  exact 
phrase  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  ^Att  al&ifoi  is  found 
in  Acts  iii.  21 ;  xv.  18 ;  &irb  r&v  aiiximv  in  CoL  i  26. 

34.  Altogether  (2(Xo9).    Lit,  all  of  thee. 

In  sins.  Standing  first  in  the  Greek  order,  and  emphatic, 
as  is  also  vh  thau^  in  both  instances.  '^  In  sins  wast  thou  bom, 
all  of  thee ;  and  dost  thou  teach  us  ? " 

Teach.  Emphatic.  Dost  thou^  thus  bom  in  sins,  assume 
the  office  of  teacher  f 

Cast  him  out.  From  the  place  where  they  were  conversing. 
Not  exoommuniccUedy  which  this  miscellaneous  gathering  could 
not  do. 

35.  Said  unto  him.    Omit  utUo  him. 

Dost  thou  believe  {ai^Trurreve^^)  ?  The  form  of  the  question 
indicates  the  confident  expectation  of  an  affirmative  answer. 
It  is  almost  an  affirmation,  you  surely  believe;  you  {aif,  em- 
phatic) who  have  borne  such  bold  testimony  to  me  that  they 
have  cast  yon  out  Note  the  phrase,  irurrevei^  ek,  believe  on, 
and  see  on  i.  12. 

Son  of  God.  Both  Tischendorf  and  Westcott  and  Hort 
read  Son  of  man. 

36.  Who  is  He?  The  best  texts  insert  xai,  and;  andtohe 
is  Het  which  imparts  an  air  of  eagerness  to  the  question. 

38.  Worshipped  {irpoaeKwqaev),     See  on  Acts  x.  26. 


188  WORD  BTDDIBB  IN  THE  NEW  TE8TAMBNT. 

39.  Judgment  (Kpi/i<i).  Not  the  tuii  of  jmjgiuent,  but  its 
restiU.  His  very  presence  in  the  world  coiistituteB  a  separatioriy 
which  is  the  primitive  idea  of  judgment,  between  those  who 
helieve  oo  Ilim  and  those  who  reject  Him.     See  on  iii,  17. 

40.  Are  we  blind  also  {ftii  xal  ^fiu';  rv^Xoi  (trfi^ir)  ^  The 
also  belongs  with  we.  The  interrogative  particle  hae  the  force 
of  WW  are  surely  not,  and  the  we  is  emphatic.  Are  we  aliio 
hlindt    So  Rev. 

41.  Ye  should  have  no  sin  (ou*  ay  etj^ere  a/ia/yruji').  Or, 
ye  would  Jtave  had.  The  phrase  afxaprlau  ej(€iv,  to  have  tin, 
oocurB  only  iu  Johu,  iu  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle. 


CHAPTER  X 

1.  Verily,  verily  {oftrp/,  aftifv).  The  formula  never  b^ns 
anything  quite  new,  but  connects  what  follows  with  what  pre- 
cedes. This  disiiourse  grows  out  of  the  assumption  of  the 
Pharisees  to  be  the  only  authoritative  guides  of  the  people  {ix. 
24,  29).    They  Lave  already  been  described  as  hlind  and  sinful. 

Sheepfold  {avKr^v  tSiv  wpo^aTav).  Lit.,  fold  of  the  sheep. 
So  Rev.,  better,  because  the  two  ideas  of  the  fiock  and  the  fold 
are  treated  distinctly.     Compare  ver.  16. 

Some  other  way  {iOCKayi^tv).  Lit.,y?-oin  some  other  grtar- 
ter.  The  thief  does  not,  like  the  shepherd,  aomefrora  some 
well-known  direction,  as  from  his  dwelling  or  from  the  pasture, 
but  from  an  unknown  quarter  and  by  a  road  of  bis  own.  This 
from  is  significant,  because,  in  the  previous  discourses,  Jesus 
has  laid  great  stress  on  the  source  from  which  lie  proceeded, 
and  has  made  the  difference  in  character  between  Ilimself  and 
His  opposers  turn  upon  difference  of  origin.  See  viii.  23,  42, 
44.  In  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter  He  brings  out  the  same 
thought  (vv.  30,  32,  33,  36). 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  189 

Thief — robber  {xXiirnf^ — Xjy^n^).  For  the  distinction  see 
on  Mark  zi.  17.  There  is  a  climax  in  the  order  of  the  words ; 
one  who  will  gain  his  end  bj  orctfty  and,  if  that  will  not  suffice, 
by  violence,  y^ 

2.  The  shepherd  {iroifi^^).  Better,  a  shepherd.  It  is  the 
character  rather  than  the  j/erson  that  is  contemplated. 

3.  Porter  (^v/M»po9).  From  Svpa,  doarj  and  &pa,  care.  An 
under-shepherd,  to  whose  charge  the  sheep  are  committed  after 
thej  have  been  folded  for  the  night,  and  who  opens  the  door 
on  the  arrival  of  the  shepherd  in  the  morning. 

Calleth  {KaXeT).  Bat  the  best  texts  read  ^pet,  expressing 
j)er8onal  address. 

4.  Putteth  forth  {ifcfidKrj).  Bev.,  more  strictly,  Aath  jmt 
forth.  Instead  of  leadeih  ont,  in  ver.  3.  It  implies  a  (xynstroMd  ; 
as  if  some  of  the  sheep  were  tknwilling  to  leave  the  fold.  Meyer 
says  that  putteth  forth  pictures  the  ma/nner  of  the  leading  out. 
He  lays  hold  on  the  sheep  and  brings  them  ont  to  the  door. 

His  own  sheep  {rh  XBul  irpd/Sara).  The  best  texts  read 
irdvra,  (My  for  irpSffara,  sheep  :  all  his  own.     So  Bev. 

Goeth  before.  As  the  Eastern  shepherd  always  does. 
Having  pushed  them  forth,  he  now  leads  them. 

Follow.  ^^  It  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  taught  to  fol- 
low, and  not  stray  away  into  the  unfenced  fields  of  wheat  which 
lie  so  temptingly  on  either  side.  The  shepherd  calls  from  time 
to  time  to  remind  them  of  his  presence.  They  know  his  voice 
and  follow  on ;  but  if  a  stranger  call,  they  stop,  lift  up  their 
heads  in  alarm,  and  if  the  call  is  repeated,  they  turn  and  flee 
from  him ;  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers.  This  is 
not  the  fanciful  costume  of  a  parable ;  it  is  simple  fact.  I  have 
made  the  experiment  often  "  (Thomson). 

6.  Parable  (irapoifjUav).  The  word  occurs  but  once  outside 
of  John's  writings  (2  Pet.  ii.  22).     The  usual  word  for  parable 


190  WORD    STUDIEB   IN  THE  NEW  TESTAirEKT. 

is  irapa^oK^,  wliifh  ie  once  rendered  proverb  in  tlie  A.  V.  (Luke 
iv.  23,  ciianged  ioparahle  hj  Rev.),  and  whicli  occurs  nowhere 
in  John.     For  tLe  diBtinctiou  eee  oD  Matt.  xiii.  3. 

7.  The  door  of  the  sheep.  Meaning  the  door  for  the 
slieep ;  not  the  door  of  the  fold,  "  The  thought  is  connected 
with  tlie  life,  and  not  simply  with  t)ie  ot^anization." 

10.  The  thief  (o  ickbmis).  Christ  puts  Himself  in  contrast 
with  the  meaner  criminal. 


I  am  come  (^XA)!").  More  correctly,  /  came.  I  am  coma 
would  be  the  perfect  tense. 

More   abundantly  {Trepurahv).     Lit.,  may  hare  abundance. 

11.  The  good  shepherd  {6  troifiijp  6  icaXo^).  Lit,  th^  shep- 
herd the  good  (shepherd).  KaXov,  though  not  of  freqnent  oc- 
currence in  John,  is  more  common  than  ofya^t,  good,  which 
occurs  but  four  times,  and  three  times  out  of  the  four  in  the 
neuter  gender,  a  goml  thing,  or  that  which  ie  good.  KoX^f  in 
John  is  applied  to  wine  (ii.  10),  three  times  to  the  shepherd  in 
this  chapter,  and  twice  to  works  (x.  32,  33).  In  classical  usage, 
originally  as  descriptive  of  outward forjn,  beautiful ;  of  useful- 
nssa,  as  9.faAr  haven,  a  fair  wijid.  Auspicious,  as  sacrifices. 
MoraUy  beaiUiftd,  noble;  hence  virtue  is  called  to  xaXoc 
Tlie  New  Testament  usage  is  similar.  Outwardly  fair,  as  the 
stones  of  the  temple  (Luke  xxi.  5) :  well  adapted  to  iispurpoae, 
ns  salt  (Mark  ix.  50) :  com^yetent  for  an  office,  as  deacma  (1 
Tim.  iv.  6) ;  a  steward  (1  Pet.  iv.  10) ;  a  soldier  (2  Tim.  ii. 
3):  expedieni,  wholesome  {Mark  ix.  43,  45,  47):  morally  good, 
nobU,  as  work^  (Matt.  v.  16);  conscience  (Ileb.  xiii.  18).  Tlie 
phrase  it  is  good,  i.e.,  a  good  or  proper  thing  (Rom.  xiv.  21). 
In  the  Septuagint  xaXo?  is  the  most  usual  word  for  good  &s 
opposed  to  evil  (Gen.  ii.  17;  xxiv.  50;  Isa.  v.  20).  In  Luke 
viii.  15,  leaKa^  and  offoSm  are  found  together  as  epithets  of  the 
heart;  hottest  (or  virtuous,  noble)  and  good.  The  epithet «oXos, 
applied  here  to  the  shepherd,  poiittt!  to  the  eBsential  goodness  as 
nobly  realized,  and  appealing  to  admiring  respect  and  affection. 


G08FBL  OF  JOHK.  191 

As  OanoD  Weetcott  obeerves,  ^^  in  the  f alfilinent  of  His  work^ 
the  Qood  Shepherd  claims  the  admiration  of  all  that  is  gen- 
erous in  man." 

Giveth  his  life  (r^y  ino^  oimA  rlBfiaui).  The  phrase  is 
peculiar  to  John,  occarring  in  the  Oospel  and  First  Epistle.  It 
is  explained  in  two  ways :  either  (1)  as  laying  dawn  as  a  pledge^ 
paying  as  a  pricey  according  to  the  classical  usage  of  the  word 
riSfffu.  So  Demostlienes,  to  pay  interest  or  the  alien  tax.  Or 
(2)  according  to  John  xiii.  4,  as  laying  aside  his  life  like  a  gar- 
ment The  latter  seems  preferable.  TlStffu,  in  the  sense  of 
to  pay  down  a  pricey  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testament, 
unless  this  phrase,  to  lay  doum  the  Ufe^  be  so  explained.*  In 
John  xiii.  4,  layeth  aside  His  garments  (riSffai  riL  ifjLdrui)  is  f ol- 
lowed,  in  ver.  12,  by  had  taken  His  garmefits  {ekafie  riL  ifjLdrui). 
So,  in  this  chapter,  giveth  {rlStfaw)  Sis  life  (ver.  11),  and  /  lay 
down  {ri&rffu)  my  life  (vv.  17,  18),  are  followed  by  Xafieuf  ^*  to 
take  it  again."  The  phrases  rifv  '^t/x^y  iStjKe  He  laid  dawn 
His  lifsy  and  riv;  '^^vxi^^  Setvai  to  lay  down  our  liveSj  occur  in 
1  John  iii.  16.  The  verb  is  used  in  the  sense  of  laying  aside  ia 
the  classics,  as  to  lay  aside  toavy  shields^  etc.  Compare  Matt 
XX.  28,  iowHU  rifp  '^ffv^v,  to  give  His  life. 

For  the  sheep  {yirip).     On  behalf  of. 

12.  Hireling  (juaBiorW}*    From  fuaS6^,  hire.    See  on  3 
Pet.  ii.  18.     Wye.,  merchant. 

Seeth  {Seapetj.     Very  graphic.     His  gaze  is  Jlooed  with  the 
fimcination  of  terror  on  the  approaching  wolf.    Compare  Dante: 

**  Bot  not  8o  maoh,  that  did  not  gire  me  fear 
A  lion^B  aspect  which  appeared  to  me. 

*  *  *  9 

And  a  she  wolf,  that  with  all  hungerings 
Seemed  to  be  laden  in  her  meagreness, 
And  many  folk  has  caused  to  lire  forlorn  t 
She  brought  npon  me  so  mach  heariness, 
With  the  affright  that  from  her  aspect  came, 
That  I  the  hope  relinqaished  of  the  height." 

"  Inferno,"  i.,  44^54. 


*  Hnther  on  1  John  iii.  16,  claims  that  this  sense  would  be  admiasible  onlj 
tn  the  event  of  the  phrase  being  oaed  inrariablj  with  ^4p  rwot^  on  behd^afcne. 


192  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NSW  TBSTAMBNT. 

Westcott  cites  Aagastine  on  this  word :  fuga  ammi  timar 
eatj  the  flight  of  the  mind  ia  oauwrdice;  with  which  again  com- 
pare Dante : 

"  So  did  mj  Boul,  thai  itiU  wm  fleeing  onwird, 
Tarn  itself  Uok,'*  etc. 

'«'  InfeniO|»  L,  25. 

Leaveth  (aifUrfa't).    See  on  iy.  3. 

Catch eth  {apTrd^€i).  Better,  as  Bev.,  snatcheih;  though 
ccUch  is  doubtless  used  bj  the  A.  Y.  in  its  earlier  and  stronger 
sense,  from  the  low  Latin  caciarey  to  chase,  corrupted  from  cajh 
tare,  to  snatch  or  lay  hold  of.  Compare  the  Italian  cacciare,  to 
hunt.  The  same  word  is  used  at  ver.  28,  of  j>hu)king  out  of 
Christ's  hand.     See  on  Matt.  xi.  12. 

The  sheep.  The  best  texts  omit.  Read,  as  Bev.,  aoattereth 
them,. 

13.  The  hireling  fleeth.  The  best  texts  omit.  Bead,  as 
Bev.,  supplying  he  fleeth. 

Car  eth  not  {ov  fUXei  avr^).  Lit.,  the  sheep  are  not  a  care 
to  him.    See  on  1  Pet.  v.  7.     The  contrast  is  suggestive. 

14.  Am  known  of  mine  {yttHoa-KOfuu  xnrh  r&v  ifdAp).  The 
best  texts  read,  yivoHrKovai  fie  rh  i/ui^  mine  own  know  me.  So 
Bev. 

15.  As  the  Father  knoweth  me.  Connect  these  words 
with  the  previous  sentence :  mdne  own  know  ms,  even  as  the 
Father  hnoweth  me,  etc. 

16.  Fold  (auX%).  From  Sm,  to  Mow,  hence,  strictly,  a  place 
open  to  the  air ;  an  uncovered  space  enclosed  by  a  wall.  So 
Homer,  of  the  cave  of  the  Cyclops: 

"  But  when  we  oame  upon  that  neighboring  coasti 
We  saw  upon  its  verge  beside  the  sea 
A  oaTe  high-vaulted,  overbrowed  with  shrubs 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  193 

Of  Uarel.     There  muoh  cattle  laj  at  rest, 

Both  sheep  and  goats.     Around  it  was  a  eowrt  (<Ak4i\ 

A  high  enoloeore  of  hewn  stone.** 

**Odjr8se7,"ix.,  181-185. 

Dr.  Thomson  says :  ^^  The  low  bailding  on  the  hill-side  which 
we  have  jnst  passed,  with  arches  in  front,  and  its  enclosure 
protected  by  a  rabble  wall  and  thorny  hedge,  is  a  sheepfold  or 
mardh.  .  .  .  The  mar&hs  are  generally  built  in  a  valley, 
or  on  the  sonny  side  of  a  hill,  where  they  are  sheltered  from 
the  winter  winds.  In  ordinary  weather  the  sheep  and  goats 
are  gathered  at  night  into  the  enclosed  yard ;  bat  when  the 
nights  are  cold  and  stormy  the  flocks  are  shut  up  in  the  mar&h. 
The  sharp  thorn-bashes  on  the  top  of  the  wall  that  snrroands 
the  yard  are  a  defence  which  the  prowling  wolf  will  rarely 
attempt  to  scale.  The  leopard  and  panther  of  this  country, 
however,  when  pressed  with  hanger,  will  sometimes  overleap 
this  thorny  hedge,  and  with  one  bound  land  amongst  the  fright- 
ened fold  "  (^^  Central  Palestine  and  PhcBuicia,"  p.  591).  Com- 
pare Homer : 

**  As  a  lion  who  has  leaped 
Into  a  fold — and  he  who  guards  the  flock 
Has  wounded  but  not  slain  him — feels  his  rage 
Waked  bj  the  blow; — the  affrighted  shepherd  then 
Ventures  not  near,  but  hides  within  the  stalls, 
And  the  forsaken  sheep  are  put  to  flight, 
And  huddling,  slain  in  heaps,  till  o*er  the  fence 
The  sarage  bounds  into  the  fields  again.  '* 

♦•Diad/'v.,  186-143. 

Bring  (ayayetp).  Better,  lead^  as  Rev.,  in  margin.  Compare 
ver.  3,  leadetk  them  out.  The  idea  is  not  hrimging  them  to^ 
gether  (as  awaydyrf,  xi.  52),  or  cond/uctmg  them  to  oneptaoe^  bat 
assuming  the  guidance. 

There  shall  be  {yei^a-ereu).  More  correctly,  shcUl  come  to 
he.     Some  editors  read  yevi^a-ovrai,  they  shall  become. 

One  fold  (/i/a  irolfivri).    The  A.  Y.  entirely  ignores  the  dis- 
tinction between  aiiKri,  fold^  and  wol^vri,  flock.    The  latter  word 
is  found  Matt.  xxvi.  31 ;   Lake  ii.  8 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  7,  and  always 
Vol.  IL— 18 


194 


distinctly  i; 


a  also  the  din 


IllltiVI 


I 


e  TTOlfLVtOV, 

tittle  Jto<:k  (Luke  xii.  32 ;  1  I'et.  v,  2,  etc.).  Itender,  as  Itev., 
one  flock,  one  s/ny/Zierd.  Su  Tyud.  Compare  Ezek.  xxxlv.  23. 
We  are  oot,  however,  to  say  with  Trench  ("  Authorized  Verslou 
of  tlie  New  T*!Ht»ment "),  that  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile  are  tlie 
two  yb^  which  Christ  will  gather  into  a  single  ^ci'.  The 
heathen  are  not  conceived  as  a  Jbld,  hut  as  a  dispersion.  See 
vii,  35;  xi.  53;  and,  aa  Meyer  observes,  "the  thought  of  a 
divine  leading  of  the  heathen  does  not  correspond  at  all  to  the 
figure  of  &fold,  of  which  tlie  conception  of  tlieocratic  fellow- 
ahip  constitutes  an  essential  feature."  So  Bengel.  "lie  says, 
othei-  theep,  not  another /(iZrf,  for  they  were  scattered  abroad  in 
the  world."  When  Jesus  speaks  of  the  other  sheep  who  are 
not  from  thiafoM,  the  emphasis  is  on/old^  not  on  this.  Com- 
pare Rom.  xi.  17  sqq.  Nor,  moreover,  does  Jesus  mean  that  the 
Gentiles  are  to  be  incorporated  into  the  Jewish  fold,  but  that 
the  unity  of  the  two  is  to  consist  in  their  common  relation  to 
Himself.  "  The  unity  of  the  Church  does  not  spring  out  of  the 
extension  of  the  old  kingdom,  but  is  the  spiritual  antitype  of 
that  earthly  figure.  Nothing  is  said  of  onefold  under  the  new 
dispensation"  (Westcott).  It  will  readily  be  seen  that  the  in- 
correct rendering  fostered  by  the  carelcssnesB  or  the  mistake  of 
some  of  the  Western  fathers,  and  by  the  Vulgate,  which  renders 
both  words  by  ovile,fold,  baa  been  in  the  interest  of  Koinish 
claims. 

18.  Taketh  away  (otpei)-  Some  texts  read  ^pmi,  took  away. 
According  to  this  reading  the  word  would  point  back  to  the 
work  of  Jesus  as  conceived  and  accomplished  in  the  eternal 
counsel  of  God,  where  His  sacrifice  of  Ilhnself  was  not  exacted, 
but  was  His  own  spontaneous  ofi'ering  in  harmony  with  the 
Father's  will. 


I  lay  it  down  of  myself.    Wye,  I  put  it  from.  mysAf. 
Power  (€foiw«H').     Rev.,  in  margin,  ri^hi.     See  on  i.  13. 
Commanclnient  (evroX^f).     See  on  Jas.  ii.  8. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  195 

19.  There  was  a  division  {fryifryM  iyipero).  Rev.,  more 
correctly,  there  arose.  Tlie  word  o^/a/ta,  divisiony  from  <7%^(ki, 
to  deavej  describes  a  fact  which  continually  recnrs  in  John's 
narrative.  See  vi.  52,  60,  66  ;  vii.  12,  26  sqq. ;  viii.  22  ;  ix. 
16, 17;  X.  19,  24,  41 ;  xi.  87  sqq. ;   xii.  19,  29,  42 ;  xvi.  18, 19. 

Words  {\oyavs).    Or,  dieoourees. 

21.  That  hath  a  devil  (BcufAopi^ofUvov).  Lit,  ofansdenum- 
iaed.    Rev.,  anepoeeessed  with  a  devil. 

Can  a  devil  (jiii  Suvartu).    8v/rely  a  demon  oa/nnot 

22.  Feast  of  the  dedication  {iyxa^ui).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament  The  word  signifies  renewal^  from  tcaivo^^  n&Wy 
fresh.  Josephus  calls  it  ^Aro,  lights.  It  was  instituted  by 
Jndas  Maccabsaus  (b.o.  164),  in  memory  of  the  cleansing  of  the 
temple  from  the  pollutions  of  Antiochos  Epiphanes.  The  vic- 
torions  Jews,  says  Dean  Stanley,  ^^  entered  and  found  the  scene 
of  havoc  which  the  Syrian  occupation  had  left.  The  corridors 
of  the  priests'  chambers,  which  encircled  the  temple,  were  torn 
down ;  the  gates  were  in  ashes,  the  altar  was  disfigured,  and  the 
whole  platform  was  overgrown  as  if  with  a  mountain  jungle  or 
forest  glade.  It  was  a  heartrending  spectacle.  Their  first  im- 
pulse was  to  cast  themselves  headlong  on  the  pavement,  and  blow 
the  loud  horus  which  accompanied  all  mournful  as  well  as  all 
joyful  occasions — the  tocsin  as  well  as  the  chimes  of  the  nation. 
Then,  whilst  the  foreign  garrison  was  kept  at  bay,  the  warriors 
first  began  the  elaborate  process  of  cleansing  the  polluted  place. 
.  .  .  For  the  interior  of  the  temple  everything  had  to  bti 
refurnished  afresh — vessels,  candlesticks  and  incense-altar,  and 
tables  and  curtains.  At  last  all  was  completed,  and  on  the  25th 
of  Chisleu  (middle  of  December),  the  same  day  that,  three  years 
before,  the  profanation  had  occurred,  the  temple  was  rededi^ 
cated.  .  .  .  What  most  lived  in  the  recollection  of  the 
time  was  that  the  perpetual  light  blazed  again.  The  golden 
candlestick  was  no  longer  to  be  had.  Its  place  was  taken  by  an 
iron  chandelier,  cased  in  wood"  ("  Jewish  Church,"  pt  iii.,  345, 
846).    According  to  tradition,  the  oil  was  found  to  have  been 


196  WORD  ST0D1EB  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

desoerated,  ami  only  one  flagon  of  pure  oil,  sealed  wilh  the 
High-Frieat's  signet,  was  found,  anfficient  to  feed  the  candle- 
etiek  for  a  single  daj.  But  by  a  miracle  the  flagon  was  re- 
plenished during  eight  days,  until  a  fresh  supply  could  he 
procured.  The  festival  lasted  for  eight  days.  Lights  were 
kindled,  not  only  in  the  temple,  but  in  every  home.  Pious 
householders  lighted  a  lamp  for  every  inmate  of  the  home, 
and  tiie  most  zealous  added  a  light  every  night  for  every  indi- 
vidual, 80  that  if  a  house  with  ten  inmates  began  with  ten 
lights,  it  would  end  with  eighty.  The  Jews  aaeembled  in  the 
temple,  or  in  the  synagogues  of  the  places  where  they  resided, 
bearing  branches  of  palm,  and  singing  psalms  of  praise.  No 
fast  or  mourning,  on  account  of  any  calamity  or  bereavement, 
was  permitted  to  commence  during  the  festival. 

23.  Solomon's  porch.  A  covered  colonnade  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  outer  court  o£  the  temple.  According  to  Josephus 
it  was  a  relic  of  Solomon's  days,  which  had  remained  intact  in 
the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 

24.  Make  us  to  doubt  (t^c  ■^v)(^v  fifiMv  eUpevi).  Lit.,  Uft 
■up  oar  soul.  Excite  us  and  inflame  our  hopes.  Rer.,  held  tu 
in  auajienge. 

Plainly  (■n-o^piTo-ia).    See  on  vii,  13. 

26.  As  I  said  unto  you.    The  best  texts  omit. 

27.  My  sheep  (t^  ■rrp6^aTa  rll  tftll).  Lit.,  i^e  sha^,  thow 
that  are  mine.  A  characteristic  form  of  expression  with  John, 
Compare  iii.  29;  v.  30;  xiv.  15,  etc. 

28.  I  give  (BiSoifii).  Not,  Twill  gvoe.  The  gift  is  present 
and  continuous.     Compare  iii.  36. 

Shall  pluck  {apirdffeC).  See  on  ver.  12.  Compare  am ^Ttcit, 
ver.  29.  Here  Jesus  speaks  of  the  fact;  there  of  the  jxnai- 
hiliit/.     Rev.,  snatch.     Wye,  ravish. 


^ 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  197 

29.  My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all 
(o  irarrip  fjuw  t^  BiSajid  ftoi,  fieit^aov  iravrtop  i<mv).  There  is  con- 
siderable confusion  here  about  the  reading.  Westcott  and 
Hort  and  Tischendorf  read  o  irarrip  fjtov  (Tischendorf  rejects 
fAov)  5  BiSnteh/  fiOL  TrcurrtDP  ftel^ov  iariv.  That  which  the  Father 
(or  my  FiUher)  hath  given  fne  is  greater  than  all.  Bev.  gives 
this  in  the  mai^n.     For  ga^>ey  render  hath  given. 

30.  One  (&).  The  netUerj  not  the  maeotdine  eU,  oneperean. 
It  implies  unity  of  eseencej  not  merely  of  wiU  or  oiporoer. 

31.  Took  up— again  {iffdcrraaav — irdKiv).  Again  refers  to 
viii.  59.  It  seems  as  though  a  different  verb  is  purposely 
chosen  here  (compare  lipav  took  vp^  in  viii.  59),  since  the  inter- 
view took  place  in  Solomon's  porch,  where  stones  would  not  be 
at  hand.    The  verb  here  may  mean  to  take  up.    So  Ajax  says : 

''Send  some  one  m  a  meesenger  to  bear 
The  otU  news  to  Teucros,  that  he  first 
Xaj  Ifft  (^a0T^)  my  corpse  by  this  sharp  sword  tramftxed." 

Sophocles,  <*Ajaz,**837. 

Its  more  usual  meaning  in  the  New  Testament,  however,  is  to 
hea/r  or  carry.  So  of  the  oroee  (John  xix.  17 ;  Luke  xiv.  27). 
Here  it  might  very  properly  be  rendered  brought^  perhaps  from 
the  works  which  were  then  going  on  at  the  temple.  See  fur- 
ther on  xiL  6. 

32.  Good  works  (/eoX^).  Beautiful^  noble  works,  adapted 
to  call  forth  admiration  and  respect  Compare  Mark  xiv.  6, 
and  see  on  ver.  11. 

For  which  of  theae  worka  (hih  irotov  avr&p  Ipyov).  Lit, 
/or  what  kind  of  a  work  of  these.  This  qualitative  force  of 
'ttmov  is  not  to  be  lost  sight  of,  though  it  is  impossible  to  ren- 
der it  accurately  without  paraphrasing.  Jesus  does  not  mean, 
as  the  A.  V.  and  Rev.  imply,  "  for  which  one  of  these  works," 
but  *^  wha^  is  the  character  of  that  particular  work  among  all 
these  for  which  you  stone  me  ? "  The  me^  closing  the  sentencey 
is  emphatic 


198 


WORD  BTUDIHS  IN  THE  ITEW  TESTAMENT. 


33.  Saying.    Omit. 

34.  Is  it  not  written  {ovk  iariv  feypa/i/ihnv).  More  strict- 
ly, does  it  not  staitd  written. 

Law  {vifi^).  The  word  is  sometimeB  need  id  the  New  Tes- 
tament of  other  Bcripturea.  See  xii.  34;  iv,  25;  Rom.  iii.  19; 
1  Cor.  xiv.  21. 

I  taid,  etc.     The  reference  is  to  Pb.  Izxxii.  6. 

35.  The  Scripture  (^  ypcn^).  1h&  jtasmge  of  scriptnra 
See  on  ii.  23;  v.  47. 

Broken  (Xu^itu).  Lit.,  (ooaened.  Wye,  undone.  Tlie 
word  is  characteristic  of  John.  He  uses  it  of  the  deBtruction 
of  the  temple  (ii.  19) ;  the  breaking  of  the  Sabbath  (v.  18) ;  the 
violation  of  the  law  (vii.  23);  the  destruction  of  Satan's  works 
(1  John  iii.  8),  besides  elsewhere  in  the  pliysical  sense. 

36.  Sanctified  {fiylacrep).  Better,  as  Rev.,  in  margin,  conse- 
crated. The  fundamental  idea  of  the  word  is  separation  and 
consecration  to  the  service  of  Deity,  See  note  on  Acts  xxvi. 
10,  on  the  kindred  adjective  arfUK,  holy  or  consecrated. 

The  Son  of  God.  There  is  no  article.  Its  absence  directs 
us  to  tlie  character  rather  than  to  the  person  of  Jesus.  The 
judges,  to  whom  the  quotation  in  ver.  35  refers,  were  called 
gods,  as  being  representatives  of  God.  See  E.\od.  xxi.  6 ;  xxii. 
8,  where  tlie  word  rendered  judges  is  elokim,  gods.  In  Exod. 
xxii.  28,yotfo  appears  in  the  A.  V.*  Jesus'  course  of  reasoning 
ifi,  if  these  judges  could  be  called  gods,  how  do  I  blaspheme  in 
calling  myself  Son  of  God,  since  the  Father  lias  consecrated  me 
and  sent  me  on  a  special  mission  to  the  world ! 

37.  Believe  me  (ttm-teiWc  fioC).  Notice  believe,  with  the 
■imple  dative ;  beliere  me,  not  on  me.  It  is  a  qnestioD  of  futh 
in  His  testtTnony,  not  in  VliAperson.     See  on  i.  12. 


*  Bav.  God,  with  the  judgei  iu  margin. 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  199 


38.  In  Him.  The  best  texts  read  i»  r^S  warpi,  m  the  Father. 

39.  Again.  Pointing  back  to  vii.  30, 32, 44,  where  the  word 
wtdatUf  to  eeisej  is  foand. 

Escaped  out  of  {i^XSev  itc).  Rev.,  literally,  went  forth  out 
of.    The  phrase  occurs  only  here. 

40.  Beyond  Jordan  {iripav  roD  lopSdvov).  Into  the  region 
called  Percea^  from  iripav,  beyond.  It  was  on  the  east  side  of 
the  river,  and  was  the  ancient  possession  of  Gad  and  Renben. 
It  corresponds,  in  an  enlarged  sense,  to  the  region  round  about 
Jordan  (Matt.  iiL  5;  Luke  iii.  3).  Compare  Matt.  zix.  1; 
Mark  x.  1. 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  Now  (Si).    Marking  the  interruption  to  Jesus'  retirement 

(x.40). 

Lazarus.    See  on  Luke  xyi.  20. 

2.  Anointed  (oKj^h^^/wrd).  Three  words  for  anointing  are 
found  in  the  New  Testament:  aXel^,  XP^'  ^^^  ^^  com- 
pounds, and  fAvpl^c».  The  last  is  used  but  once,  Mark  xiv.  8,  of 
anointing  the  Lord's  body  for  burying.  Between  the  two 
others  the  distinction  is  strictly  maintained.  Xpito,  which  oc- 
curs five  times,  is  used  in  every  case  but  one  of  the  anointing 
of  the  Son  by  the  Father  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Luke  iv.  18 ; 
Acts  iv.  27;  x.  38;  Heb.  i.  9).  In  the  remaining  instance 
(2  Cor.  i.  21)  of  enduing  Christians  with  the  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Thus  the  word  is  confined  to  sacred  anointing.*  ^AXei- 
^  is  used  of  all  actual  anointings.  See  Matt.  vi.  17 ;  Mark 
vi.  13  ;  Luke  vii.  38 ;  Jas.  v.  14.     The  same  distinction  is  gen- 

*  Trench  (Synon/ms)  appears  to  oTerlook  the  exception  in  2  Cor.,  though 
he  cites  the  passage.  He  sajs  that  xp^up  is  cUmliUdy  rtitricted  to  the  anoint- 
ing  of  the  Son  hjr  the  Father,  p.  181. 


200  WORD  STUDIES  IH  THB  SEW  TB8TAMENT, 

erally  maintained  in  the  Septnagint,  though  with  a  few  excep- 
tions, as  Num.  iii.  3. 

3.  Thou  lovest  (•^(X«(«).  See  on  v.  20.  "  They  do  Dot  say, 
cOTTie.     He  who  loves  needa  but  know  "  (Bengel). 

i.  Unto  death.    Not  to  have  death  ae  its  final  issne. 

For  the  glory  (vtrip).  Here,  as  elsewhere  in  John,  tn  hehalf 
of.  Canon  Westcott  remarks :  "  The  sickness  is  regarded  in  a 
triple  relation  ;  untu,  in  respect  of  the  actual  result ;  in  iehalf 
of,  in  respect  of  tiie  suffering  borne ;  in  order  thai,  in  respect 
of  the  divine  purpose," 

5.  Lov«d  (ifi&ra).  Notice  the  verb  Jiere :  not  ^iXw,  as  ver. 
3.    See  on  t.  20.     Lazarus  is  not  mentioned  in  Luke  x.  3S  sqq. 

8.  Of  late  sought  (la/v  i^-fyrovv).  Kev.,  much  better,  giving 
the  true  force  of  vvv,  now,  and  of  the  imperfect :  laere  but  nou> 
seeking. 

Goest  (vTTOTete).  Dost  thou  loithdraw  from  this  safe  r^ 
treat?     See  on  vi.  21 ;  viii.  21. 

9.  Walk  {TTepmoT^).  Walk  ahout,  in  the  pursuit  of  bis  or- 
dinary business.     Wye,  wander. 

11.  Sleepeth  (xc«o/^i7Tfu).  More  correctly,  as  Kev.,  hath 
fallen  asleep.     See  on  Acts  vii,  60 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  4. 

Awake  him  out  of  sleep  (e^vTmitra  airov).  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament. 

12.  Shall  do  well  ((rw^o-eroi).  Lit.,  shall  he  saved.  Rev., 
he  will  recover.  Wye,  shall  he  safe.  Tjnd.,  shall  he  do  well 
tnougk. 

13.  Taking  rest  (xot/i^o-eow).  Akin  tc  the  verb  in  ver.  IL 
Wye,  the  sleeping  of  deep.     Tynd.,  the  natural  sle^. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  201 

15.  For  your  sakes—to  the  intent  ye  may  believe. 
These  two  clanBes,  which  are  separated  in  the  A.  Y.  and  Eev., 
are,  in  the  Oreek  order,  placed  together :  for  your  sakesj  to  the 
intent  ye  may  believe  /  the  latter  clanse  being  explanatory  of 
the  former. 

That  I  was  not  there.  BengePs  comment  is  beautiful  and 
characteristic.  ^^It  accords  beantifnlly  with  divine  propriety 
that  we  read  of  no  one  having  died  while  the  Prince  of  life 
was  present  If  you  suppose  that  death  could  not,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  Jesus,  have  assailed  Lazarus,  the  language  of  the  two 
sisters,  vv.  21,  32,  attains  loftier  meaning ;  and  the  Lord's  joy 
at  His  own  absence  is  explained." 

Unto  him  (7r/>09  a\n6v).  Most  touching.  To  Atm,  as  (hough 
he  were  yet  living.  Death  has  not  broken  the  personal  relation 
of  the  Lord  with  His  friend. 

16.  Didymus  {A&viaos;).  Not  a  surname  of  Thomas,  but 
the  Oreek  equivalent  of  the  Aramaic  name,  tmn.  See  on 
Mark  iii.  18.     The  word  occurs  only  in  John's  Gospel. 

Fellow-disciples  {avfAjjLaSfjTdi^).  Only  here  in  the  New 
Testament 

We  may  die.  ^^  He  will  die  for  the  love  which  he  has,  but 
he  will  not  affect  the  faith  which  he  has  not "  (Westcott). 

17.  Had  lain  in  the  grave  four  days  already  {riaaapa^ 
nfUpa^  fi&r}  e)(pvTa  iv  r^  fivqfieCtp),  Lit.,  found  him  ha/oing 
already  four  days  in  the  tomb, 

18.  Fifteen  furlongs.    About  two  miles. 

19.  Many  of  the  Jews  came.  Rev.,  rightly,  had  come. 
The  tense  is  the  pluperfect.  Lazarus'  friendship  with  Jesus 
had  not  caused  him  to  be  regarded  as  an  apostate,  at  whose 
burial  every  indignity  would  have  been  shown.  People  were 
even  to  array  themselves  in  white,  festive  garments  in  demon- 


21)2  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

stiation  of  joy.    Here,  on  the  contrary,  every  token  of  sympathy 
and  respect  seems  to  have  been  ahown. 

To  Martha  and  Mary  (trpin  tA?  Trepi  MdpBav  *ai  Mapiav). 
Lit.,  to  those  about  Martha  and  Mary;  a  Greek  idiom  for 
Martha  and  Mary  aiid  their  companione,  or  aitendajits.  Com- 
pare 01  Trepi  Tov  IlauKov,  Paul  and  his  coinpaniojia  (Acts  xiiL 
13).  Somewhat  analogous  ie  our  familiar  idiotii  when  we  epeak 
of  going  to  visit  a  honseliold :  /  am  yoing  to  SinitA'a  or 
Brown's,  by  which  we  include  the  head  of  the  household  with 
its  ineiiibere.  Weatcott  and  Hort  and  Tregel lea,  however,  read 
irpo'i  TT/v  MapSav  K.  M.,  to  Martha  and  Mary.  So  also  the 
Bevisers'  text. 


20.  That  Jesus  was  coming  (ort  o  Itiaov:  Ipjferai).  Lit, 
is  coming.     The  exact  words  of  the  message :  Jesiis  U  coming. 

Went  and  met  (inr^im](Teir).     The  verb  means  to  go  to  mset. 

22.  Wilt  ask  of  God  (ainJoTj  rov  Seov).  The  verb  amcD  is 
used  of  the  asking  of  an  inferior  from  a  superior.  'Eptordoi  is 
to  ask  on  equal  terras,  and  hence  is  always  used  by  Christ  of 
His  own  asking  from  the  Father,  in  the  consciousness  of  Ilis 
equal  dignity.  Hence  Martha,  as  Trench  observes,  "plainly 
reveals  her  poor,  unworthy  conception  of  Ilia  persun,  that  she 
recognises  in  Him  no  more  than  a  prophet,  when  she  ascribes 
that  asking  {atTtiiT$ai)  to  Him  which  He  never  ascribes  to 
Himself"  ("Synonyms").  Bengel  says:  "Martha  did  not 
speak  in  Greek,  yet  John  expreaeea  her  inaccurate  remark, 
which  the  Lord  kindly  tolerated."     See  on  Matt,  xv.  23. 

24.  In  the  resurrection.     Wye,  the  again  rising, 

25.  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life.  The  words  /am 
are  very  aignificant.  Martha  had  stated  the  resurrection  rather 
as  a  doctrine,  a  current  tenet :  Jesus  states  it  as  a  Jact,  iden- 
tified with  His  own  person.  He  does  not  say,  fraiee  the  dead; 
I  perform  the  reeurrection,  but  I  am  the  resurrection.     In  His 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  203 

own  person,  representing  hnmanity.  He  exhibits  man  as  im- 
mortal, but  immortal  only  throngh  union  witli  Him. 

The  life.  The  life  is  the  larger  and  inclusive  idea.  Resur- 
rection is  involved  in  life  as  an  incident  developed  by  the  tem- 
porary and  apparent  triumph  of  death.  All  true  life  is  in 
Christ.  In  Him  is  lodged  everything  that  is  essential  to  life, 
in  its  origin,  its  maintenance,  and  its  consummation,  and  all 
this  is  conveyed  to  the  believer  in  his  union  with  Him.  This 
life  is  not  affected  by  death.  '^  Every  believer  is  in  reality  and 
for  ever  sheltered  from  death.  To  die  with  full  light,  in  the 
clear  certainty  of  the  life  which  is  in  Jesus,  to  die  only  to  con- 
tinue to  live  to  Him,  is  no  longer  that  fact  which  human  lan- 
guage designates  by  the  name  of  death.  It  is  as  though  Jesus 
had  said :  In  me  death  is  certain  to  live,  and  the  living  is  cer- 
tain never  to  die  "  (Godet).     On  fowy,  life,  see  on  L  4. 

He  were  dead  {airo^dvrj).  The  aorist  denotes  on  events  not 
a  condition^    Hence,  much  better,  Rev.,  though  he  die. 

27.  I  believe  {ireiriareviea).  Lit.,  I  have  believed.  The  per- 
fect tense.  So  Rev.  Martha  goes  back  to  her  previous  belief, 
which  consists  in  the  recognition  of  Christ  as  her  Lord.  What- 
ever faith  she  has  in  this  new  revelation  of  Christ  rests  upon 
the  truth  that  He  is  the  Anointed,  the  Son  of  God,  even  He 
that  Cometh  into  the  world. 

28.  The  Master  (o  SiBdateaXo^).  Lit.,  the  teacher.  Westcott 
remarks  that  this  title  opens  a  glimpse  into  the  private  inter- 
course of  the  Lord  and  the  disciples :  so  they  spoke  of  Him. 

Is  come  (irdpeoTip).    Lit.,  iajpreeent.     Rev.,  is  here. 

29.  Arose  and  came  {vy^p^  koX  fifyxero).  The  aorist,  oroM, 
marks  the  single,  instantaneous  act  of  rising.  The  imperfect, 
vxie  coming^  the  progress  towards  Jesus. 

31.  Saying  (Xiyoin-ev).  The  best  texts  read  t&^cane^,  sup* 
posing.     So  Rev. 


204  WORD  STCDIB8  m  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

She  goeth  {inrwyn).  WUhdrmoetli  from  our  company.  See 
on  vi.  21 ;  viii.  21. 

To  weep  IJva  KXavir^).  Rev.,  in  margin,  waii.  The  word 
means  loud  weeping.  See  Matt  ii.  18 ;  Mark  v.  38 ;  and  on 
Luke  vi.  21 ;  vii.  32. 

33.  He  groaned  in  the  spirit  {eve^pift^aTo  t^J  trvfvftart). 
See  on  Mark  i.  43.  The  word  for  groaned  occurs  three  times 
elsewhere :  Matt.  ix.  80  ;  Mark  i.  43 ;  xiv.  5.  In  every  case  it 
expreeees  a  charge,  or  remonstrance,  accompanied  with  a  feel- 
ing of  diepleaanre.  On  this  pnssage  there  are  two  lines  of  in- 
terpretation, both  of  them  assuming  the  meaning  just  stated. 
(1)  T^  mtvfMTt,  the  spirit,  is  regarded  as  the  object  of  Jesus' 
inward  charge  or  remonstrance.  This  is  explained  variously: 
as  that  Jeeiis  sternly  rebuked  the  natural  shrinking  of  Hia 
human  spirit,  and  summoned  it  to  the  decisive  conflict  with 
death  ;  or  that  He  checked  its  impulse  to  put  forth  Ilis  divine 
energy  at  once.  (2)  Takes  in  the  spirit,  as  representing  tlie 
sphere  qf feeling,  as  xiii.  21 ;  Mark  viii.  12  ;  Luke  x.  21.  Some 
explain  the  feeling  as  indignation  at  the  hypocritical  mourning 
of  the  Jews,  or  at  their  unbelief  and  the  sisters'  misapprehen- 
sion ;  others  as  indignation  at  the  temporary  triumph  of  Satan, 
who  had  the  power  of  death. 

The  interpretation  which  explains  tm  irve^/iaTi  as  the  sphere 
of  feeling  is  to  be  preferred.  Comp.  ver.  38,  in  himself.  The 
nature  of  the  particnlar  emotion  of  Jesus  most  remain  largely 
a  matter  of  conjecture.  Rev.  renders,  in  margin,  was  moved 
with  indigiiation  in  the  spirit. 

Was  troubled  {erdpa^  eavrov).  Lit,  troubled  Nimse^. 
Probably  of  the  outward  manifestation  of  His  strong  feeling. 

35.  Wept  (eZmcpva-ev).  A  diflterent  verb  from  that  in  ver.  31, 
From  ioKpv,  tear,  and  meaning  to  shed  tears,  to  teeep  silently. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  KXaito,  to  w>eep  audibly,  is 
once  used  of  our  Lord  in  Luke  xix.  41.  "  The  very  Gospel  in 
which  the  deity  of  Jesus  is  luoet  clearly  asserted,  is  also  that 


Q08PEL  OF  JOHN.  205 

which  makes  us  best  acquainted  with  the  profoundly  human 
side  of  His  life  "  (Godet).  How  far  such  a  conception  of  deity 
is  removed  from  the  pagan  ideal,  may  be  seen  by  even  a  super- 
ficial study  of  the  classics.  Homer's  gods  and  goddesses  weep 
and  bellow  when  wounded,  but  are  not  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  human  infirmity  *  (see  on  iii.  16).  ^^  The  gods,"  says  Glad- 
stone, "  while  they  dispense  afflictions  upon  earth,  which  are 
neither  sweetened  by  love,  nor  elevated  by  a  distinct  disciplin- 
ary purpose,  take  care  to  keep  themselves  beyond  all  touch  of 
grief  or  care." 

**  ThA  godB  ordain 
ThA  lot  of  niAn  to  soif or,  whUo  thomielTes 
Aro  froe  from  ctte." 

<<  nUd/' xziT.»  68S. 

So  Diana,  when  appealed  to  by  the  wretched  Hippolytus  for 
sympathy,  replies : 

**  I  Me  thj  lore,  bat  must  not  shed  a  tear.** 

Bnripides,  '•  Hippoljtna,"  1896. 

The  Roman  satirist  unconsciously  bears  witness  to  the  profound 
truthfulness  and  beauty  of  this  picture  of  the  weeping  Saviour, 
in  the  words :  ^'  Nature  confesses  that  she  gives  the  tenderest 
of  hearts  to  the  human  race  by  giving  them  tears:  this  is  the 
best  part  of  our  sensations"  (Juvenal,  '^Satire"  xv.,  131-138). 

36.  Loved  (i(f>CKef).  Not  the  word  in  ver.  5.  See  on  v.  SO, 
and  compare  xx.  2. 

37.  Of  the  blind  (rov  rv^Xot)).  Referring  to  the  restoration 
of  the  blind  man  in  ch.  ix.  The  A.  V.  is  too  indefinite.  Rev., 
rightly,  of  him  that  was  Uind. 

Have  caused,  etc.  This  saying  of  the  Jews  may  have  been 
uttered  ironically,  in  which  case  it  throws  light  on  the  meaning 

*  Perhaps  the  nearest  approach  to  snoh  a  sentiment  in  Homer  ia  the  case  of 
Thetis,  weeping  for  and  with  her  son  AchUles  ( ' '  Iliad,**  L ,  860 ;  zriU. ,  51, 66). 


306  WORD  8TCDIB8  IN  THE  MBW  TBSTAJtHNT, 

of  groaned  in  the  gpirit  (ver.  33)  and  of  groaning  in  Slmgel/ 
in  the  uext  verse.  But  tho  words  may  have  been  epoken  sin- 
cerely. 

3S.  Lay  upon  (errEKEtro).  This  would  be  the  meaning  if  the 
tomb  were  a  vertical  pit;  but  if  hollowed  horizontally  into  the 
rock,  it  ma;  mean  lai/  against.  The  traditional  tomb  of  Lazarns 
is  of  the  former  kind,  being  descended  into  by  a  ladder. 

Take  ye  away.  The  stone  was  placed  over  the  entrance 
mainly  to  guard  against  wild  beaBts,  and  could  easily  be  re- 
moved. 

The  sister  of  him  that  was  dead.  An  apparently  super- 
fluous detail,  but  added  in  order  to  give  point  to  her  renion- 
BtrancG  at  the  removal  of  the  stone,  by  emphasizing  the  natural 
rehietaiice  of  a  sister  to  have  the  corrupted  body  of  her  brotlier 
exposed. 

Stinketh  (S^ei).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Not 
indicating  an  es^periemx  of  her  sense,  which  has  been  main- 
tained by  some  e.\positorB,  and  somethnes  expressed  in  the 
pictorial  treatment  of  the  subject,*  but  merely  her  inference 
from  the  fact  that  he  had  been  dead  four  days. 

He  hath  been  dead  four  days  (rerapTouK  e<rTiv).  A 
peculiar  Greek  idiom.  He  is  a  fourih-day  man.  So  Acts 
x.tviii.  13,  q/ier  one  day:  lit.,  being  second-day  men  The 
common  Jewish  idea  was  that  the  soul  hovered  about  the 
body  until  the  third  day,  when  corruption  began,  and  it  took 
its  flight. 

41.  From  the  place  where  the  dead  was  laid.    Omit. 

42,  The  people  {top  S)^v).  In  view  of  the  distinction 
which  John  habitually  makes  between  ihe  Jews  and  the  multi- 
tude, the  use  of  the  latter  term  here  is  noticeable,  since  Jews 


*A»  hj  Fra  Angelico  (Florenoe),  BonffMio  (LoDvre),  •nd  the  (operb  pietnra 
ij  S«butian  dt^  Piombo  in  the  Nation&I  Oallerjr,  Londmi. 


Q06PRL  OF  JOHN.  207 

occnrs  at  vr.  19, 31, 36.    It  woald  Boem  to  indicate  that  a  miBoel- 
laneous  crowd  had  ^thered.    Rev.,  the  m/uUihuie.    See  on  i.  19. 

43.  Come  forth  {Beupo  i^).    Lit,  hither  forth. 

44.  Grave-clothes  (icecp^).  Lit.,  stoaihing-bands.  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament.  In  xix.  40 ;  xx.  5,  7,  oSopia^  Unen 
handSf  is  used. 

A  napkin  (aouSap/!p).    See  on  Lake  xix.  20. 

It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  Gospel  pictnre  of  sisterly 
affection  under  the  shadow  of  death,  with  the  same  sentiment 
as  exhibited  in  Greek  tragedy,  especially  in  Sophocles,  by 
whom  it  is  developed  with  wonderful  power,  both  in  the  '^An- 
tigone "  and  in  the  '^  Electra." 

In  the  former,  Antigone,  the  consummate  female  figure  of 
the  Greek  drama,  falls  a  victim  to  her  love  for  her  dead  brother. 
Both  here,  and  in  the  ^^  Electra,"  sisterly  love  is  complicated  with 
another  and  sterner  sentiment :  in  the  '^  Antigone  "  with  indig- 
nant defiance  of  the  edict  which  refuses  burial  to  her  brother; 
in  the  '^  Electra  "with  the  long-cherished  craving  for  vengeance. 
Electra  longs  for  her  absent  brother  Orestes,  as  the  minister  of 
retribution  rather  than  as  the  solace  of  loneliness  and  sorrow. 
His  supposed  death  is  to  her,  therefore,  chiefiy  the  defeat  of  the 
passionate,  deadly  purpose  of  her  whole  life.  Antigone  lives 
for  her  kindred,  and  is  sustained  under  her  own  sad  fate  by  the 
hope  of  rejoining  them  in  the  next  world.  She  believes  in  the 
permanence  of  personal  existence. 

**  And  jet  I  go  and  feed  myself  with  hopes 
That  I  shall  meet  them,  by  mj  father  loTod, 
Dear  to  my  mother,  well-beloTed  of  thesy 
Thon  darling  brother  *'  (897-900). 

And  again, 

"  LoTed,  I  shall  be  with  him  whom  I  have  loved, 
Oniltj  of  holiest  crime.     More  time  is  mine 
In  which  to  share  the  favor  of  the  dead, 
Than  that  of  those  who  live ;  for  I  shall  reei 
Forever  there"  (78-76). 


SOS  WORD  STDDIB8  IN  THB  SBW  TESTAMBNT. 

Ko  Buoli  hope  illumiDatea  tha  grief  of  Electra. 

"  Ah,  Ortistes! 
Dur  brother,  in  tbj  death  tbou  ulajest  me  ; 
For  thou  irt  gone,  becesTiug  m;  puur  heart 
Of  alt  the  little  hope  that  yet  n'mained 
That  thou  wouldat  oome,  >  liiioif  miQisler 
Of  TBogoaooB  for  thj  fathsr  aud  for  me"  (807-813). 

And  again, 

"  If  thou  aoggeateit  itaj  hope  from  thtaa 
So  clearly  gone  to  Hades,  than  oa  me. 
Wasting  with  sorrow,  thou  wilt  trample  more"  (832-884). 

When  she  is  asked, 

"  Whil  1  shall  1  e»er  bring  the  dead  to  life  •■' 
she  replies, 

"  I  meant  not  that :  I  am  not  quite  so  mad." 

In  the  household  of  Bethany,  the  grief  of  the  two  sisters,  nn- 
like  that  of  the  Crreek  maidens,  is  unmixed  with  any  other  senti- 
ment, save  perhaps  a  tinge  of  a  feeling  bordering  on  reproach 
that  Jesns  had  not  been  there  to  avert  their  calamity.  Com- 
fort from  the  hope  of  reunion  with  the  dead  is  not  expressed 
by  them,  and  is  hardly  implied  in  their  assertion  of  the  doctrine 
of  a  future  resurrection,  which  to  them,  is  a  general  matter 
having  little  or  no  bearing  on  their  personal  grief.  In  iAia 
particular,  so  far  as  expression  indicates,  the  advantage  is  on 
the  side  of  the  Theban  maiden.  Though  lier  hope  is  tlie  out- 
growth of  her  affection  rather  than  of  her  religious  training — ft 
thought  which  is  the  child  of  a  wish — she  never  loses  her  grasp 
upon  the  expectation  of  rejoining  her  beloved  dead. 

But  the  gospel  story  is  thrown  into  strongest  contrast  with 
the  classical  by  the  truth  of  resurrection  which  dominates  it  in 
the  person  and  energy  of  the  Lord  of  life.  Jesus  enters  at 
once  as  the  consolation  of  bereaved  love,  and  the  eternal  soln- 
tion  of  the  problem  of  life  and  death.  The  idea  which  Electra 
sneered  at  as  madness,  is  here  a  realised  fact.     Beautiful,  won- 


006PBL  OF  JOHN.  209 

derf ul  as  is  the  action  which  the  drama  evolves  oat  of  the  con- 
flict of  sisterly  love  with  death,  the  curtain  falls  on  death  as 
victor.  Into  the  gospel  story  Jesos  brings  a  benefaction,  a 
lesson,  and  a  triumph.  His  warm  sympathy,  £Us  comforting 
words,  His  tears  at  His  friend's  tomb,  are  in  significant  contrast 
with  the  politic,  timid,  at  times  reproachful  attitnde  of  the  cho- 
rus of  Theban  elders  towards  Antigone.  The  consummation 
of  both  dramas  is  unmitigated  horror.  Suicide  solves  the  prob- 
lem for  Antigone,  and  Electra  receives  back  her  brother  as 
from  the  dead,  only  to  incite  him  to  murder,  and  to  gloat  with 
him  over  the  victims.  It  is  a  beautiful  feature  of  the  Gospel 
narrative  that  it  seems,  if  we  may  so  speak,  to  retire  with  an  in- 
stinctive delicacy  from  the' joy  of  that  reunited  household.  It 
breaks  o£F  abruptly  with  the  words,  ^^  Loose  him,  and  let  him  go." 
The  imagination  alone  follows  the  sisters  with  their  brother, 
perchance  with  Christ,  behind  the  closed  door,  and  hears  the 
sacred  interchanges  of  that  wonderful  communing.  Tenny- 
son, with  a  deep  and  truly  Christian  perception,  has  struck  its 
key-note. 

"  Her  ftjes  are  homes  of  silent  prayer, 
Nor  other  thought  her  mind  admits 
But,  he  was  dead   and  there  he  sits  I 
And  He  that  broaght  him  hack  is  there. 

Then  one  deep  lore  doth  supersede 
All  other,  when  her  ardent  gase 
Bores  from  the  lipng  brother^s  faoe 
And  rests  upon  the  Life  indeed." 

'*  In  Memoriam.** 

45.  The  things  which  Jesus  did.  The  best  texts  omit 
Je9vs.  Some  read  ft,  that  which  He  did ;  others  &,  the  things 
which. 

46.  Some  of  them.  Not  of  the  Jews  who  had  come  to 
Mary,  but  some  of  the  Jews,  some  perhaps  who  had  joined  the 
crowd  from  curiosity. 

47.  The  chief  priests.  Of  the  Sadducean  party.  This 
should  be  constantly  kept  in  mind  in  reading  both  John's  nar- 
rative and  that  of  the  Synoptists.    The  Sadducees,  represented 

Vol.  IL— 14 


210  WORD  STUDIES  DJ  THB  NBW  TBSTAHBHrF. 

b^'  the  chief  priests,  are  the  leaders  in  the  more  decisive  mea»- 
ures  against  Christ.  Throngliout  tliis  tJoBpel  the  form  of  ex- 
preesiou  is  eitlier  the  chief  priests  alone,  or  the  chief  priests 
and  the  I'harisees.  Tlie  oiily  mention  of  the  Pharisees  in  the 
history  of  the  paasion  is  Matt,  xivii.  62,  where  also  the  expree- 
sion  is  the  chief  prieatn  and  Pharisees.  The  chief  priests  are 
the  deadly  enemies  of  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  3, 14).  Similarly,  in 
the  Acts,  the  opposition  to  the  Christians  is  headed  by  the 
priests  and  Sadducees,  who  represent  the  same  party.  In  the 
two  instances  wliere  the  Pharisees  appear,  they  incline  to  favor 
the  Christians  (v.  34;  xxiii.  6). 

47.  A  council  {irwitpuai).  Correctly,  and  not  the  conncil, 
which  would  require  the  article.  The  meaning  is,  they  called  a 
sitting  of  the  Sanhedrim ;  probably  as  distinguished  from  a 
formal  meeting  of  that  body. 

What  do  we  ?  The  present  tense,  indicating  an  emergency. 
This  man  is  at  work  teaching  and  working  miracles,  and  what 
are  we  doing  ? 

48.  Place  and  nation  {tov  tottov  km  to  IAvk).  Place,  the 
temple  and  city  (Acta  vi.  13;  xxi.  28;  Matt.  xxiv.  15).  Jfit- 
tion,  the  civil  organization.  See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Luke  ii.  32. 
In  the  Sanhedrim  were  many  davoted  adherents  of  Kome,  and 
the  rest  were  well  aware  of  the  weakness  of  the  national  power. 

49.  Cataphas,  A  Sadduece,  who  held  the  office  for  eigh- 
teen years. 

That  year.  This  has  been  cited  to  show  that  John  is  guilty 
of  a  historical  error,  since,  according  to  the  Mosaic  law,  the  high 
priesthood  was  held  for  life.  The  occurrence  of  the  phrase 
three  times  (vv.  49,  Bl)  is  significant,  and,  so  far  from  indicat- 
ing an  error,  goes  to  connect  the  office  of  Caiaphae  with  his  part 
in  accomplishing  the  death  of  Christ.  It  devolved  on  the  High- 
Pneat  to  offer  every  year  thegreat  sacrifice  of  atonement  for  sin  ; 
and  in  that  year,  that  memorable  year,  it  fell  to  Cai.iphas  to  be 
the  instrument  of  the  sacrifice  of  Ilim  that  taketh  away  the 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  211 

sin  of  the  world.    Dante  places  Caiaphas  and  his  father-m-law, 
Annas,  far  down  in  Hell  in  the  Bolgia  of  the  Hypocrites : 

'*  to  mine  eyes  tbere  nuhed 
One  omoified  with  three  stakes  on  the  groond. 
When  me  he  saw,  he  writhed  himself  idl  oyer, 
Blowing  into  his  beard  with  suspirations ; 
And  the  friar  Catalan  who  noticed  this, 
Said  to  me  :  '  This  transfixed  one  whom  thoa  secBt, 
Counselled  the  Pharisees  that  it  was  meet 
To  put  one  man  to  tortare  for  the  people. 
Crosswise  and  naked  is  he  on  the  path, 
As  thou  peroeiTest ;  and  he  needs  must  feel. 
Whoever  passes,  first  how  maoh  he  weighs ; 
And  in  like  mode  his  father-in-law  is  panished 
Within  this  moat,  and  the  others  of  the  oonneil, 
Which  for  the  Jews  was  a  malignant  seed.*' 

«« Inferno,"  zziit,  llO-ltt. 

Dean  Plamptre  suggests  that  the  punishment  described  bj  the 
poet  seems  to  reproduce  the  thought  of  Isa.  IL  23. 

50.  People — nation  (rot)  Xaov — t6  iSvo^).  The  former 
the  theocratic  fuUion^  the  people  of  God :  the  latter,  the  hody 
j>olUic.     See  on  1  Pet  ii.  9. 

52.  Nation  (iSvov^).  John  does  not  used  the  word  Xim,j>e(h 
jpUy  which  Caiaphas  had  just  employed.  The  Jews  were  no 
longer  a  pecple^  only  one  of  the  natione  of  the  world.  He 
wishes  to  set  the  Gentiles  over  against  the  Jews,  and  this  dis- 
tinction was  national.  Moreover,  John  points  out  in  this  word 
the  fact  that  the  work  of  Christ  was  not  to  be  for  Any  people  as 
specially  chosen  of  God,  but  for  all  nations. 

54.  Wilderness.  The  wild  hill-country,  northeast  of  Jeru- 
salem. 

Ephraim.  The  site  is  uncertain.  Commonly  taken  as 
Ophrdh  (1  Sam.  xiii.  17),  or  Ephraim  (2  Chron.  xiii.  19),  and 
identified  with  eU  TaiyHbeh^  sixteen  miles  from  Jerusalem,  and 
situated  on  a  hill  which  commands  the  Jordan  valley. 

55-57.  xii.  1-11.    Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  6-13 ;  Mark  xiv.  3-9. 


212  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THH  NBW  TBSTAMHNT. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  Which  had  been  dead.    (Omit) 
He  raised.    For  He.  read  Jwub. 

.    3.  A  pound  (X/r/Msy).     Only  here  and  xix.  39.    Matthew 
and  Mark,  oKificurrpov,  a  flask. 

Of  spikenard  {vdpSov  ir$<rrucfy:).  So  Mark.  See  on  Mark 
xiv.  3. 

Very  precious  {irokurifAov).  lit,  of  much  valne.  Matthew 
has  fiapvrifjMv,  ofvmgkty  value. 

Anointed.    See  on  xi.  2. 

Feet.  The  Sjnoptists  mention  only  the  pouring  on  the 
head. 

4.  Simon's  son.    Omit 

5.  Three  hundred  pence  {rpuucoalnv  bqvapUnf).  Or  three 
hundred  denarii.  On  the  denarins,  see  on  Matt.  xx.  2.  Mark 
says  more  than  three  hundred  pence.  Three  hnndred  denarii 
would  be  about  fifty  dollars,  or  twice  that  amount  if  we  reckon 
according  to  the  purchasing  power. 

The  poor  {wrwxpk).  See  on  Matt  y.  3.  No  article:  to 
poor  people. 

6.  And  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put  therein 
(mlX  to  yXo^acoicofAOP  €l)(€,  9cal  r^  fiaXKofieva  ifidoTo^ev).  The 
best  texts  read  e)(fov,  hamngj  and  omit  the  second  koX,  and. 
The  rendering  would  then  be,  and  having  the  hag  harej  etc. 

The  bag  (yXioaao/cofAov).  Only  here  and  xiii.  29.  Origi- 
nally a  box  for  keeping  the  mouth-pieces  of  wind  instruments. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN. 


213 


From  f'KSfcaa,  t&ngue,  and  xo/iia,  to  tend.  The  word  was  also 
used  for  a  cfyffi,n.  JoBephiis  applies  it  to  the  coffer  in  which  the 
golden  mice  and  emerods  were  preserved  (I  Sam.  vi.  11),  In 
the  Septuaglnt,  of  the  chest  which  Joash  liad  provided  for  re- 
ceiving contributions  for  the  repairing  of  the  Lord's  house  (2 
ChroD.  xxiv.  8).     Rev.  gives  box,  in  margin. 

Bare  {e&airTa^ev).  Carried  a^ay  or  purloined.  This  menu- 
ing  ie  rather  imparted  by  tiie  context  than  residing  in  the  verb 
itself,  i.e.,  according  to  New  Testament  usage  (see  on  x.  21). 
Uuqnestionably  it  has  this  meaning  in  later  Greek,  freqnently 
in  Josephus.*  Render,  therefore,  as  Rev.,  took  moay.  The 
rendering  of  the  A.  V.  is  tautological, 

7.  Let  her  alone :  against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath 
she  kept  this  (o*^?  aurqv  eli;  t^c  ^fUpav  roO  iinatftiaa/iov  fiov 
TerrjprjKfv  auTo).  This  passage  presents  great  difficulty.  Ac- 
cording to  the  reading  just  given,  the  meaning  is  that  Mary 
had  kept  the  ointment,  perhaps  out  of  the  store  provided  for 
Lazarus'  burial,  against  the  day  of  Christ's  preparation  for  the 
tomb,     Tlie  word  ii^atfua^fiov  is  wrongly  rendered  burial.    It 


*  Th«  meaning  to  tnke  or  bear  attay  ie  oliimed  bj  flome  for  M>tt.  riil.  17 
And  John  xi.  ZH  (BO  Thayer,  N.  T.  LexieoDl.  The  former  I  think  more  than 
doabtfu[  ISeyvi  deolares  It  "  contrary  to  the  sense  ;  "  De  Wette  and  Lange 
both  render  bore.  Canon  Cook  says  :  "  The  words  cboaeo  by  St.  Matthew  pre- 
clude the  Bappoeitfon  that  he  refers  the  prophet's  words,  contrary  to  the  sense 
of  the  original,  to  the  mere  removal  of  diseases  by  healing  them."  The  words 
In  Matthew  are  a  citation  from  Isa.  lili,  4,  which  Qieyne  ("  Propheoies  of 
taaiah  ")  renders,  ■'  siirelv  oar  ilcknesseB  he  bore,  and  onr  pains  he  carried 
them."  Beptuagint :  "  This  man  carries  oar  sins  and  la  pained  for  us."  Sym- 
macboB:  "Sorely  he  took  up  our  Mne  and  endured  our  labors."  Edersheim 
ramarke  that  "the  words  as  given  by  St  Matthew  are  most  truly  a  New  Testa- 
ment targum  of  the  original,"  Delitisch.  who  thinks  thai  the  meaning  took 
atcij/  U  included  in  the  senae  of  the  Hebrew  ndsd.  admits  that  Ite  primary 
meantug  is,  He  look  up,  bore.  The  meaning  in  John  %s.  2!i  may  be  explained 
■a  In  John  xli.  6,  as  determined  by  (he  context  thouiib  il  may  be  rendered  i^ 
CAtm  h^tt  liiken  lim  up.  Field  ("  Otium  Xorvicense  ")  cites  a  passage  from 
Diogenes  Lvrtins,  It  .  .Ml.  where  it  ie  said  that  Lacydes,  whenerer  he  took 
anything  out  of  his  store-room,  was  accnstomed.  after  sealing  it  up.  to  throw 
the  seal  or  ring  tlirough  the  hole,  bo  that  it  might  never  be  taken  from  bis  fta- 
ger,  and  any  of  the  iloreB  be  lUiltn  iPaaraxitiii}. 


i 


214  WORD  8T0DIES  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMBNT. 

means  the  preparation  for  burial,  the  laying  out,  or  embaim' 
msnt.  It  is  explained  b;  xix.  10,  as  the  binding  in  linea 
cloths  witli  spices,  "  as  tlie  manner  of  the  Jews  is  ivra^td3^i» 
toprepare  for  hurial^^  not  to  hury.  It  is  the  L&iXn  pomTigere^ 
to  wash  and  prepare  a  corpse  for  the  furieral  pile.  Hence  the 
name  of  the  servant  to  whom  this  duty  was  committed  wag 
pollinctor.  lie  was  a  slave  of  the  lihUinarius,  or  furnishing 
undertaker.  Mary,  then,  baa  kept  the  ointment  in  order  to 
embahu  Jesus  witU  it  on  Uiis  day,  as  though  lie  were  already 
dead.  This  is  the  aense  of  the  Syuoptists.  Matthew  (xxvi.  13) 
says,  she  did  it  with  reference  to  my  preparation  for  huriai. 
Mark,  she  anticipated  to  anoiiit. 

The  reading  of  the  lleceived  Text  is,  however,  disputed. 
The  best  to-ttual  critics  agree  that  the  perfect,  TerrjptjKev,  she 
hatA  kept,  was  substituted  for  the  original  reading  ■nj/>^i7Tj.  the 
aorist,  s/ie  iiyiy  keep,  or  may  have  kept,  by  sumo  one  who  waa 
trying  to  bring  the  text  into  harmony  with  Mark  xiv.  8;  not 
understanding  liow  she  could  keep  for  His  burial  that  which 
she  poured  out  now.  Some,  however,  urge  the  exact  contrary, 
namely,  that  the  perfect  is  the  original  reading,  and  that  the 
aorist  is  a  correction  by  critics  who  were  occupied  with  the 
notion  that  no  man  is  embalmed  before  his  death,  or  who 
failed  to  see  bow  the  ointment  could  have  been  kept  already, 
as  it  might  naturally  be  supposed  to  have  been  just  purchased. 
(So  Godet  and  Field.) 

According  to  the  corrected  reading,  tva,  in  order  that,  is  in- 
serted after  atfiet  avT7]v,  let  her  alone,  or  suffer  her  ,■  rerrfpif- 
tceir,  hath  kept,  is  changed  to  njp^irj],  jnay  keep,  and  the  whole 
is  rendered,  suffer  her  to  ketp  it  against  the  day  of  my  burying. 
So  Rev. 

But  it  is  difBcult  to  see  why  Christ  should  desire  to  bare 
kept  for  His  embalmment  what  bad  already  been  poured  out 
upon  Him.  Some,  as  Meyer,  assume  that  only  a  jtart  of  tlte 
ointment  was  poured  out,  and  refer  avro,  it,  to  the  part  remain- 
ing. "  Let  her  alone,  thai  she  may  not  give  away  to  the  poor 
this  ointment,  of  which  she  has  just  used  a  portion  for  the 
anointing  of  my  ieet.  but  preserve  it  for  the  day  of  my  embalm- 
ment."   Canon  Weatcott  inclines  to  this  view  of  the  use  of  only 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  215 

a  part  Bat  the  inference  from  the  synoptic  narratives  can  be 
only  that  the  whole  contents  of  the  flask  were  used,  and  the 
mention  of  the  jx}und  by  John,  and  the  charge  of  waste  are  to 
the  same  effect.  There  is  nothing  whatever  to  warrant  a  con- 
trary supposition. 

Others  explain,  suffer  her  to  have  kept  ity  or  suffer  thai  she 
may  home  kept  it.  So  Westcott,  who  says:  '^The  idiom  by 
which  a  speaker  throws  himself  into  the  past,  and  regards  what 
is  done  as  still  a  purpose,  is  common  to  all  languages." 

Others,  again,  retain  the  meaning  let  her  cdonej  and  render 
iva,  in  order  thaty  with  an  ellipsis,  thus :  ^^  Let  her  alone :  (she 
hath  not  sold  her  treasure)  in  order  that  she  might  keep  it," 
etc. 

The  old  rendering,  as  A.  Y.,  is  the  simplest,  and  gives  a  per- 
fectly intelligible  and  consistent  sense.  If,  however,  this  must 
be  rejected,  it  seems,  on  the  whole,  best  to  adopt  the  marginal 
reading  of  the  Rev.,  with  the  elliptical  ha:  let  her  alone:  itvHU 
that  she  might  keep  it.  This  preserves  the  ^prohibitory  force  of 
a^  aim]v,  which  is  implied  in  Matt.  xxvi.  10,  and  is  unques- 
tionable in  Mark  xiv.  6.  Compare  Matt.  xv.  14;  xix.  14; 
xxvii.  49.* 

Note  that  the  promise  of  the  future  repute  of  this  act  (Matt, 
xxvi.  13 ;  Mark  xiv.  9)  is  omitted  by  the  only  Evangelist  who 
records  Mary's  name  in  connection  with  it. 

9.  Much  people  (Jhc^  7ro\^).  The  best  texts  insert  the 
article,  which  converts  the  expression  into  the  current  phrase, 
the  common  people.     So  Rev. 

Knew  {eyvto).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  learned.  They  oamis 
to  know. 

10.  The  chief  priests.    See  on  ver.  47. 

*  Field  (**  Otiam  NorTioense  **),  who  holds  bj  rrr^^iiKw,  obserres  that  "th« 
oonjecture  that  the  oiDtmeDt  maj  have  been  reseired  from  that  used  at  the 
burjing  of  LazarnB,  is  not  fanciful,  but  an  excellent  example  of  undesigned 
coincidence,  since  we  should  never  hare  ]>eroeiTed  the  proprietj  of  the  might 
have  been  sold  of  the  first  two  Gospels,  if  John  had  not  hel]>ed  us  out  with  his 
rrH^^ificffy,  the  hdUh  kept** 


21C  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

11.  Went  away  (ijin)r/ov).    Withdrew  from  tlieir  conipanj'. 

12-19.  Compare  Matt.  xxi.  1-11 ;  Mark  xi.  1-11 ;  Luke  xix, 
29-44. 

12.  A  great  multitude  (o;^X«;  iroXu«).  Some  editors  add 
tlie  article  and  render,  the  comiM»i  pe(yple. 

13.  Branches  of  palms  (ri  ^aia  TWf  ^wUtav).  The  A.  V. 
overlooks  both  the  articles,  the  brant^hes  of  tlte  palms.  Bala 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Teetament,  and  means  jxilm- 
branches,  or,  strictly,  tops  of  the  palms  where  the  fruit  is  pro- 
duced. OftAepalma  may  have  been  added  by  John  for  read- 
ers unacquainted  with  the  technical  term,  but  the  expression 
palm-branches  of  tlte  palms,  is  similar  to  hmtse-master  of  ike 
house  (oUo&etrjronji  t^  oucUk,  Luke  xxii.  1 1).  The  articles  arc 
commonly  explained  as  marking  the  trees  which  were  by  the 
wayside  on  the  route  of  the  procession.  Some  think  that  they 
point  to  the  weU^knovm  palm-branches  connected  with  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles.  On  the  different  terms  employed  by 
the  Evangeiista  for  "  branches,"  see  on  Mark  xi.  8. 

To  meet  {e«  vTrdvrqtrtv).     Very  literally,  to  a  goin^  to  meeL 

Cried  (expa^ov).     Imperfect,  icpi  crying  as  he  advanced. 

Hosanna.    Meaning  OsatK.' 

Blessed  {fv\oyr}fievo<;).  A  different  word  from  the  blessed  of 
Matt.  V.  3  {jiMKopwi).  This  is  the  perfect  participle  of  the 
verb  eiiKo^ito,  to  speak  well  of,  praise,  hence  our  eulogy.  Mat- 
thew's word  applies  to  character  ;  this  to  repute.  The  ascrip- 
tion of  praise  here  is  from  Pb.  cxviii.  25,  26.  This  Psalm,  ac- 
cording to  Perowne,  was  composed  originally  for  the  first  cele- 
bration of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  after  the  completion  of  the 
sacred  temple.  The  words  of  the  twenty-fifth  verse  were  sung 
during  that  feast,  when  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  was  solemn- 
ly compassed ;  that  is,  once  on  each  of  the  first  six  days  of  tlie 
feast,  and  seven  times  on  the  seventh  day.     This  seventh  day 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  217 

was  called  '^  the  Oreat  Hosanna,"  and  not  only  the  prayers  for 
the  feast,  but  even  the  branches  of  trees,  including  the  myrtles 
which  were  attached  to  the  palm-branch,  were  called  '^Uo- 
sannas." 

The  King  of  Israel.  The  best  texts  add  teal,  even  the  king, 
etc. 

14.  A  young  ass  {ivdptov).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment Matthew  mentions  an  ass  and  a  colt ;  Mark  and  Luke  a 
colt  only. 

18.  Met  (tnnivrfiiTev).  The  verb  means  to  go  to  meeL  Hence 
Bev.,  went  and  met. 

19.  Is  gone  after  Him  {atria-m  aifroO  inrrjIKSey).  The  phrase 
occors  only  here.    Lit.,  is  gone  away. 

20.  Greeks  ('BlXXrive^).  Gentiles,  not  Hellenists.  See  on 
Acts  yi.  1.  Jesos  comes  into  contact  with  the  Gentile  world  at 
His  birth  (the  Magi)  and  at  the  dose  of  His  ministry. 

22.  Philip — Andrew.  They  appear  together  in  i.  45;  tL 
7, 8.     Compare  Mark  iii.  18. 

23.  Answered  {anreKpCinvro).  The  best  texts  read  amicph^ 
erai,  anstoereth. 

The  hour  is  come,  that  (ikifkuSeu  i)  &pa  7va).  This  is  not 
eqaivalent  to  '^  the  hour  is  come  in  whiokP  The  Jiour  is  used 
absolutely :  the  critical  hour  is  come  in  order  that  the  Son,  etc 

24.  Verily,  verily.    See  on  i.  51 ;  z.  L 

A  corn  (o  kokko^).  Properly,  the  com  or  grain.  The  article 
should  be  inserted  in  the  translation,  because  Jesus  is  citing  the 
wheat-grain  as  a  familiar  type  of  that  which  contains  in  itself 
the  germ  of  life.  So  wheat  has  the  article :  the  com  of  the 
wheat.     The  selection  of  the  com  of  wheat  as  an  illustration 


218  WORD  STUDIES   IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

acquires  a  peculiar  interest  from  the  fact  of  its  being  addressed 
to  Ureeks,  familiar  with  the  Eleosiaian  mysteries  celebrated  iti 
their  own  country.  These  mysteriee  were  based  on  the  legend 
of  Dionysus  (Bacchus).  According  to  the  legend  Lis  original 
name  wasZagreus.  lie  was  the  sou  of  Zeus  (Jupiter)  by  his  own 
daughter  Persephone  (Proserpina),  and  was  destined  to  succeed 
to  supreme  dominion  and  to  the  wielding  of  the  thunderbolt. 
The  jealousy  of  liere  (Juno),  the  wife  of  Zeus,  incited  the 
Titauft  against  him,  who  killed  him  while  he  was  contemplat- 
ing hia  face  in  a  mirror,  cut  up  his  body,  and  boiled  it  in  a 
caldron,  leaving  only  the  heart.  Zeus,  in  his  wrath,  hurled 
the  Titans  to  Tartarus,  and  Apollo  collected  the  remains  of 
Zagreus  and  buried  them.  The  heart  was  given  to  Semele, 
and  Zagreus  was  born  again  from  her  under  the  form  of 
Dionysus.  The  myeteriea  represented  the  original  birth  from 
the  serpent,  the  murder  and  dismemberment  of  the  child,  and 
the  revenge  inflicted  by  Zens;  and  the  symbols  exhibited — the 
dice,  ball,  top,  mirror,  and  apple — signified  the  toys  with  which 
the  Titans  allured  the  child  into  their  power.  Then  followed 
the  restoration  to  life ;  Demeter  (Ceres)  the  goddess  of  agri- 
culture, the  mother  of  food,  putting  the  limbs  together,  and 
giving  her  maternal  breasts  to  the  child.  All  this  was  pre- 
paratory to  the  great  Eleusinia,  in  which  the  risen  Dionysus  in 
the  freshness  of  his  seuond  life  was  conducted  from  Athens  to 
Eleusis  in  joyful  procession.  An  ear  of  corn,  plucked  in  solemn 
silence,  was  exhibited  to  the  initiated  as  the  object  of  mystical 
contemplation,  as  the  symbol  of  the  god,  prematurely  killed, 
but,  like  the  ear  enclosing  the  aeed-corn,  bearing  within  him- 
self the  germ  of  a  second  life. 

With  this  mingled  the  legend  of  Persephone,  the  daughter 
of  Demeter,  who  was  carried  off  by  Pluto  to  the  infernal  world. 
The  mother  wandered  over  the  earth  seeking  her  daughter,  and 
having  found  her,  applied  to  Zeus,  through  whose  intervention 
Persephone,  while  condemned  to  Hades  for  a  part  of  the  year, 
was  allowed  to  remain  upon  earth  during  the  other  part.  Thus 
the  story  became  the  symbol  of  vegetation,  which  shoots  forth 
in  spring,  and  the  power  of  which  withdraws  into  the  earth  at 
other  seasons  of  the  year.     These  features  of  the  mysteries  set 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  219 

forth,  and  with  the  same  Bjmbol  as  that  employed  by  Christ 
here,  the  crude  pagan  conception  of  life  rising  out  of  death. 

Alone  {otfTo^ fiSposi).    Lit.,  itsdfdUme.    Bev.,  hy  itse^ alone. 

25.  Life  (V^'t/X^)-     '^^  ^^  Mark  xii.  30 ;  Luke  i.  46. 

Shall  lose  (airoXitrei).  The  best  texts  read  &jro\kvei^  laaetA. 
See  on  Luke  ix.  25. 

In  this  world.  This  earthly  economy,  regarded  as  alien  and 
hostile  to  Ood.  The  words  are  added  in  order  to  explain  the 
strong  phrase,  hatdh  his  life  or  aaiU. 

Shall  keep  (if^vXA^ei).    See  on  1  Pet  L  4. 

26.  Serve  {SuucovQ).  See  on  Matt  xx.  26;  Mark  ix.  86; 
1  Pet  i.  12. 

Me  {if^iy  Notice  the  emphatic  recurrence  of  the  pronoun 
in  this  verse. 

My  Father.  Eev.,  rightly,  the  Father.  "Very  much  of 
the  exact  force  of  St.  John's  record  of  the  Lord's  words  ap- 
pears to  depend  upon  the  different  conceptions  of  the  two 
forms  under  which  the  fatherhood  of  God  is  described.  God 
is  spoken  of  as  '^  Father'  and  as  ^my  Father.'  Generally 
it  may  be  said  that  the  former  title  expresses  the  original  rela- 
tion of  God  to  being,  and  specially  to  humanity,  in  virtue  of 
man's  creation  in  the  divine  image ;  and  the  latter  more  par- 
ticularly the  relation  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  incarnate,  and 
so  indirectly  to  man  in  virtue  of  the  incarnation.  The  former 
suggests  those  thoughts  which  spring  from  the  consideration  of 
the  absolute  moral  connection  of  man  with  God ;  the  latter, 
those  which  spring  from  what  is  made  known  to  us  through 
revelation  of  the  connection  of  the  incarnate  Son  with  God 
and  with  man.  ^The  Father'  corresponds,  under  this  aspect, 
with  the  group  of  ideas  gathered  up  in  the  Lord's  titles, '  the 
Son,'  Uhe  Son  of  man;'  and  ^my  Father'  with  those  which 


220  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THE  NKW  TESTAMENT. 

are  gathered  up  in  tlie  title  '  the  Son  of  God,' '  the  Christ '" 
(Weatcott). 

27.  My  soul.  See  reff.  on  ver.  25.  The  soid,  ^-i^,  ia  the 
seat  of  the  human  affections ;  the  spirit  {Trvevfta)  of  the  relig- 

Is  troubled  {TerdpaKrai).  The  perfect  tense ;  has  been  die- 
tnrbed  and  remaijis  troubled.  The  same  verb  as  in  xi.  33.  No- 
tice that  there  it  is  said  He  groaned  in  the  spirit  {t^  irvev/uiTt). 
His  inward  agitation  did  not  arise  from  personal  sorrow  or 
eympathy,  but  from  some  shock  to  His  moral  and  spiritual 
eenee. 

What  shall  I  say?  A  natural  expression  out  of  the  depths 
of  our  Lord's  humanitj'  :  How  shall  1  express  inj  emotion  I 
Some  commentators  connect  this  with  the  following  clause, 
shall  I  say.  Father,  save  me,  etc.  But  this  does  not  agree 
with  the  context,  and  represents  a  hesitation  in  the  mind  of 
Jesus  which  found  no  place  there.' 

Save  me.  The  shrinking  from  suffering  belongs  to  the 
hnman  personality  of  our  Lord  (compare  Matt.  xxvi.  39) ;  but 
the  prayer,  save  mefromthia  hour,  is  not  for  deliverance  from 
suffering,  but  for  victory  in  the  approaching  trial.  See  Heb.  v. 
7.     The  expression  is  very  vivid.    "  Save  me  out  of  this  hour." 

For  this  cause.  'E.}t\A&\neA  \ty  glorify  thy  name.  For  this 
cause,  namely,  that  the  Father's  name  might  be  glorified. 

28.  GlorJ^  (Wfoo-OK),  (Wye,  darify,  as  the  Vulgate  dari' 
fea.) 

Name.     See  on  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

30.  For  my  sake.     Emphatic  in  the  Greek  order.     It  is  not 

for  TTty  sake  that  this  voice  hath  come. 

•  He.rer  •cntelj  remarks  th»t  this  renderiiiB  "'  jields  the  reanU  of  ui  »ctu«l 
pra/er  Interwoven  into  a  reflective  moDologue,  and  ii  therefore  let*  raitablt 
to  a  frame  of  mind  so  deeplj  moved." 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  221 

31.  The  prince  of  this  world  (o  ipxwv  rot)  tcoafiov  toutov). 
The  phrase  occurs  only  in  the  Gospel ;  here,  xiv.  30  ;  xvi.  11. 

Shall  be  cast  out  {iKl3XafSii<r€Tiu  i^).  In  every  case  but 
one  where  the  word  ixfiaXKn  occars  m  John,  it  is  used  of  cast- 
ing out  from  a  holy  place  or  society.  See  ii.  15 ;  ix.  34,  35 ;  3 
John  10 ;  Apoc.  xii.  2.    Compare  John  z.  4. 

32.  Be  lifted  up  (v^t»3£).  See  on  iii.  14.  The  primary 
reference  is  to  the  cross,  but  there  is  included  a  reference  to 
the  resurrection  and  ascension.  Bengel  says:  ^^In  the  yery 
cross  there  was  already  something  tending  towards  glory.'' 
Wye,  enhomoed. 

From  the  earth  (ix  r^  7^).     Lit.,  <n^  ^the  earth. 

Will  draw  {eKtcvtrw),     See  on  yL  44. 

All  men  {^6vt(k),  Some  high  authorities  read  trdyrot  aU 
things. 

Unto  Me  {'rrpb^  ifjLauT6v).  Rey.,  rightly,  unto  llysdf:  in 
contrast  with  theprmoe  of  this  vforld, 

34.  The  law.    See  on  x.  34. 

35.  With  you  Oie»'  v/jlAv).  The  best  texts  read  ^  ifuv, 
among  you. 

While  ye  have  (&09).  The  best  texts  read  w,  as:  walk  in 
conformity  with  the  fact  that  you  have  the  Light  among  you. 

Lest  darkness  come  upon  you  (&a  i^ii  axorCa  ifia^  Kara- 
Xaffjj).  Rev.,  better,  that  darkness  overtake  you  not.  On  over- 
take see  on  takethy  Mark  ix.  18 ;  t^ud  j>ercevvedy  Acts  iv.  13. 

40.  He  hath  blinded,  etc.  These  words  of  Isaiah  are  re- 
peated five  times  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  description  of 
the  Jewish  people  in  its  latest  stage  of  decay.  Matt.  xiii.  13; 
Mark  iv.  12;  Luke  viii.  10;  John  xii.  40;  Acts  xxviii.,26. 


233  WORD  STODIBB  IN  THE  KBW  TBSTAMEST. 

Hardened  {TTeiraiptoKev).  See  on  tlie  kindred  noun  v^paxTKy 
hardness,  Mark  iii.  5. 

Understand  {vo^<t<mtiv).  Rev.,  better, ^e7W«!ve.  Mark  has 
awtSsatv,  iindentaml.     Wee  on  understaiidiny,  Luke  ii.  47. 

Be  converted  {e-rrurrpaifmaw).  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  15 ;  Luke 
xxii.  32.  Rev.,  more  accurately,  turn,  with  the  idea  of  turning 
to  or  toward  soinetliing  (eV/). 

41.  When  (ore).     The  beet  texte  read  on,  because. 
His  glory.     In  the  vision  in  tlie  temple,  Igb.  vi.  1,  3,  5. 
Of  Him.     Christ. 

42.  Among  the  chief  rulers  {koX  ex  t&v  apyivrav).     Rev., 

more  neatly  and  accurately,  tweii  of  the  rviers. 

Believed  on  Him  {e-iria^evtrav  ck  ainov).     See  on  i.  12.     It 

is  to  be  noted  that  John  here  uses  of  thia  imperfect  faith 
whicli  refused  to  complete  itself  in  confeBsion,  the  formula  for 
complete  faith.  Compare  believed  in  Ilia  rtame  (ii.  23),  and 
Bee  note  there. 

Confess  Him  {ai/ioXoyow).  The  IIim,or,  Rev.,  i(,  is  not  in 
the  text.  The  verb  is  used  absolutely.  They  did  not  ttuijka 
cw\fe«sion.     See  on  Matt.  vii.  23;  x.  32;  xiv.  7. 

Lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue  (^/*^ 
airoavvdrfoiyot  yhtavTai).  Better,  t/ial  tliey  should  not  be.,  etc. 
Compare  Rev,,  ver.  35.  On  the  phraee,  be  put  out  of  the  syna- 
gogue, see  on  ix.  22. 

43.  Praise  (Srffaf).  Much  better,  Rev.,  glory,  because  sug- 
gesting a  contrast  with  the  vision  of  divine  glory  referred  to  in 
ver.  41.     Compare  v.  44. 

Than  (^irep).  The  word  cannot  be  rendered  by  a  corre- 
sponding word  in  English.  Tlie  force  is,  "more  than  the  glory 
of  God,  though  He  is  so  muck  niore  glorious."    The  word  16 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  22S 

foand  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament    Some  authorities 
read  ^ep,  above. 

44.  Cried  (lc/xi{ey).  This  is  not  meant  to  relate  a  reap- 
pearance of  Jesus  in  public.  The  close  of  His  public  ministry 
is  noted  at  ver.  36.  It  is  in  continuation  of  the  Evangelist's 
own  remarks,  and  introduces  a  summary  of  Jesus'  past  teaching 
to  the  Jews. 

Believeth— on  Him  that  sent  Me(irMrreuei — ek  rov  iriftf^ 
amd  fu).  This  is  the  first  and  almost  the  only  place  in  the 
Oospel  where  the  words  believe  an  are  used  with  reference  to 
the  Father.  This  rendering  in  y.  24  is  an  error.  See  xiv.  1. 
The  phrase  is  constantly  associated  with  our  Lord.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  to  be  noted  that  it  contemplates  the  Father  as 
the  source  of  the  special  revelation  of  Christ,  and  therefore  is 
not  absolutely  an  exception  to  the  habitual  usage.  The  same  is 
true  of  xiv.  1. 

45.  Seeth  {Setopel).  Sev.,  properly,  behcldeth.  Compare 
xiv.  9.  The  word  is  purposely  chosen  to  mark  an  i/ntenty  con- 
tmuouB  contemplation  of  Christ,  issuing  in  ever  larger  knowl- 
edge of  the  Father. 

I  am  come  {iKrjKu^).  The  perfect  tense,  pointing  to  the 
abiding  result  of  His  manifestation.  Compare  v.  43 ;  vii.  28 ; 
viii.  42 ;  xvi.  28 ;  xviii.  37. 

Abide  in  darkness.  The  phrase  occurs  only  here.  Com- 
pare 1  John  ii.  9,  11 ;  also  viii.  12 ;  xiL  35. 

47.  Believe  not  (/*^  irurrewrri).  The  best  texts  read  <l>vXdfy, 
keep  (them). 

Came  {^XSov),  The  aorist  tense,  pointing  to  the  purpose  of 
the  coming,  as  /  o/m  come  (ver.  46)  to  the  residt.  Compare 
viii.  14 ;  ix.  39 ;  x.  10 ;  xii.  27,  47 ;  xv.  22.  Both  tenses  are 
found  in  viii.  42 ;  xvi.  28. 

48.  Rejecteth  (oBer&v).    See  on  Luke  viL  30. 


334  WORD  STUDIBB  IN  TBB  HBW  TBSTAUENT. 

The  word  (o  \6yov).  Comprehending  all  the  sayings  (j>^ 
liara). 

The  same  (eKeivot).  That.  The  pronoun  of  remote  refer- 
ence. WeBtcott  linely  remarks:  "The  resumptive,  lEolating 
pronoun  places  in  emphatic  prominence  the  teaching  which  is 
regarded  as  past,  and  separated  from  those  to  whom  it  was  ad- 
dressed. It  stands,  as  it  were,  in  the  distance,  as  a  witness  and 
an  accuser," 

The  last  day.     Peculiar  to  John.     8ee  ri.  39. 

49.  Of  myself  (ef  iiuwrov).  Out  ofmyadf.  This  formula 
occurs  only  liere.  The  usual  expression  is  air  ifuivrov.  'Awo, 
from.y  as  diatinguished  from  ^«,  out  of,  marks  rather  the  point 
of  departure,  while  enr,  including  this  idea,  emphasizes  the 
point  of  departure  as  the  living  and  impelling  source  of  tliat 
which  issues  forth.  In  vii.  17,  we  read,  "  whether  it  be  out  of 
God  (ex  Toii  8eov),  or  whether  I  speak  from  myself  {air  eftav 


Gave   (ISmxev).     The  best  texts  read  SeSaxev.  the  perfect 
tense,  hat/i  given,  the  result  of  the  gift  still  abiding.     So  Rev, 


Say — speak  {tttnu — XaXijau).     The  former  relating  to  the 
aubttamee,  and  the  latter  to  theyor-m  of  Jesus'  attersaces. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


1.  Before  the  Feast  of  the  Passover.  This  clause  is  to  be 
construed  with  fp/airqirtv,  l^&ved,  at  the  close  of  this  verse.  No- 
tice that  John,  in  mentioning  the  Passover,  here  drops  the  ex- 
planatory phrase  (f  the  Jews  (si.  55).  It  is  not  the  Passover 
of  the  Jews  which  Jesus  is  about  to  celebrate,  which  had  degen- 
erated into  an  empty  form,  but  the  national  ordinance,  accord- 
ing to  its  true  spirit,  and  with  a  development  of  its  higher 
meaning. 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  226 

Knowing  {elSi^).    Or,  sinoe  he  knew. 

His  hour.    See  on  xii.  23,  and  compare  ii.  4. 

That  (Zya).  In  order  that;  marking  the  departure  as  a 
divine  decree. 

Depart  (/lerafi^).  The  compounded  preposition  fJLerth  signi- 
&es  jHUfsing  over  from  one  sphere  into  another. 

His  own  {roif^  IS^ovsi).  See  on  Acts  i.  7.  Compare  xviL  6 
sqq. ;  Acts  iv.  23 ;  xxiv.  23 ;  1  Tim.  y.  8 ;  John  L  11. 

He  loved  {'qyafrffaev).  Notice  that  John  uses  the  word  in- 
dicating the  discriminating  afiFection :  the  love  of  choice  and 
selection.    See  on  v.  20. 

Unto  the  end  (ek  riXo^).  Interpretations  differ.  The  ren- 
dering  of  the  A.  V.  and  Bev.  is  of  doubtful  authority.  The 
passages  cited  in  support  of  this,  Matt  x.  22 ;  xxiv.  13 ;  Mark 
xiii.  13,  may  all  be  rendered  to  the  uttermost.  Morever,  other 
formulas  are  used  where  the  meaning  to  the  end  is  unquestiona- 
ble. In  Apoc.  ii.  26,  the  only  other  instance  in  John's  writings 
where  riXo^  is  used  in  an  adverbial  phrase,  the  expression  is 
axp^  riXov^,  v/nto  the  end.  Similarly  Heb.  vi.  11.  In  Heb.  iii. 
6,  14,  /^XP^  T€Xot;9,  tmto  the  end.  The  phrase  may  mean  at 
lasty  and  so  is  rendered  by  many  here,  as  Meyer,  Lange,  Thayer 
(Lex.).  "At  last  He  loved  them ; "  that  is,  showed  them  the  last 
proof  of  His  love.  This  is  the  most  probable  rendering  in 
Luke  xviii.  5,  on  which  see  note.  It  may  also  mean  to  the  tUter- 
mosty  comj>letely.  So  Westcott  and  Godet  But  I  am  inclined, 
with  Meyer,  to  shrink  from  the  "inappropriate  gradation" 
which  is  thus  implied,  as  though  Jesus'  love  now  reached  a 
higher  degree  than  before  (arfomnia'ai).  Hence  I  prefer  the 
rendering  at  lasty  or  Jinally  He  lovea  them^  taking  rffdmiaevy 
loved,  in  the  sense  of  the  manifestation  of  His  love.  This 
sense  frequently  attaches  to  the  verb.  See,  for  instance,  1  John 
iv.  10  ("love  viewed  in  its  historic  manifestation"  Westcott); 

Vol.  IL— is 


236  WORD  8TUDIB8  UJ  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

and  compare  John  ill.  16;  £pb.ii.4;  v.2,25;  2  Thess.  ii.  16; 
Apoc.  iii.  9. 

2.  Supper  being  ended  {Seiwvov  yepo/ievov).  The  most 
approved  reading  is  ytvoiievov,  the  present  participle,  denoting 
while  a  supper  was  in  progress.  Hence  Rev.,  rightly,  ditrhig 
supper.  The  A.  V".  is  wrong,  even  if  tlie  reading  of  the  Received 
Text  be  retained ;  for  in  ver.  12  Jesus  reclined  again,  and  in 
ver.  26,  the  supper  is  still  in  progresB.  It  ehoiild  be,  supper 
Ka/viTig  beffun,  or  having  been  served.*  It  is  important  to  note 
the  absence  of  the  definite  article:  a  snpper,  as  diBtinguisbed 
from  the  feast,  which  also  is  designated  by  a  different  word. 

Having  now  put  (^Stj  ^e/3X.ijj<0T05).  Rev.,  better,  already. 
Put,  is  literallj',  thrown  or  cast. 

Into  the  heart  of  <iudas.  Meyer,  strangely,  refers  the 
heart,  not  to  Judas,  but  to  the  Devil  himself;  rendering,  ths 
Deoil  having  already  formed  the  design  that  Judas  should  de- 
Iwer  Htm  iip.  Godet  does  not  speak  too  strongly  when  he  says 
that  "  this  meaning  is  inBufferable."  f 

3.  Had  given  {SeSwKev).  The  best  texts  read  IStoKor,  gave, 
the  aorist  marking  Jesus'  commission  as  given  once  for  all. 

Was  come  (ef^XSe).  This  rendering  would  require  the  per- 
fect tense.  The  aorist  points  to  Ris  coming  as  a  historic  fact, 
not  as  related  to  its  result.  See  on  xii.  47.  Rev,,  rightly,  came 
forth. 

Want  (inrtvyei).  Present  tense:  goeth ;  withdrawing  from 
the  scenes  of  earth.  Note  the  original  order ;  thai  ii  was  from 
God  He  came  forth,  and  unio  God  Me  is  going. 


*  Qodet,  with  his  well-knoim  aTeraian  to  departtiret  frnm  the  Beo.,  holds  bj 
the  rekdlng  ytrontm,  and  explalai  ymttirtiv  bj  ic/ien  the  reptat  at  a  repmt 
began;  adding  that  the  oorreclion  was  madti  In  order  to  plaae  the  foot  wash- 
ing at  the  befpaaing  of  the  repast,  (he  oustomar/  lime  for  it.  But  the  per- 
(onnsnre  of  [he  aot  during  the  oonraa  of  the  meal,  in  indleated  b;  the  words 
in  Ter.  4.  Bn  riuthfrom  (J.)  Ou  tapper. 

fl  am  surpHwd  to  Bud  it  adopted  b;  Hllligan  and  Moulton. 


008PKL  OF  JOHN.  227 

4.  From  the  supper  {i$c  rov  Seiiivov).     Out  of  the  group 
gathered  at  the  table. 


Laid  aside  ijC^^i).    Present  tense :  laydk  cuide. 
Garments  {tfjuxna).    See  on  Matt.  y.  40.     Upper  garments. 

Towel  (Xivrioy).  A  Latin  word,  Imtewm,.  A  IvMn  oloth. 
Only  here  and  ver.  5. 

Girded  (&i{c»9€y).  Only  in  this  chapter  and  xxi.  7.  The 
oompoond  verb  means  to  li/nd  or  gird  all  rov/nd. 

5.  A  bason  (yiTrr^/xi).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
From  vhrroi,  to  wash. 

6.  Dost  thou  wash  (en;  fjyov  vtirrei^^i  The  two  pronouns 
Thou,  my,  stand  together  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence  in 
emphatic  contrast.     Dost  thou  of  me  wash  the  feet  t 

7.  Knowest — shalt  Icnow  (oI8a9— Twerjy).  TheA.V.  ig- 
nores the  distinction  between  the  two  words.  ^^  Thou  kvuywest 
not "  {ovK  oZSo?),  of  absolute  and  complete  knowledge.  Thou 
shalt  learn  or  perceive  {yp<i>a7))y  of  knowledge  gained  by  exper- 
ience.    See  on  ii.  24. 

Hereafter  (jierh  raSha).    Lit,  after  these  things. 

8.  Never  (ov  fjtff — ek  rbv  eU&va).  A  very  strong  expression. 
Lit.,  thou  shalt  hy  no  msans  wash  my  feet  as  long  as  the  world 
stands. 

10.  He  that  is  washed— wash  his  feet  (o  XiKovfiiyo^ — 
vi^^uaBiu).  The  A.  Y.  obliterates  the  distinction  between 
Xowo,  to  haihcy  to  apply  water  to  the  whole  body,  and  vhrm, 
to  vHish  a  part  of  the  body.  Thus,  when  Dorcas  died  (Acts  ix. 
37)  they  lathed  her  body  (XoAroi^re?).  The  proverb  in  2  Pet  iL 
22,  is  about  the  sow  that  has  been  bathed  all  over  Q^oiMrafUvff). 
On  the  other  hand,  he  who  fasts  must  wash  (vt^m)  his  face 
(Matt  vi.  17).    Both  verbs  are  always  used  of  living  Mngs  in 


228  WORD  8TODIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

the  Xew  Testament.  Tho  word  for  washing  things,  as  nets, 
garments,  etc.,  is  irXwrn.  See  Luke  v.  2.  All  three  verbs 
occur  in  Lev,  xv,  11  (Sept). 

11.  Who  should  betray  (jov  wapaSiSoin-a).  Lit.,  Mm  that 
i»  betraying.  So  in  Matt.  xxvi.  2,  tlie  preeent  tense  la  used,  is 
beitig  betrayed  {irapa&Horat).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  12,  and  compare 
■wpoSoTTj?,  betrayer,  Luke  vi.  16  ;  Acts  vii,  52  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  4. 

12.  Was  set  down  (avaireawi^.  Lit.,  having  reclined.  The 
giiesta  reclined  on  couches,  lying  on  the  left  side  and  leaning 
on  the  left  hand.  The  table  was  in  the  hollow  square  or  ob- 
long formed  on  three  sides  hy  the  conches,  the  fourth  side 
being  open,  and  the  table  extending  beyond  the  ends  of  the 
couches. 

Know  ye  (yivata-Kere)  ?     Perceive  or  underhand  ye  I 

13.  Master  (oStSao-ca\«;).  hit.,  tAe  Teac/ter.  Teacher  and 
Lord  were  used,  according  to  the  Jewish  titles  Rahbi  and  Mar, 
corresponding  to  which  the  followers  were  disciples  or  servants. 

14.  Your.  Inserted  in  A.  Y.  Better,  the  Lord  and  tA« 
Master  as  Rev.     Both  have  the  article. 

Ought  (o^iXere).  The  verb  means  to  owe.  It  occurs  several 
times  in  John's  Epistles  (1  John  ii.  6 ;  iii.  16 ;  iv.  11 ;  3  John  8). 
In  the  Gospel  only  here  and  six.  7,  Compare  Luke  xvii,  10.  In 
Matthew's  version  of  the  Lord's  prayer  occur  the  two  kindred 
words  otfietKrifia,  debt,  and  o^etXerTf,  debtor.  Jeans  here  puts 
the  obligation  to  ministry  as  a  debt  under  which  His  disciples 
are  laid  by  Hia  ministry  to  them.  The  word  ought  is  the  past 
tense  of  oioe.  Atl.  ought  or  jnitst  (see  iii.  7,  14,  30,  etc.)  ex- 
presses an  obligation  in  the  nature  of  things  ;  oifxiKeiv,  a  special, 
personal  obligation. 

15.  Example  (InroSetyfia).  On  the  three  words  used  in  the 
New  Testament  for  example,  vrroSeifffta,  rinrot,  aud  Setyfio,  see 
on  2  Pet.  ii.  6;  1  Pet.  v.  3;  Jude  7. 


GOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  229 

16.  Verily,  verily.    See  od  i.  51 ;  x.  1. 

The  servant.  No  article.  Better  a  servant,  as  Bev.,  a  hand- 
$ervant. 

Ho  that  is  sent  (aTrooroXo^).  lit,  a/n  apoMe.  See  on  Matt 
X.  2. 

17.  Happy  (juucdpiot).  Better,  as  Be  v.,  UeaaecL  See  on 
Matt.  V.  3. 

18.  I  have  chosen  {i^Xe^dfurpi).  Aorist  tense,  IcAo$e.  Not 
elected  to  ecU/wUion,  bnt  chaee  as  am  apoeUe. 

That  the  scriptore,  etc.  (tua).  Elliptical.  We  must  supply 
this  choice  ivtu  mctde  in  order  that,  et<^. 

Eateth  {rptiym).  With  the  exception  of  Matt  xxiv.  88,  the 
word  occurs  only  in  John.  See  on  vi.  54.  Originally  it  metus 
to  gnmo  or  crwnch  ;  to  chew  raw  vegetables  orfruite^  and  hence 
often  used  of  animals  feeding,  as  Homer  (^^  Odyssey,''  vi,  90), 
of  mnles  feeding.  Of  course  it  has  lost  its  original  sense  in 
the  New  Testament,  as  it  did  to  some  extent  in  classical  Oreek, 
though,  as  applied  to  men,  it  more  commonly  referred  to  eat- 
ing vegetables  or  fruit,  as  Aristophanes  (^^  Peace,"  1325)  nvica 
Tpc076iy,  to  eat  jigs.  The  entire  divorce  in  the  New  Testament 
from  its  primitive  sense  is  shown  in  its  application  to  the  flesh 
of  Christ  (vi.  54).  It  is  used  by  John  only  in  connection  with 
Ohrist 

Bread  with  me  (jJier  ifuw  top  dprov).  Some  editors  read, 
fAov  TOP  apToVf  my  bread. 

Heel  {irripvav).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  The 
metaphor  is  of  one  administering  a  kick.  Thus  Plutarch,  de- 
scribing the  robber  Sciron,  who  was  accustomed  ^'  out  of  inso- 
lence and  wantonness  to  stretch  forth  his  feet  to  strangers, 
commanding  them  to  wash  them,  and  then,  when  they  did  it, 
with  a  kick  to  send  them  down  the  rock  into  the  sea  "  ('^  The- 
seus ").    Some  have  explained  the  metaphor  by  the  tripping  up 


230 


WOBD  STUDIO  IN  THB  NEW  TB8TAMENT. 


of  one's  feet  in  wrestling ;  but,  aa  Mej'er  justly  says, "  Jesus  was 
not  overreuckedy  The  quotation  is  from  the  Hebrew,  not  tlie 
Septuagiut  of  Ps.  xli.  9  (Sept.  xl.).  The  Septuagint  reads, 
"For  tlie  man  of  my  peace  in  whom  I  hoped,  who  eateth  iiijr 
bread,  magnified  his  cunning  {irrepvtfffiov.  lit.,  tripping  up) 
against  me." 

19.  Now  (oTr'apri).  Kev.,  correctly,y7wa  A«7MW^tfrtlA.  Com- 
pare i.  52 ;  xiv.  7 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  39. 

I  am  he  (ertu  cZ/k).    Or,  lam.     See  od  viii.  34. 

21-35.  Compare  Matt.  xztL  21-25 ;  Mark  xir.  1&-21 ;  Luke 
ixii.  21-23. 

21.  Was  troubled  in  spirit.  See  on  xi.  33;  xii.  27.  Tlie 
agitation  was  in  the  highest  region  of  the  spiritual  life  {Trvevfia), 

One  of  you  shall  betray  me.  So  Matthew  and  Mark,  with 
the  addition  of,  who  eateth  wttfi  me.  Luke,  the  hand  of  him 
thai  betrayeth  me  is  with  me  on  the  table. 


The  imperfect  tense,  k^  looking 


22.  Looked  {IffKerrov). 
as  they  doubted. 

Doubting  (A'Topovfuvot).     See  on  Mark  vi.  20. 

He  spake  (Xc7»)-  '^^^  present  tense,  speaXxih,  introduced 
.with  lively  effect. 

23.  Was  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom  (^i'  avaieeltuvo<!  iv  r^ 
koXtt^  Toil  'IijcroO).  The  Kev,  renders,  "  there  was  at  the  tabU 
reclining,"  etc.  At  the  table  is  added  because  the  verb  is  the 
general  term  equivalent  to  sitting  at  table.  "  In  Jesus'  bosom," 
defines  John's  position  relatively  to  the  other  gnests.  As  the 
guests  reclined  upon  the  left  arm,  the  feet  being  stretched  out 
liehind,  the  head  of  each  would  be  near  the  breast  of  hfs  com- 
panion on  the  left.  Supposing  that  Jesus,  Peter,  and  John 
were  together,  Jesus  would  occupy  the  central  place,  the  place 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  231 

of  honor,  and  John,  being  in  front  of  Him,  oonld  readily  lean 
back  and  Bpeak  to  Him.    Peter  would  be  behind  him. 


Bosom.  See  on  Lnke  yi  38.  The  Sjnoptists  do  not  giTe 
thiB  incident. 

24.  Beckoneth  (veAei).    lit.,  noddetA. 

That  he  should  ask  who  it  should  be  {wvl^Sai  rk  Ap 
ehf).  The  best  texts  read,  ical  Xiyei  ainr^  ehri  rk  iirruf^  and 
iaiih  unto  Aim,  Tell  tu  who  it  is. 

25.  Lying  {hnTream).  This  word  is,  literally,  to  fall  upofij 
and  is  so  rendered  in  almost  every  instance  in  the  New  Testa* 
ment.  In  Mark  iii.  10,  it  is  applied  to  the  multitudes  j^rMmn^ 
upon  Christ.  It  occurs,  however,  nowhere  else  in  John,  and 
therefore  some  of  the  best  authorities  read  avanreaibv^  leaning 
backy  a  verb  which  John  uses  several  times  in  the  Qospel,  as  in 
ver.  12.*  So  Rev.  Whichever  of  the  two  is  read,  it  points  out 
the  distinction,  which  the  A.  Y.  misses  by  the  translation  lying j 
between  Ijv  ovaKelfAevo^  (ver.  23),  which  describes  the  reclining 
position  of  John  throughout  the  meal,  and  the  sudden  change 
of  posture  pictured  by  auaireamv^  leaning  hack.  The  distinction 
is  enforced  by  the  different  preposition  in  each  case :  reclining 
in  {hi)  Jesns'  bosom,  and  leaning  back  {av£).    Again,  the  words 

bosom  and  breast  represent  different  words  in  the  Greek; 
/cJX7ro9  representing  more  generally  the  bend  formed  by  the 
front  part  of  the  reclining  person,  the  lap,  and  arfjSo^  the 
breast  proper.  The  verb  avawlwrn,  to  lean  back,  always  in  the 
New  Testament  describes  a  change  of  position.  It  is  used  of 
a  rower  bending  back  for  a  fresh  stroke.  Plato,  in  the  well- 
known  passage  of  the  ^^  Phsedrus,"  in  which  the  soul  is  de- 
scribed under  the  figure  of  two  horses  and  a  charioteer,  says 
that  when  the  charioteer  beholds  the  vision  of  love  he  is  afraid, 
BXid  falls  backward  {opiireaev),  so  that  he  brings  the  steeds  upon 
their  haunches. 


*  Oodet's  affection  for  the  **reoeiTed  reading"  oarrlea  him  rather  hejond 
bounds,  when  it  leadi  him  to  saj  that  iuftarwiu^  **  seems  absord." 


S3-i  WORD  8TDDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TB8TAMBNT. 

As  he  was  {ovtok).  Inserted  b;  the  best  texte,  and  not 
found  in  the  A.  V.  Reclining  as  he  was,  ho  leaned  hack.  The 
general  attitude  of  reclialDg  was  maintained.  Compare  iv.  6: 
"fiat  thws  {ovraxi)  on  the  well,"  According  to  the  original  in- 
stitutioQ,  the  FaBBOver  wae  to  be  eaten  standing  (Exod.  xii.  11). 
After  the  Captivity  the  cuBtom  wae  changed,  and  the  gucstB  re- 
clined. The  llabhiB  inaiBted  that  at  least  a  part  of  the  PaBchal 
meal  ehoiiM  be  eaten  in  that  position,  becauee  it  was  the  man- 
ner of  Blaves  to  eat  standing,  and  the  recumbent  position 
showed  that  they  had  been  delivered  from  bondage  into  free- 
dom. 

Breast  {ar^os).  From  ttrrtffu,  to  comae  to  stand.  Hence, 
that  which  stands  out.  In  later  writingB  John  was  known  m 
o  ^MTDjStos,  the  one  on  the  breast,  or  the  bosom  friend. 

26.  To  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop  when  I  have  dipped  it 
(i5  eyw  ^dyfrcK  to  ^frrofiiov  hrt&ixTm)-  The  best  texts  read  eS  iyw 
/Su^ro)  TO  yjru>fi.iov  <cal  S<i><ro)  airr^  for  whom  I  shall  dip  tha 
sop  and  give  it  him. 

Sop  {-^filov).  Only  in  this  chapter.  Diminutive  from 
■ffMOfio^,  a  morsel,  which,  in  turn,  is  from  ^roai,  to  rub,  or  to 
orumble.     Homer,  of  tlie  Cyclops : 

"  Then  from  Mb  month  cune  bitt  (ifufuO  ■>'  baman  Qesli 
Mingled  with  wine."  "  Odjssej,"  It,  874. 

And  Xenophon :  "  And  on  one  occasion  having  seen  one  of  his 
companions  at  table  tasting  many  dishes  with  one  bli  (t^ft^) 
of  bread"  ("  Memorabilia,"  iii.,  14, 15).  The  kindred  verb  ^jro^- 
fil^at,  rendered  fee<l.  occurs  Rom.  xii.  20 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  3.  See 
also  Septuagint,  Ps.  Ixxix.  5 ;  Ixxx,  16.  According  to  its  ety- 
mology, the  verb  means  to  feed  with  morsels;  and  it  was  need 
by  the  Crreeke  of  a  nurse  chewing  the  food  and  administering 
it  to  an  infant.  So  Aristophanes:  "And  one  laid  the  child  to 
rest,  and  another  bathed  it,  and  anotlier  fed  (e^wfutrtv)  it " 
("  LyaiBtrate,"  19,  20).  This  sense  may  possibly  color  the  word 
as  used  in  Rom. xii.  20:  "If  thine  enemy  hunger, feed {ilm/ii^e) 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  233 

him;"  with  tender  care.  In  1  Cor.  xiii.  3,  the  original  sense 
appears  to  be  emphasized :  ^^  Though  /  bestow  all  my  goods  to 
feed  the  poor  {^jrio/jUawy^  This  idea  is  that  of  doUng  axjoay  in 
morsels.  Dean  Stanley  sajs:  ^^Who  that  has  witnessed  the 
almsgiving  in  a  Catholic  monastery,  or  the  court  of  a  Spanish 
or  Sicilian  bishop's  or  archbishop's  palace,  where  immense  rev- 
enues are  syringed  away  in  farthings  to  herds  of  beggars,  but 
must  feel  die  force  of  the  Apostle's  half  satirical  '^/Li^cn?" 

Dipped  the  sop.  Compare  Matt  xxvi.  23;  Mark  xiv.  20. 
The  regular  sop  of  the  Paschal  supper  consisted  of  the  follow- 
ing  things  wrapped  together:  flesh  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  a 
piece  of  unleavened  bread,  and  bitter  herbs.  The  sauce  into 
which  it  was  dipped  does  not  belong  to  the  original  institution, 
but  had  been  introduced  before  the  days  of  Christ  According 
to  one  authority  it  consisted  of  only  vinegar  and  water  (com- 
pare Ruth  ii.  14) ;  others  describe  it  as  a  mixture  of  vinegar, 
figs,  dates,  almonds,  and  spice.  The  flour  which  was  used  to 
thicken  the  sauce  on  ordinary  occasions  was  forbidden  at  the 
Passover  by  the  Rabbins,  lest  it  might  occasion  a  slight  fer- 
mentation. According  to  some,  the  sauce  was  beaten  up  to  the 
consistence  of  mortar,  in  order  to  commemorate  the  toils  of  the 
Israelites  in  laying  bricks  in  Egypt. 

To  Judas  Iscariot  the  son  of  Simon  f^Iovha  SlfiMvo^ 
'lafcapiany).  The  best  texts  read  ^laKopuarov.  ^' Judas  the 
son  of  Simon  Isca/riotP  So  vi.  71.  The  act  was  a  mark  of 
forbearance  and  good-will  toward  the  traitor,  and  a  tacit  appeal 
to  his  conscience  against  the  contemplated  treachery. 

27.  Then  {rir^.  With  a  peculiar  emphasis,  marking  the 
decisive  point  at  which  Judas  was  finally  committed  to  his  dark 
deed.  The  token  of  good-will  which  Jesus  had  ofFered,  if  it 
did  not  soften  his  heart  would  harden  it ;  and  Judas  appears  to 
have  so  interpreted  it  as  to  confirm  him  in  his  purpose. 

Satan.     The  only  occurrence  of  the  word  in  this  Gospel. 


2S4  WORD  8TDDIB8  IH  THH  WW  TR8TAMBST. 

Into  him   (ew  ixeivov).     The  pronoun  of  remote  referenca 
Bets  Judika  apart  fi-om  the  company  of  tlie  disciples. 

Quickly   (Tax^ov).     Lit.,  more  quickly.     The   comparative 
implies  a  command  to  hasten  Itis  work,  which  was  already 


29.  The  bag.    See  on  xii.  6. 

Buy  (ayopairov).  An  incidenUl  argcment  in  favor  of  this 
gathering  of  the  disciples  having  taken  place  on  the  evening  of 
the  Paschal  feast.  Had  it  been  on  the  previous  evening,  no 
one  would  liave  thought  of  Judaa  going  out  at  night  to  Ijiiy 
proviaioiiB  /'or  the  feast,  when  there  was  the  whole  of  the  next 
day  for  it,  nor  would  they  have  thought  of  his  going  out  to 
seek  the  poor  at  tiiat  honr.  The  15th  Nisan,  the  time  of  the 
Passover  celebration,  was  indeed  invested  with  the  sanctity  of 
a  Sabbath;  but  provision  and  preparation  of  the  needful  food 
was  expressly  allowed  on  that  day.  The  llabbinical  rules  even 
provided  for  the  procuring  of  the  Paschal  lamb  on  the  Pass- 
over  eve  when  that  happened  to  fall  on  the  Sabbath. 

Against  the  feast  (ew  t^j-  lopr^v).  Rev.,  better, /or  the 
feast.  Tlie  Passover  feast.  The  meal  of  which  they  had  been 
partaking  was  the  preliminary  meal,  at  the  close  of  which  the 
Passover  was  celebrated;  just  as,  subsequently,  the  Eucharist 
was  celebrated  at  the  close  of  the  Agape,  or  love-feast.  Notice 
the  different  word,  kopr^feaat,  instead  of  helttvov,  sy^per,  and 
the  article  with^^oj^. 

To  the  poor.    Perhaps  to  help  them  procure  their  Paschal 

lamb. 

30.  He  {iKtivoi).     See  on  ver-  37, 

31.  Now.  Marking  a  crisis,  at  which  Jesus  is  relieved  of 
the  presence  of  the  traitor,  and  accepts  the  consequences  of  bis 
treachery. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK.  235 

Is — glorified  {iSo^dcrSff).  Lit,  toas  glorified.  The  aorist 
pointB  to  tlie  withdrawal  of  Jadas.  Jesos  was  glorified  through 
death,  and  His  fate  was  sealed  (humanly  speaking)  by  Judas' 
going  out  He  speaks  of  the  death  and  consequent  glorification 
as  already  accomplished. 

32.  if  God  be  glorified  in  Him.  The  most  ancient  au- 
thorities omit 

In  Himself  (^  iavr^).  His  glory  will  be  contained  in  and 
identified  with  the  divine  glory.  Compare  ^'  the  glory  which  I 
had  toith  thee,^^  iraph  aoi  (xvii.  5).  *Ev  ifij  indicates  unity  of 
being ;  irapd  vnthy  unity  otjxmHon, 

33.  Little  children  {reKpU),  Diminuitive,  occurring  only 
here  in  the  Gospel,  but  repeatedly  in  the  First  Epistle.  No- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament 

Now  {aprt).  In  ver.  31,  now  is  iw,  which  marks  the  point 
of  time  absolutely.  "Afn^  marks  the  point  of  time  as  related 
to  the  past  or  to  the  future.  Thus,  '^  from  the  days  of  John 
the  Baptist  until  nmc"  {dpri.  Matt  xi.  12).  ^^Thinkest  thou 
that  I  cannot  now  {ofni)  pray  to  my  Father  ? "  though  succor 
has  been  delayed  all  along  till  now  (Matt  xxvi.  53).  Here  the 
word  implies  that  the  sorrowful  announcement  of  Jesus'  depart- 
ure from  His  disciples  had  been  ¥rithheld  until  the  present 
The  time  was  now  come. 

34.  New  {/coivffv).    See  on  Matt.  zzvL  29. 

Commandment  {ivrdX^).  The  word  for  a  single  com- 
mandment or  injunction^  but  used  also  for  the  whole  body  of 
the  moral  precepts  of  Christianity.  See  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  2  Pet. 
ii.  21 ;  iii.  2.  See  also  on  Jas.  ii.  8.  This  new  commandment 
embodies  the  essential  principle  of  the  whole  law.  Compare 
also  1  John  iii.  23.  Some  interpreters,  instead  of  taking  tiuU 
ye  love  one  another,  etc.,  as  the  definition  of  the  commandment, 
explain  the  commandment  as  referring  to  the  ordinance  of  the 
Holy  Communion,  and  render,  ^^  a  new  commandment  (to  ob* 


236  WORD  STODIBS  IN  THE  HBW  T^TAKKNT. 

Eerve  this  ordiDaiice)  I  give  uuto  you,  in  order  th&t  ye  love  one 
another."  It  is,  however,  more  than  improbable,  and  contrary 
to  Dsage,  that  the  Holy  Supper  should  be  spoken  of  as  evroKii 
a  comj/iandment. 

That  (ha).  With  its  usual  UHic*  force;  indicating  the 
sc(^  and  not  merely  the  form  or  nature  of  the  commandment 

As  (wfi-^aK).  llev.,  bettor,  «?M»  ag.  Not  a  simple  comparisoa 
(mmrep),  hat  &  conforrnity ,'  the  love  is  to  be  of  tfte  sajTie  nature. 
There  are,  however,  two  ways  of  rendering  the  passage.  1.  "I 
give  yon  a  new  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another  with 
the  same  devotion  with  which  I  loved  yon."  2,  "  I  give  you  a 
new  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,  even  as  up  to  this 
moment  1  loved  you,  in  order  that  you  may  imitate  my  love 
one  toward  another."  By  the  first  rendering  the  character  of 
the  mutual  love  of  Christians  is  described  ;  by  the  second,  ita 
ffroujid.     The  Kev.  gives  the  latter  in  margin. 

35.  Shall — know  {yintxTatTai}.     Perceive,  or  come  to  know. 

My  disciples  (e/ioi  fiaJ^ai).  See  on  Matt  xil  49.  Lit^ 
dtsciplea  unto  ms.     Compare  xv.  8, 

36-38.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  31-35 ;  Mark  xiv.  27-31 ;  Luke 
ixii.  31-38. 

37.  Now  {aprt).  Without  waiting  for  a  future  time.  See 
on  ver.  33,  and  compare  wv  now,  in  ver.  36. 

I  will  lay  down  my  life.     See  ou  x.  11. 

38.  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life?  For  a  similftr  repetition 
of  Peter's  own  words,  see  on  xxl.  17. 


*  Direoled  to  an  end  (TiXot),  uid  tlierefore  tnArklng  ft  jntrpOM. 


G08PKL  OF  jomr.  387 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  Heart  {lULp&lcC).  Never  need  in  the  New  TeBtament,  as 
in  the  Septaagint,  of  the  mere  physical  orgcm^  though  aome- 
times  of  the  vigor  and  sense  of  jphysioal  life  (Acts  xiy.  17 ; 
Jas.  v.  5 ;  Lake  xxi.  34).  Generally,  the  centre  of  owr  cwwpUx 
heing — physical,  moral,  spiritaal,  and  intellectual.  See  on  Mark 
xii.  30.  The  immediate  organ  by  which  man  lives  his  personal 
life,  and  where  that  entire  personal  life  concentrates  itself.  It 
is  thos  nsed  sometimes  as  parallel  to  '^^vyrty  ^  vndimdual  Ufe^ 
and  to  irvevfAa  the  principle  of  life,  which  manifests  itself  in  the 
'^rt;^.  Strictly,  tcaphCa  is  the  immediate  organ  of  '^^trx/l»  occupy- 
ing a  mediating  position  between  it  and  wveufia.  In  the  heart 
{xapBla)  the  spirit  (Tryev/ia),  which  is  the  distinctive  principle 
of  the  life  or  soul  {^^^x^j),  has  the  seat  of  its  activity. 

E^notions  of  joy  or  sorrow  are  thus  ascribed  both  to  the 
heart  and  to  the  soul.  Compare  John  xiv.  27,  ^^  Let  not  your 
heart  {tcapSia)  be  troubled ; "  and  John  xii.  27,  ^^  Now  is  my 
sotd  {ypvxn)  troubled."  The  hecM^i  is  the  focus  of  the  religious 
life  (Matt.  xxii.  37 ;  Luke  vi.  45 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  22).  It  is  the 
sphere  of  the  operation  of  grace  (Matt.  xiii.  19  ;  Luke  viii.  15  ; 
xxiv.  32 ;  Acts  ii.  37 ;  Rom.  x.  9,  10).  Also  of  the  opposite 
principle  (John  xiii.  2  ;  Acts  v.  3).  Used  also  as  the  seat  o/the 
understanding;  the  faculty  of  intelligence  as  applied  to  divine 
things  (Matt.  xiii.  15  ;  Rom.  i  21 ;  Mark  viii.  17). 

Ye  believe — believe  also  (TnoTevere  teal  Trurreuere).  The 
verbs  may  be  taken  either  as  indicatives  or  as  imperatives. 
Thus  we  may  render :  ye  believe  in  God,  ye  believe  also  in  me; 
or,  believe  in  Ood  and  ye  believe  in  me;  or,  believe  in  God  a/nd 
believe  in  ms;  or  again,  as  A.  Y.  The  third  of  these  render- 
ings corresponds  best  with  the  hortatory  character  of  the  dis- 
course. 

2.  House  (oUia),  The  dioelUng-place.  Used  primarily  of 
the  edijice  (Matt.  vii.  24 ;  viii.  14 ;  ix.  10 ;  Acts  iv.  34).    Of 


233  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

the  family  or  alt  t/ie  persons  iobabiting  tlie  Louse  (Matt  xii. 
25  ;  Joliu  iv.  53  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  16  ;  Matt.  x.  13).  Of  pro^eHs 
(Matt,  xxiii.  14 ;  Mark  xii.  40).     Uere  meaoiag  heaven* 

Mansions  {ftovaX).     Oa\y  bere  and  ver.  23.     From  iteina  to 

etay  or  ahlde.  Originally  a  stayiyig  or  ahidiny  or  delay.  Tlma 
Tliiicj-didee,  of  PausaiiiaB:  ''He  settled  at  Colouie  in  Troaa, 
and  wae  reported  to  tbe  Epbors  to  be  negotiating  witli  tbe 
Barbarians,  and  Ui  he  staying  there  ijifv  fiovijv  voioufievtK,  lit,, 
Tnaking  a  stay)  for  no  good  pnrpoae"  (i.,  131).  Tbence,  a  stay- 
ing or  abiding-place ;  an  abode.  Tbe  word  mansion  has  a 
similar  etymology  and  follows  tlie  same  conrse  of  development, 
being  derived  from  manere,  to  remain.  Manaio  is  tlins,  first,  a 
staying,  atid  then  a  Uioellijigplace.  A  later  meaning  of  both 
maimio  and  /*ov^  is  a  halting-place  or  atotlon  on  a  journey. 
Some  expositors,  as  Trench  and  Weaicott,  explain  tbe  word 
bere  according  to  this  later  meaning,  as  indicating  tbe  combi- 
nation of  tbe  contrasted  notions  of  progress  and  repose  in  tlie 
vision  of  tlie  fiiture.f  This  la  quite  untenable.  The  word 
means  bere  abodes.  Compare  Homer's  description  of  PriaiD's 
palace: 

"  A  pataoe  built  with  graceful  portioocB, 

And  &t\,j  chambers  nertr  each  other,  trailed 
With  poliahed  Htnne,  the  roomE  of  Priam  B  flona 
And  of  their  wiveBi  and  opposite  to  these 


■  The  explanation  given  bj  Milligan  and  Moulton  ia,  that  the  Father's 
hon««  lnn)iide«  enrth  as  well  as  hearaD  :  that  it  is,  in  shart.  the  universe,  over 
which  thd  Fallier  rnles,  having  manv  apartments,  some  on  this  aide,  othen 
beyoad  the  grave.  When,  thpreture.  Jeaus  goes  awaj',  it  is  only  to  another 
chamber  of  the  one  houie  of  the  Father,  The  mKiii  Ihonpht  is  that  wherever 
Jesus  ia,  wberev«^r  we  are.  we  are  all  in  the  Fallior'a  house,  and  therefor* 
there  can  be  no  real  separatlan  between  Jesus  and  Ilia  disoiplea.  This  ia  vvtj 
beautiful,  and,  in  itself,  true  ;  but,  as  an  explanation  of  this  passage,  la  not 
warranted  bj  anything  in  it,  but  la  rather  read  Into  it 

+  W.  Aldia  Wright  ('■  Bible  Word-Book  "l  Is  wrong  In  calling  this  "  tht 
primary  meaning"  of  the  word.  Do  anthorities  for  the  aee  of  jnangio  In  this 
sense  are  quoted  earlier  than  Pliny  and  Saetoniu<<,  and  none  for  this  use  of 
uorli  earlier  than  PauaaDias  (A.n.  1801.  Canon  Westoolt'a  interpretation  !• 
eSeotively  demolished  (usually  no  easy  thing  to  do)  by  J.  Sterling  Berry,  la 
The  ExpottiU'r,  2d  aeriea,  vol.  lii..  p.  397. 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  239 

TweWe  ohambere  for  his  daaghtera,  also  near 
Bioh  other ;  and,  with  polished  marble  walla, 
The  Bleeping-rooms  of  Priam*8  fona-in-law 
And  their  unblemished  consorts." 

*<Iliad,**Ti,243-26a 

Gkxlet  remarks:  ^^The  image  is  derived  from  those  vast  oriental 
palaces,  in  which  there  is  an  abode  not  only  for  the  sovereign 
and  the  heir  to  the  throne,  bat  also  for  all  the  sons  of  the  king, 
however  nnmerons  they  may  be." 

If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you  (ei  Si  ijAi  elnvp  h» 
vfuv).    Wye,  If  anything  less^  I  had  said  to  you. 

I  go  to  preparOy  etc.  Many  earlier  interpreters  refer  1 
wotdd  have  told  you  to  these  words,  and  render  Itootdd  home 
told  you  that  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  But  this  is  in- 
admissible, because  Jesus  says  (ver.  3)  that  He  is  actually  go- 
ing to  prepare  a  place.  The  better  rendering  r^ards  if  it  were 
not  80y  Ivxmld  ha/oe  told  youj  as  parenthetical,  and  connects  the 
following  sentence  vdth  are  many  mansione,  by  means  of  Jri, 
for  or  beoauee,  which  the  best  texts  insert.  '^  In  my  Father's 
house  are  many  mansions  (if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
jou)y/or  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.'' 

I  go  to  prepare.  Compare  Num.  x.  33.  Also  Heb.  vL  20, 
"  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus." 

A  place  {roirov).  See  on  xL  48.  The  heavenly  dwelling  li 
thus  described  by  three  words :  houee^  dbodej  place. 

3.  If  I  go  {ii^v  iropeuBS).  IlopevofuUt  ffOy  of  going  with  a 
definite  object     See  on  viii.  21. 

I  will  come  again  (iniKiv  Ipxofuu).  The  present  tense;  / 
oomej  so  Kev.  Not  to  be  limited  to  the  Lord's  second  and 
glorious  coming  at  the  last  day,  nor  to  any  special  coming,  such 
as  Pentecost,  though  these  are  all  included  in  the  expression ; 
rather  to  be  taken  of  His  continual  coming  and  presence  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.     '^  Christ  is,  in  fact,  from  the  moment  of 


240  WORD  STUDUa  IN  THB  NEW  TIWTAMBNT. 

resurrection,  ever  coming  into  the  world  and  to  the  Church,  aad 
to  men  as  the  riBen  Lord  "  (Weatcott). 

And  receive  (TrajMXij^^tat).  Here  the  hiture  tense,  wiU 
receive.  Rev.,  therefore,  much  better:  I  come  again  and  will 
receive  you.  The  change  of  tense  is  intentional,  the  futnre 
pointing  to  the  future  pereonal  reception  of  the  believer 
through  death.  Christ  is  with  the  disciple  alway,  continually 
"coming"  to  him,  nnto  the  end  of  the  world.  Then  He  will 
receive  iiiin  into  that  immediate  fellowship,  where  he  "shall 
see  Him  as  He  is."  The  verb  irapdKafx^dvm  is  nsed  in  the 
New  Testament  of  taking  along  with  (Matt.  iv.  5;  xvii.  1; 
Acts  xvi.  33,  on  all  which  see  notes) :  of  taking  to  {Matt.  i.  20 ; 
John  xiv.  3) :  of  taking  from,  recei/oing  by  tranainisgion  ;  so 
mostly  in  Paul  (Gal.  i.  12;  Ool.  ii.  6;  iv.  17;  1  Thess.  ii.  13, 
etc.  See  also  Matt.  xxiv.  40,  41).  It  is  scarcely  fancifnl  to 
see  the  first  two  meanings  blended  in  the  use  of  the  verb  in 
this  passage.  Jesus,  by  the  Spirit,  takes  His  own  along  witA 
Him  through  life,  and  then  takes  them  to  Mia  aide  at  death. 
He  himself  conducts  them  to  Himself. 

I  am.     See  on  vii.  34. 

4.  I  go  (wrayw).    Withdraw  from  you.     See  on  viii.  21. 

Ye  know,  and  the  way  ye  know  (M&are,  «aj  r^v  ihhp 
olSare).  The  best  texts  omit  the  second  ye  hitow,  and  the  and 
before  the  way;  reading,  whither  I  go  ye  know  the  wag. 

5.  And  how  can  we  know  («ai  ttws  hwdixeBa  t^v  ohitv 
el&ivai).  The  best  texts  eubstilute  othaitev,  hnow  we,  for  Swdft- 
eSa,  can  we  ;  reading,  /low  know  toe  the  way.  So  Kev.  Some 
also  omit  and  before  how. 

S.  I  am  the  way>  The  disciples  are  engrossed  with  the 
thought  of  separation  from  Jesus.  To  Thomas,  ignorance  of 
whither  Jesus  is  going  involves  ignorance  of  the  wag.  "  There- 
fore, with  loving  condescension  the  figure  is  taken  np,  and  they 
are  assured  that  Ue  is  Himself,  if  we  may  so  speak,  this  dis- 


006PBL  OP  JOHN.  241 

tance  to  be  traversed  ^  (Milligan  and  Monlton).    All  along  the 
coarse  to  the  Father's  house  they  are  still  with  Him. 

The  truth.  As  being  the  perfect  revelation  of  God  the 
Father:  combining  in  Himself  and  manifesting  all  divine  real- 
ity^  whether  in  the  being^  the  law^  or  the  character  of  God. 
Ue  embodies  what  men  onglit  to  know  and  hdieve  of  Qod ; 
what  they  shoald  do  as  children  of  God,  and  what  they  should 
be. 

The  life.  Not  only  life  in  thej^ur^  world.  He  is  ^^  the 
principle  and  source  of  life  in  its  temporal  development  and 
future  consummation,  so  that  whoever  has  not  received  Him 
into  himself  by  faith,  has  become  a  prey  to  spiritual  and  eter- 
nal death "  (Meyer).  ^^  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life."  Compare  Col.  iii.  4;  John  vi.  50,  51;  xi. 
25,  26. 

^^  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  Without  the  way 
there  is  no  going;  without  the  truth  there  is  no  knowing; 
without  the  life  there  is  no  living.  I  am  the  way  which  thou 
shouldst  pursue ;  the  truth  which  thou  shouldst  believe ;  the 
life  which  thou  shouldst  hope  for"  (Thomas  k  Kempis,  ^^Imi- 
tation of  Christ,"  iii.,  56).     On  ^ooi^,  lifsj  see  on  L  4. 

Unto  the  Father.    The  end  of  the  way. 

7.  Had  known  {iyvauee^re).  Rather,  had  learned  to  know, 
through  my  successive  revelations  of  myself. 

Ye  should  have  known  {iyiH^tceire  ay).  The  same  verb  as 
above.  Some  editors,  however,  read  ^ire,  the  verb  signifying 
absolute  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  intuition  and  satisfied 
convictiofi.  If  this  is  adopted,  it  marks  a  contrast  with  the 
progressive  knowledge  indicated  by  iyv<a/c€$T€.     See  on  ii.  24. 

My  Father.  Not  the  Father,  as  ver.  6.  It  is  the  knowledge 
of  the  Father  in  His  relation  to  the  Son.  Through  this  knowl- 
edge the  knowledge  of  God  as  the  Father,  ^Mn  the  deepest 

Vol.  1L— 16 


242  WORD  STUDIES  IN  ^B  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

▼erity  of  His  being,"  is  attained.   This  latter  knowledge  is  bet* 
ter  expressed  by  oZSo.     See  on  iv.  21. 

Have  soon.    See  on  i.  18. 

9.  Havo  I  boon  {eifu).    Lit.,  am  I. 

Known  (eyiw/ca?).     Come  to  know. 

Sayest  thou  (<rv).  Emphatic  Thau  who  didst  say,  "We 
have  found  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law  and  the  prophets 
did  write"  (i.  46).     Omit  and  before  how  sayest  thou. 

10.  Of  mysolf  (air  ifiavrw).  Rev.,  better,  from  myself. 
See  on  vii.  17. 

Tho  Father  that  dwelloth  in  mo.  Ho  death  the  works 
(o  Bk  iraTtjp  6  €P  ifjLol  fievtov^  aino^  iroiel  rk  Ipya).  The  best 
texts  read,  o  Bk  irar^p  iv  i/iol  fUiwv  Trobei  ret  epya  avrov ;  the 
Father  abiding  in  me  doeth  Ilia  works.  Philip  doubts  \vhether 
Christ  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  ia  Him.  The  answer 
is  twofold,  corresponding  to  the  two  phases  of  the  donbt. 
His  words^  spoken  not  from  Himself,  are  from  the  Father,  and 
therefore  He  ntters  them  from  within  the  Father,  and  is  Him- 
self in  the  Father.  His  works  are  the  works  of  the  Father 
abiding  in  Him  ;  therefore  the  Father  is  in  Him. 

11.  Believe  me  {iruTreieri  fioi).  The  plural  of  the  impera- 
tive: "believe  ye  me."  Compare  believest  thou,  ver.  10. 
These  words  are  addressed  to  the  disciples  collectively,  whose 
thought  Philip  had  voiced. 

Or  else  {ei  Bi  /a^).  Lit,  hut  if  not.  If  you  do  not  believe 
on  the  authority  of  my  personal  statement. 

For  tho  very  worlcs'  salce  (Si^  r^  Spya  avra).  Lit,  on 
account  of  the  works  themselves,  irrespective  of  my  oral  testi- 
mony. 

12.  Greater  worlcs.  Not  more  remarkable  miracles,  but 
referring  to  the  wider  work  of  the  apostolic  ministry  under  the 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  243 

dispenBation  of  the  Spirit.  This  work  was  of  a  higher  natnre 
than  mere  bodily  cares.  Godet  trnthfolly  sajs :  '^  That  which 
was  done  by  St.  Peter  at  Pentecost,  by  St.  PanI  all  over  the 
world,  that  which  is  effected  by  an  ordinary  preacher,  a  single 
believer,  by  bringing  the  Spirit  into  the  heart,  could  not  be 
done  by  Jesus  during  His  sojourn  in  this  world."  Jesus'  per- 
sonal ministry  in  the  flesh  must  be  a  local  ministry.  Only 
under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  could  it  be  universal. 

13.  In  my  name.  The  first  occurrence  of  the  phrase.  See 
on  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  Prayer  is  made  in  the  name  of  Jesus, "  if 
this  name,  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  full  substance  of  the  saving 
faith  and  confession  of  him  who  prays,  is,  in  his  consciousness, 
the  element  in  which  the  prayerful  activity  moves;  so  that 
thus  that  Name,  embracing  the  whole  revelation  of  redemp- 
tion, is  that  which  specifically  measures  and  defines  the  disposi- 
tion, feeling,  object,  and  contents  of  prayer.  The  express  use 
of  the  name  of  Jesus  therein  is  no  specific  token ;  the  question 
is  of  the  spirit  and  mind  of  him  who  prays  "  (Meyer).  West- 
cott  cites  Augustine  to  the  effect  that  the  prayer  in  Christ's 
name  must  be  consistent  vdth  Christ's  character,  and  that  He 
fulfils  it  as  Saviour,  and  therefore  just  so  far  as  it  conduces  t9 
salvation. 

14.  If  ye  shall  ask  anything.  Some  authorities  insert  me. 
So  Rev.    This  implies  prayer  to  Christ. 

15.  Keep  {rrjpija'aTe).  The  best  texts  read  rrfp^ere,  ye  wiU 
keep.  Lay  up  in  your  hearts  and  preserve  by  careful  watching. 
See  on  reservedj  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

My  commandments  (tA?  hnoKk^  ri^  ifd^).  lit.,  the  com- 
ma/ndments  which  are  mine.     See  on  x.  27. 

16.  I  will  pray  {ipamriam).    See  on  xi.  22. 

Comforter  {irapaxKTjrov).  Only  in  John's  Gospel  and  First 
Epistle  (xiv.  16,  26  ;  xv.  26 ;  xvi.  7 ;  1  Ep.  ii.  1).  From  irapd, 
to  the  side  of^  and  /caXicn,  to  summon.     Hence,  originally,  one 


344  WORD  STODras  m  thb  sbw  tbbtament. 

who  i«  called  to  another's  aids  to  aid  him.,  as  an  adrocate  in  a 
court  of  justice.  The  later,  Hellenistic  use  of  trof/aKoKeiv  and 
trapoKKijiTiv,  to  denote  the  act  of  consoling  and  comolation,  gave 
rise  to  the  rendering  Comforter,  which  is  given  in  every  instance 
in  the  Goapel,  but  is  changed  to  advocate  in  1  John  ii.  1,  agree- 
ably to  its  uniform  signification  in  classical  Greek.  The  argu- 
ment in  favor  of  this  rendering  throughout  is  conclusive.  It  is 
urged  that  the  rendering  Comforter  is  justified  by  the  fact  that, 
in  its  original  eenae,  it  means  more  than  a  mere  consoler,  beiug 
derived  from  the  Latin  coiforiare,  to  atre^igthen,  and  that  the 
Comforter  is  therefore  one  who  strengtliens  tlie  canse  and  the 
courage  of  his  client  at  the  bar:  but,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  ob- 
serves, the  history  of  this  interpretation  shows  that  it  is  not 
readied  by  this  process,  but  grew  out  of  a  grammatical  error, 
and  that  therefore  this  account  can  only  be  accepted  as  an 
apology  after  the  fact,  and  not  as  an  explanation  of  the  fact. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is,  tiierefore,  by  the  word  TraptwcXip-os,  of  which 
Paraclete  is  a  transcription,  represented  as  our  Advocate  or 
Counsel,  "  who  suggests  true  reasonings  to  our  minds,  and  true 
courses  of  action  for  our  lives,  who  convicts  our  adversary,  the 
world,  of  wrong,  and  pleads  our  cause  before  God  our  Father." 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  Jesus  as  well  as  the  Holy  Spirit  is  repre- 
sented as  Paraclete.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  to  be  another  Para- 
clete, and  this  falls  in  with  the  statement  in  the  First  Epistle, 
"  we  have  an  advocate  with  God,  even  Jcsiis  Chjnst."  Compare 
lioui.  viii.  96,  See  on  Luke  vi.  24.  Note  also  that  the  word 
another  is  aXKov,  and  not  Irepov,  which  means  different.  The 
advocate  who  is  to  be  sent  is  not  different  from  Christ,  but  an- 
oOier  similar  to  Himself.     See  on  Matt.  vi.  24.* 

With  you  {jueS'  vfimv).  Notice  the  three  prepositions  used 
in  this  verse  to  describe  the  Spirit's  relation  to  the  believer. 
With  you  (>MTa),  in  fellowship ;  hy  you  (trapd),  in  His  personal 

"The  Btudpnt  wiU  Dnd  the  who's  (|a«stlon  digcuaged  b;  Biahnp  Lightfoot 
('■  On  ■  Fresh  Berision  of  the  New  TestameDt."  p.  5»  B<iq.)  i  Julias Chftrlea  Hare 
("Misafonof  theConirorter,"p.  !M6):  and  Canon  Westaottdntroduotlon  to  the 
Commentarj-  on  John's  Qoii|wl.  F^ptiaksr'B  Commeutary.  p,  I211>,  See  altw  hia 
note  on  1  Joha  11.  1,  in  his  Commenturj'  oa  the  Epfatli^a  of  John. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  246 

presence ;  in  yoa  {hi)^  as  an  indweUing  personal  energy,  at  the 
springs  of  the  life. 

17.  The  Spirit  of  Truth.  "A  most  exquisite  title,"  saja 
Beugel.  The  Spirit,  who  has  the  truth,  reveals  it,  by  knowl- 
edge in  the  understanding ;  confers  it  by  practical  proof  and 
taste  in  the  will ;  testifies  of  it  to  others  also  through  those  to 
whom  He  has  revealed  it ;  and  defends  that  truth,  of  which 
ch.  i.  17  speaks,  grace  and  truth.  .  .  .  The  truth  makes  all 
our  virtues  true.  Otherwise  there  is  a  kind  of  false  knowledge, 
false  faith,  false  hope,  false  love ;  but  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
false  truth." 

The  world.    See  on  i.  9. 

Shall  be  in  you.    Some  editors  read,  icrtv^  ia  in  yon. 

18.  Leave  (o^f^co).    See  on  iv.  3. 

Comfortleea  (6p<f>auovs;).  Lit,  bereft  or  orphans.  Only  here 
and  Jas.  i.  27,  where  it  is  rendered/cUherlesa.  Compare  mif  UtUe 
children  (xiii.  33).  ^'  He  hath  not  left  un  without  a  rule  (xiii. 
34);  nor  without  an  example  (xiii.  16);  nor  without  a  motAoe 
(xiv.  15) ;  nor  without  a  strenffth  (xv.  6) ;  nor  without  a  toamr 
ing  (xv.  2, 6) ;  nor  without  a  Comforter  (xiv.  18) ;  nor  without 
a  revyard  (xiv.  2)  (James  Ford,  ^^  The  Gospel  of  St  John  Illus- 
trated *'). 

i  will  come  i^prxpyjii).   Present  tense,  I  come.  See  on  ver.  3. 

19.  Ye  ahali  live  alao  (luu  vyuw  ^tja-eaSe).  This  may  also  be 
rendered,  and  ye  shall  live^  explaining  the  former  statement,  ye 
hehold  roe.  So  Rev.,  in  margin.  This  is  better.  John  is  not 
arguing  for  the  dependence  of  their  life  on  Christ's,  but  for 
fellowship  with  Christ  as  the  ground  of  spiritual  vision. 

21.  Hath.  ^^  Who  has  in  memory  and  keeps  in  life"  (Au- 
gustine). 


346  WORD  STtTDIBa  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Will  manifest  {ip^vCaoi).  Properly,  of  manifestation  to 
the  sight,  as  distinguiBlied  from  hrflJMi,  to  Tnake  eviderU  to  the 
7)duU  (1  Cor.  iii,  13 ;  Col.  i,  8,  etc.).  A  clear,  conspicuous  mani- 
featation  is  indicated.  Compare  ye  see  me  (ver.  19).  "It  con- 
veys more  tlian  tlie  disclosing  of  an  undiscorered  preeenca 
{ivoKaKinrTta),  or  the  manifesting  of  a  hidden  one  (^^avtpim) " 
(Westcott). 

'     32.  Judas.    See  on  7%add(9U9,  Mark  iii  18. 

Not  Iscariot.  The  Rev.  improves  the  translation  by  placing 
these  words  immediately  after  Judaa.  "  He  distinguishes  the 
godly  Judas,  not  by  his  own  surname,  but  by  the  negation  of 
the  other's ;  marking  at  the  same  time  the  traitor  as  present 
again  after  his  negotiation  with  the  adversaries,  but  as  having 
no  sympathy  with  such  a  question  "   (Bengel). 

How  is  it  (rl  yeyofo/).  Lit.,  what  has  come  to  pass.  Im- 
plying that  Judas  thought  that  some  change  bad  taken  place 
in  Jesus'  plans.  He  had  assumed  that  Jeeua  would,  as  the 
Messiah,  reveal  Himself  publicly. 

23.  My  word  (Xoyov  fiov).  The  entire  gospel  message,  u 
distinguished  from  its  separate  parts  or  commandments. 

We  will  come.     Compare  x.  30  ;  Apoc.  iii.  20. 

Abode  (jtoifiiv).  See  on  ver.  2.  Compare  1  Johnii.  24; 
V.  15. 

34.  My  sayings  {Xoyavt).  Kev.,  words.  Compare  word^ 
ver.  23.     The  constituent  parts  of  the  one  word. 

25.  Being  yet  present  (jtevav).  Rev.,  stronger  and  more 
literally,  wAil^  yet  abiditig. 

26.  In  my  name.     See  on  ver.  13. 

He  (eVetTO?).  Setting  the  Advocate  distinctly  and  sharply 
before  the  hearers.     The  pronoun  ia  used  in  John's  First  Epis- 


1 


Gospsir  OF  jomr.  247 

tie,  distinctively  of  our  Lord.    See  1  John  ii.  6 ;  iiL  3,  5,  7, 16 ; 
iv.  17. 

I  have  eaid  (eZiroy).    The  aorist  tense,  I  said. 

27.  Peace.  ^  These  are  last  words,  as  of  one  who  is  abont 
to  go  away  and  says  ^good-night'  or  gives  his  blessing'' 
(Lather).  Peace  !  was  the  ordinary  oriental  greeting  at  part- 
ing.    Compare  xx.  21. 

My  peace  I  give.  Compare  1  John  iiL  1.  ^^  It  is  of  Ki%  aton 
that  one  ffwes  "  (Godet). 

Let  it  be  afraid  {BetXtdrno).  Only  here  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. Properly  it  signifies  ootoarcOy  fear.  Bjev.y /eatful. 
The  kindred  adjective  Se«Xo9  fearftdy  is  used  by  Matthew  of 
the  disciples  in  the  storm  (viiL  26),  and  in  the  Apocalypse 
of  those  who  deny  the  faith  throogh  fear  of  persecution  (xxi. 
8).  The  kindred  noan,  BeiXia,  occurs  only  in  2  Tim.  i.  7,  ^^  Ood 
hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear^  contrasted  with  the  spirit 
of  power,  love,  and  a  sound  mind. 

28.  I  aaid.  Omit,  and  read,  ye  would  have  rejoiced  beoaued 
I  go  unto  the  Father. 

30.  Hereafter  I  will  not  talk  (ovc  fri  XoXs^).  Rev.,  more 
correctly,  /  wiU  no  more  apeak. 

The  prince  of  thia  world.  The  best  texts  read,  '^of  the 
world." 

Hath  nothing  in  me.  No  right  nor  power  over  Christ 
which  sin  in  Him  could  give.  The  Greek  order  iSjin  me  he 
hath  nothing. 

31.  But  that  the  world  may  know,  etc  The  connection 
in  this  verse  is  much  disputed.  Some  explain,  Ariee^  let  us  go 
henoej  thai  the  world  may  know  that  I  love  the  FatheTj  and  thai 
even  as  the  Father  oo^nmanded  me  so  I  do.     Others,  So  Ido^ 


218  WORD  8TOD1B8  IM  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

tliat  the  world  may  know — and  even  as  the  Father,  etc.  Otliei's, 
agnin,  take  the  opening  pliraee  &b  elliptical,  Biippl^ing  eitlier, 
he  coinei/t,  i.e.,  Satan,  in  order  tliat  tlie  world  ma_>'  know — aud 
tliat  as  the  Father,  etc. ;  or,  /  surrender  mi/self  to  suffering  and 
death  that  the  world  tnaj  know,  etc.  In  this  case,  Arise,  etc., 
will  form,  as  in  A.  V.  aud  Eev.,  an  independent  sentence.  I 
incline  to  adopt  this.  The  phrase  &XX'  uia,  hut  in  order  that, 
with  an  ellipsis,  is  common  in  Jotm.  See  i.  8,  31 ;  ix.  3 ;  xiii. 
18 ;  XT.  25 ;  1  John  ii.  19. 


CHAPTER  Xr. 

"Wbeee  the  following  discourses  were  uttered  is  a  matter  of 
nncertaiuty.  Some  suppose  that  after  the  words,  Ai-iee,  let  us  go 
hence,  the  disciples  still  lingered  at  the  table.  Others,  that  the 
discourses  were  spoken  on  the  way  to  the  Mount  of  Olives; 
and  others,  again,  in  the  court  of  the  temple.  Assuming  tliat 
the  figure  of  the  vine  was  suggested  by  some  e.\ternal  object, 
that  object  is  explained  according  to  the  different  views  of  the 
scene  of  tiie  discuui'ses.  Those  who  think  that  it  was  the 
chamber  which  the  company  bad  not  yet  left,  suggest  the  cuji 
of  wine  of  which  they  had  recently  partaken  (Meyer) ;  or  a 
vine  whose  tendrils  liad  crept  into  the  room  (Tholuck) ;  or  the 
view  of  vineyards  outside  in  the  light  of  the  moon  (Storr). 
Those  who  assign  the  discourses  to  the  walk  to  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  down  to  Kedron  through  the  vineyards,  draw  the  figure 
from  the  vineyards,  and  the  fires  burning  along  the  sides  of  the 
Kedron  valley  in  order  to  consnme  the  vine-cuttings  (Lange, 
Godet).  Those  who  place  the  discourses  in  the  court  of  the 
temple,  find  the  suggestion  in  the  great  golden  vine  over  the 
temple-gate  (Westcott,  Lampel.  Others,  again,  think  that  the 
similitude  was  not  drawn  from  any  external  object,  but  was 
suggested  by  tlie  familiar  Old  Testament  symbolism  of  the 
vineyard  and  the  vine,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxx.  8-19;  Isa.  v.  1  sqq. ; 
Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Ezefc.  .\ix.  10  sqq.  (So  Liicke,  Alford,  Miliigan  and 
Moulton,  and  Trench). 


J 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  249 

1.  The  true  vine  (4  ifJtffr€\o^  4  cXtfl^ivfj).  Lit.,  the  vinsj 
the  true  (vine).  True^  g&n/uine^  answering  to  the  perfect  ideal. 
See  on  i.  9.  The  vine  was  a  symbol  of  the  ancient  church. 
See  the  passages  cited  above,  and  Hosea  z.  1 ;  Matt  zxi.  33 ; 
Lake  xiii  6. 

Huabandman  (y^opy^).  From  yfj,  the  earthy  and  l/xyco,  to 
work.  The  vinedresser  is  ifureXovfyfo^,  occarring  only  at  Lake 
xiii.  7 ;  bat  the  office  of  the  vine-dresser  is  a  subordinate  one, 
while  yempy^  may  indicate  the  prcfprietor.  See  2  Chron.  xxvi. 
10  (Sept.),  where  the  word  is  applied  to  King  XJzziah.  So  of 
Koah,  Gen.  ix.  30.  In  Matt.  xxi.  33-41,  the  yempyol  represent 
the  chiefs  and  leaders  of  the  Jews.    Wjc,  (m  eartA-tiUer. 

2.  Branch  {dKfjfAa).  Occarring  only  in  this  chapter.  Both 
this  and  icXdSo^,  braneh  (see  on  Matt.  xxiv.  32 ;  Mark  xi.  8)  are 
derived  from  tcKda,  to  break.  The  word  emphasizes  the  ideaa 
of  tenderness  and  fiestXbiUty. 

Purgeth  (/MbSti^pci).     Cleanseihy  Bev. 

3.  Clean  {leaBapol).  Etymologically  akin  to  tcaBalpei,  purff- 
etA.    The  Rev.  indicates  this  by  rendering  leaSaipeiy  deansetk. 

4.  Of  itself  (o^'  iauTov).  Froperljj/rom  itself.  See  on  viL 
17. 

No  more  can  ye  {oUtw^  ou8d  j/mk).  Lit.,  so  neither  can  ye. 
So  Rev. 

5.  Without  me  (x'^pU  ifiov).  Properly,  apart  from  me. 
So  Rev.    Compare  i.  3 ;  Eph.  ii.  12. 

6.  He  is  cast  forth  (ipkn^  ^fa»).  The  aorist  tense.  Lit, 
vHis  cast  forth.  The  aorist,  denoting  a  momentary  act,  indi- 
cates that  it  was  cast  forth  at  the  moment  it  ceased  to  abide  in 
the  vine.    JFbrth  signi&e&yrom  the  vineyard;  i^,  oiUside. 

As  a  branch  (»9  r6  kKSjiao).  Strictly,  the  branch :  the  nil' 
fruitful  branch. 


WORD  STUDIES  tS  THB  SEW  TESTAMENT. 


Is  withered  (i^f>dv57i). 

Wjc,  a/iall  ■wax  dry. 

Men  gather.     Or,  ae  Re' 
pare  lea.  xxvii,  11 ;  Ezek.  xv 


7.  Ye  shall  ask  (aiTijo-etr.9c).     The  beat  texts  read  the  im- 
perative, aiTTjeraffSe,  ask.* 


The  aorist,  aa  in  was  coat  forth. 
.,  they  gather.     Indefinite.     Com- 


Shall  be  done  unto  you  {iev^ff\ 

•ome  to  pass  for  you. 


vfiXii).    Lit.,  U  shall 


8.  Herein  {eu  rovrp).  Commonly  referred  to  what  followa. 
My  Father  is  glorified  in  this,  namely,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit. 
It  is  better  to  refer  it  hack  to  ver.  7.  In  the  perfect  unity  of 
will  between  the  Son  and  the  disciple,  which  results  in  the  dis- 
ciple's obtaining  whatever  he  asks,  the  Father  is  glorified.  To 
this  effect  is  xiv.  13,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name, 
that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may  he  glorified  in.  the  Son." 
The  design  of  this  glorification  ibi  thtU  (tva)  you  may  bear  much 
fruit.  This  retrospective  reference  of  eir  rovr^,  in  thia,  or 
herein,  occurs  in  iv,  37  ;  xvi,  30 ;  1  John  iv,  17. 

Is  glorified  (e'Sofoo-iSi)).  The  aorist  tense ;  was  glorified. 
As  in  ver.  C,  marking  the  point  when  the  Father's  glory  wag 
realized  in  the  perfect  union  of  the  believer's  will  with  Christ's. 

So  shall  ye  be  (koI  yein]<T€a$().  Lit.,  and  ye  shaU  heco7ne. 
Some  editors,  however,  read  yevrjirSe,  and  connect,  in  the  same 
construction  with  the  preceding  clause,  rendering,  "Herein  ia 
(was)  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  might  hear  much  fruit  and 
become  my  disciples."  Note  that  the  word  is  become,  not  he. 
Christian  discipleship  implies  progress  and  growth. 

9.  In  my  love  (h>  rfj  arfdir^  ttJ  e/iTJ).  Lit,  in  the  love,  thai 
which  w  mijie.     Not  only  the  love  of  the  disciple  for  Christ, 


*Thifl  does  not.  as  Godet  mja,  lam  the  promise  into  "■  morftl  preospt." 
It  ia  k  hortatorjr  euoou  rage  meat.     But  tbsn  the  reading  oooara  in  Cod.  A.  I 


■ 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  251 

nor  the  love  of  Christ  for  the  disciple,  but  the  Christ-principle 
of  love  which  inclades  both.  See  the  same  form  of  expression 
in  t?^  joy  that  is  minej  ver.  11 ;  iii.  29 ;  xvii.  13 ;  tiie  judgment 
{v.  30 ;  viii.  16) ;  tiie  cammandmerUs  (xiv.  15) ;  pecuse  (xiv.  27). 

11.  My  joy.  The  joy  that  is  mine;  characteristic  of  me. 
See  on  ver.  9. 

Might  remain  (jj^ivfi).    The  best  texts  read  ^,  may  be. 

Might  be  full  {irXripo9$p).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  may  he 
fuijlUed.  The  A.  Y.  loses  the  distinction  between  the  abecH/uite 
joy  which  is  Christ's,  and  \\\^ progreesvoe^  bat  finally  consnm- 
mated  joy  which  is  the  disciple's. 

12.  My  commandment  (i^  ^in^X^  ^  iyJ^.  The  command- 
ment which  is  mine. 

That  ye  love  (2ya).  Indicating  not  merely  the  natfwre  of  the 
commandment,  bnt  \\a  purport. 

13.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  (tya).  Some  of 
the  more  sabtile  phases  of  John's  thought  cannot  be  appre- 
hended without  a  careful  study  of  this  often-recurring  conjunc- 
tion. It  is  still  claimed  by  some  grammarians  that  it  is  used 
to  mark,  not  only  design  and  end^  but  also  result,*  But  it  may 
fairly  be  claimed  that  its  predominant  sense  is  intent^  purpose^ 
purport,  or  object.  Hence  thatj  as  representing  &a,  is  to  be 
takep  in  the  sense  of  to  the  end  or  irUent  that;  in  order  that. 
Here  the  use  of  the  word  is  very  subtile  and  suggestive,  as 
well  as  beautiful.  No  man  hath  greater  love  than  this  (love), 
which,  in  its  original  conception,  was  intended  and  designed  to 
reach  to  the  extent  of  sacrificing  life  for  a  friend.  Christ,  there- 
fore, here  gives  us  more  than  a  mere  abstract  comparison,  and 
more  than  a  merely  human  gauge  of  love.  He  measures  love 
according  to  its  divine,  original,  far-reaching  intent. 

*  Tiie  technical  terms  are  rcAutdf  (teUcot),  of  the  daign  and  end,  and  Im^o- 
ruMf  (ekbatikos),  of  the  re$uU. 


252  WORD   STUDIES  DJ  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Lay  down  his  life.     See  on  x.  11. 

14.  I  command  (^^Xo^mm),  Of  several  words  for  oom- 
mand  in  the  New  Testament,  tliia  one  ie  always  need  of  giving 
a  specific  injunction  or  jirecept.  The  kindred  nonn,  ei^oXij, 
means  an  ord<ir,  a  charge,  a  j-recejit,  and  hence  is  used  of  a 
separate  precept  of  tlie  law  as  distinguished  from  the  )aw  as  & 
whole  (co/M«).  See  Matt.  xxii.  36, 3S.  It  is,  however,  eometimes 
need  of  the  wiiole  body  of  the  moral  precepts  of  Christianity. 
See  on  xiii.  34.  The  sense  of  specific  commands  here  falls  in 
with  the  reading  of  the  Rec.  Text,  &aa,  whatsoever,  lit.,  at 
many  things  as. 

15.  Henceforth — not  (owe^t)-  Kev.,  better,  m<j  ion^er.  No 
longer  gervani^,  ae  yon  were  under  the  dispeaeation  of  the  law. 
Compare  Gal.  iv.  7, 

Servants  (SoiiXovs).     Strictly,  bondservants. 

Knoweth  not  {ovk  olSi).  Has  no  inatinctvoe  perception. 
See  on  ii.  2i. 

You.  The  position  of  the  pronoun  io  the  Qreek  is  em- 
phatic :  "  Ymi  I  have  called  friends." 

16.  Ye — chosen.  The  pronoun  is  emphatic :  "It  was  not  ye 
that  cliose  nie." 

Ordained  (e-^xa).  Rev.,  appointed  is  better,  because  it 
divests  the  word  of  its  conventional  meaning.  Ordain  is  from 
the  Latin  oriiinare,  and  means  to  set  in  order.  Thus,  Robert 
of  Gloucester's  "Chronicle:"  "lie  began  to  ordain  his  folk," 
i.^.,  set  his  people  in  order.  Hakluyt,  "Voyages:"  "He  or- 
dained a  boat  made  of  one  tree."  The  Greek  verb  means  to 
set,  put,  or  j}lac6.  Hence  of  appointing  one  to  service.  See 
1  Tim.  i.  12.  "Wye,  Matt  xxiv.  47:  "Upon  all  his  goods  he 
shall  ordain  him." 

Should  go  (\nr6rpiTe).  Withdraw  from  His  personal  society 
and  go  out  into  the  world. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  253 

That  whatsoever,  etc  (Zi«).  Co-ordinated  with  the  preced- 
ing u^Ot  tAai^  as  marking  another  resolt  of  their  choice  and  ap- 
pointment by  Christ  He  has  appointed  them  tluU  they  should 
bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  they  should  obtain  such  answers  to 
their  prayer  as  would  make  them  fruitful. 

17.  That  (&a).  All  my  teachings  toe  to  the  end  that  you 
should  love  one  another. 

18.  If  the  world  hate  (el  fuaei).  lit,  hates.  The  indicative 
mood  with  the  conditional  particle  assumes  the  fact  as  existing : 
If  the  world  hates  you,  as  it  does. 

Ye  know  (yivwrtcere).  This  may  also  be  rendered  as  imper- 
ative :  Know  ye. 

It  hated  (jiefjUafficev).  The  perfect  tense,  hath  hated  The 
hatred  continues  to  the  present  time. 

Before  it  hated  you  {irp&rop  vfA&y).  lit,  first  in  regard 
of  you.    See  on  i.  16. 

19.  Of  the  world  {i/c  rov  icdcfuw).  Sprung  oti^  ^the  world. 
See  on  of  the  earthy  iii.  31. 

Would  love  (Ay  i^iKMi).  The  verb  for  natural  affection. 
See  on  v.  20. 

20.  Persecuted  (^8^^).  The  verb  means  originally  to 
put  to  flight ;  thence  to  run  svnfUy  in  order  to  overtake  or  at" 
tairij  as  the  goal  or  the  competitor  in  the  race.  Thus  Sophocles 
("  Electra,"  738)  :  "  He  urged  his  swift  steeds  vehemently  with 
shouts  that  pierced  their  ears,  and  makes  for  him  (huiieei).*^ 
Compare  /follow  after  (SMi/co),  Philip,  iii.  12).  Hence  to  pur- 
sfie  with  hostile  intent^  and,  generally,  to  molesty  luirass^  perse- 
cute, PerseciUe  is  from  the  equivalent  HaXm  persequor^  tofdU 
low  upj  and  is  used  earlier,  in  the  sense  ofpursue^  while  pursue^ 
in  turn,  is  used  in  the  sense  oi  persecute.    Thus  Wye,  Matt.  v. 


254  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

AAy  for  inen  pursuing  you.  Sir  Thomas  MJore  (*^ Utopia"), 
**'  Whiles  their  enemies  rejoicing  in  the  victory  h^ve persecuted 
(i.e.,  jmrsued)  them." 

21.  For  my  name's  sake  (St^  r6  opofid  fAov).  Lit,  on  ac- 
count of  my  name.  The  name  of  Christ  represented  the  faith, 
the  attitude,  the  claims,  and  the  aim  of  the  disciples.  His 
name  was  their  confession.  Luther  says :  ^^  The  name  of  Christ 
from  your  mouth  will  be  to  them  nothing  but  poison  and 
death." 

22.  Had  ain  {ofiapriav  elxov).     See  on  ix.  41 ;  1  John  i.  8. 

Cloke  {irpoifMa'ai).  From  irpo,  before,  in  front  of  and  (fyqfU, 
to  say  or  affirm.  Hence  something  which  is  placed  in  front 
of  tlie  true  cause  of  a  thing,  a  pretext.  Compare  1  Thess.  ii. 
5;  Acts  xxvii.  30.  Pretext  carries  tlie  same  idea,  Latin,  ^ee- 
textum,  something  woven  in  front,  with  a  view  to  conceahnent 
or  deception.  Rev.,  excuse.  Wye,  excusation.  The  A.V.  fol- 
lows Tyndale:  nothing  to  cloke  their  sin  withal.  Latimer 
("  Sermons  ") :  *'  By  such  cloaked  charity,  when  thou  dost  ofiFend 
before  Christ  but  once,  thou  hast  ofiPended  twice  herein."  The 
word  appears  in  the  low  Latin  doca,  a  bell  (compare  the  French 
cloche,  and  English  clock),  and  the  name  was  given  to  a  horse- 
man's cloak  because  of  its  resemblance  to  a  bell.  The  word 
palliate  is  from  the  TjaXm  pallium,  a  cloak. 

25.  Without  a  cause  {SoDpedv).  Gratuitously.  Akin  to 
SlSwfiiy  to  give.     Their  hatred  was  a  voluntary  gift. 

27.  Shall  bear  witness  (jiaprvpeire).  Present  tense,  bear 
witness.  So  Rev.  Or,  it  may  be  taken  as  imperative :  bear  ye 
witness. 


CHAPTER  Xri. 

1.  Be  offended  (o-^oi/SaXurS^c).  Bev.,  made  to  stumile. 
In  this  Gospel  only  here  and  vi.  61.  See  on  Matt  v.  29.  Wye, 
be  not  slandered. 


Ck)6PEL  OF  JOHN.  266 

2.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogues.  See  on 
ix.22. 

Yea  (oXX*).  Lit.,  hU.  They  shall  ezcominonicate  jouy  btU 
worse  than  this,  the  hoar  cometh,  etc. 

The  hour  oometh  that  (im).  Lit,  ^^  there  oometh  an  hour  in 
order  that?^  The  hoar  is  ordained  with  that  end  in  view :  it 
comes  fraaght  with  the  f alfllment  of  a  divine  parpose. 

Whosoever  (ira9  o).    Lit,  e^>ery  one  who. 

Doeth  service  (Xarpelop irpo<n^ip€ui).  lAtyMngethor  offer- 
eth  service.  Aarpela  means,  strictly,  service  for  A«rv,  bat  is  used 
of  any  service,  and  frequently  of  the  service  of  God. 

3.  Unto  you.    Omit 

4.  But  (oXX^).  Harks  a  breaking  off  of  the  enumeration  of 
fearful  details;  bui  (to  say  no  more  of  these  things), I  have 
spoken  these,  etc. 

At  the  beginning  (i^  op^).  Properly,  from  the  begin- 
ning.    So  Rev.     The  phrase  only  here  and  vi.  64. 

7.  It  is  expedient  (a'ufuf>ip€i).  From  avv  together^  and 
^/K0  to  bear  or  bring.  The  underlying  idea  of  the  word  is 
concurrence  of  circumstances. 

Go  away  {airtxSaoi).  The  different  words  for  go  should  be 
noted  in  this  verse,  and  ver.  10.  Here,  expressing  simple  de- 
parture from  a  point. 

Depart  (iropeuSS).  Rev.,  go.  With  the  notion  of  going  for  a 
purpose,  which  is  expressed  in  I  will  send  him. 

8.  Will  reprove  (^Xiyfc*).     See  on  iii.  20.    Rev.,  cowoicL 

Of  sin — righteousness — ^judgment  (irept).  Lit,  concerning. 
Rev.,  in  respect  of.     Of  gives  a  wrong  impression,  viz.,  thai 


256  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NHW  TESTAMENT. 

He  will  convict  the  world  of  being  sinful,  unrighteous,  and  ex- 
posed to  judgment.  This  is  true,  but  the  preposition  implies 
more.  He  will  convict  the  world  as  respects  these  three ;  that 
is,  will  convict  it  of  ignorance  of  their  real  nature. 

Righteouaneaa  {Sucatoainnf^).    Only  here  and  ver.  10  in  the 
Gospel.    It  occurs  in  the  First  Epistle  and  in  the  Apocalypse. 

10.  I  go  {inrdym).     Withdraw  from  their  sight  and  earthly 
fellowship.     See  on  viiL  21,  and  foot-note. 

Ye  aee  (•9ea>p€«T€).    Rev.,  behold.    See  on  i.  18. 

11.  la  judged  {lUicpirai),    Perfect  tense.    Rev.,  therefore, 
rightly,  haih  been  judged. 

12.  Bear  (fiaard^eiv).     See  on  x.  31 ;  xii.  6. 

Now  {afyri).     See  on  xiii.  33.     With  reference  to  a  future 
time,  when  they  toill  be  able  to  bear  them. 

13.  Spirit  of  truth.    Lit.,  of  the  truth.    See  on  xiv.  7. 


Will  guide  (6Si;7i7<r€«).  From  68a<;,  way^  and  fffiofioA,  to 
lead  The  kindred  noun,  0817709,  guidey  leader^  occurs  Matt.  xv. 
14 ;  Acts  i.  16,  etc. 

Into  all  truth  (c^  irSurav  rifv  oKqSeuiv).  Bev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, into  aU  the  truth.  Some  editors  read,  iv  t§  aXrfSeia 
TrdoTj,  in  all  the  truth.  Others,  ek  rifv  aki^uuf  Traaav,  join- 
ing iraaav  in  an  adverbial  sense  with  wHl  guide  you  :  i.e.,  will 
guide  you  whoUy  into  the  truth.  The  Spirit  does  not  reveal 
all  truth  to  men,  but  He  leads  them  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Christ. 

Of  himself.    Rev.,  rightly,  from  himself.     See  on  vii.  17. 

He  shall  hear  (Ay  okovo^).  Some  read,  okov^l,  heareth^ 
and  omit  Ai;,  the  conditional  particle.     ^^Oaa  tiv  uKovarj,  the 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  257 

reading  of  the  Rec.  Text,  is,  strictlj,  whatsoever  things  he  may 
have  heard. 

Will  shew  (ovoTyeXe!).  Better,  as  Bev.,  declare.  Compare 
Mark  v.  14, 19 ;  Acts  xx.  27 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  7.  Also  to  rehearse  ; 
Acts  xiv.  27.  Used  of  the  formal  proclamation  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion  (Acts  xx.  20  ;  1  Pet  L  12 ;  1  John  i.  5).  See  on 
Acts  xix.  18. 

Things  to  come  {jk  ifrxpfieua).  The  article,  omitted  by 
A.  Y.,  is  important.  The  meaning  is  not.  He  will  show  you 
some  things  to  come,  bat  the  things  that  are  to  come,  or  the 
things  that  are  coming.  These  things  are  whatsoever  He  shaXL 
hear.    The  phrase  occors  only  here  in  the  Now  Testament 

14.  Shall  receive  (Xif^rercu).    Bev.,  take.    See  on  iii.  32. 

15.  All  things  that  {^Jana  6(ra).  Lit,  cUl  things  as  many 
as.    Bev.,  all  things  whatsoever. 

Shall  take  (Xif^reroi).  The  best  texts  read  Xofifidue^,  iakeih. 
The  relation  between  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  is  put  by  JesnB 
as  present  and  constant 


<i 


16.  Ye  ehall  not  see  (pv  S^^peire).    The  present  tense: 
ye  behold  me  no  more."    So  Bev. 


Ye  shall  see  {Sylteo'Se).  A  difFerent  verb  for  seeing  is  nsed 
here.  For  the  distinction,  see  on  i.  18.  Qempim  emphasizes 
the  act  of  vision,  opaa>,  the  resvU.  Sempkm  denotes  deliberate 
contemplation  conjoined  with  mental  or  spiritual  interest 
^'The  vision  of  wondering  contemplation,  in  which  they 
observed  little  by  little  the  outward  manifestation  of  the  Lord, 
was  changed  and  transfigured  into  sight  in  which  they  seized 
at  once,  intuitively,  all  that  Christ  was.  As  long  as  His  earthly 
presence  was  the  object  on  which  their  eyes  were  fixed,  their 
view  was  necessarily  imperfect  His  glorified  presence  showed 
Him  in  His  true  nature ''  (Westcott). 
Vol.  IL— 17 


2oS  WORD  STDDIEB  IF  THE  NEW  TRSTAMENT. 

Because  I  go  unto  the  Father.    The  beet  texts  omit. 

17.  Then  (owe).  Rev.,  correctly,  therefore.  It  is  a  particle 
of  logical  connection,  not  of  time. 

18.  He  saith  (Xeyet).  Kinpiiasizing  tlie  purpoi-i  of  the  say- 
ing. 

A  little  while  (to  fiucpov).  In  vv.  16, 17,  without  the  article. 
Here  the  article  the  or  this  little  while  defines  the  special 
point  of  their  difBculty ;  this  "  little  while "  of  which  He 
speaks. 

We  cannot  tell  (o^k  oZSo^mv).  Rer.,  more  simply  and  liter- 
ally, ice  know  not. 

He  aaith  (XoX^t)-     Emphaeiziog  ih.e  form  of  the  saying. 

19.  Knew  {eyvta).     Better,  liev., perceived.     See  on  ii.  24. 

20.  Weep — lament — be  sorrowful  (*Xiii}ffere— ^piji^ffere — 
Xv7nj5T)<reff3«).  Of  these  tliree  words,  the  last  is  the  most 
general  in  meaning,  expressing  every  species  of  pain,  of  body 
or  of  eonl,  and  not  necessarily  the  outward  manifestation  of 
sorrow.  Both  the  other  words  denote  audible  expressione  of 
grief.  Sptfveto  marks  the  more  formal  expression.  It  means 
to  utter  a  dirge  over  the  dead.  Thus  Homer,  of  the  mourning 
over  Hector  in  Troy : 

"  On  a  fair  couch  thej  laid  the  oorse,  sdcI  placed 
SJngHrs  beaide  it,  leaders  of  the  dirge  (ipjimt). 
Who  sang  (^p^vtavj  &  sorrowful,  lamenting  Btroin, 
And  all  the  women  ansnered  it  with  sobs." 

"  Iliad,"  itiii.,  720-733. 

The  verb  occurs  Matt,  xi  17  ;  Lnke  vii.  32;  xxiii.  27.  KXai'w 
means  avdHle  weeping,  the  crying  of  children,  as  distinguished 
from  hoKfiwa,  to  ahed  tears,  to  weep  silently,  which  occurs  but 
once  in  the  New  Testament,  of  Jeeue'  weeping  (John  xi.  35). 
See  on  Luke  vii.  32. 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  259 

21.  A  woman  {^  yvvijj).  lit,  the  woman.  The  generic 
article  marking  the  woman  as  representing  her  sex :  woman  as 
snch. 

She  is  In  travail.  A  common  Old  Testament  image  of  sor- 
row issuing  in  joy.  See  Isa.  xxi.  3 ;  xxvL  17 ;  IxvL  7 ;  Hos. 
xiii.  13 ;  Mic.  iv.  9,  10. 

The  anguish  (r^  SXb^^ifsi).  Commonly  rendered  affUoUan 
or  tf^bylaUan  in  A.  Y.     See  on  Matt  xiii  31. 

Joy  (t^  X^H^)'  Pi^perly,  the  joy  which  answers  to  the 
anguish. 

A  man  (&ik9/MMro9).    See  on  i.  30. 

22.  Have  sorrow  (Kumfv  Ix^e).  This  form  of  expression 
occurs  frequently  in  the  New  Testament,  to  denote  the  posses- 
sion or  experience  of  virtues,  sensations,  desires,  emotions,  in* 
tellectual  or  spiritual  faculties,  faults,  or  defects.  It  is  stronger 
than  the  verb  which  expresses  any  one  of  these.  For  instance, 
to  have  faith  is  stronger  than  to  believe  :  to  have  life^  than  the 
act  of  living.  It  expi-esses  a  distinct,  peraonal  redUisaHon  of 
the  virtue  or  fault  or  sentiment  in  question.  Hence,  to  ha/ve 
sorrow  is  more  than  to  be  sorrowftU.  In  Matt  xvii.  20,  Christ 
does  not  say  if  ye  beUeve^  but  if  ye  have  faith;  if  faith,  in  ever 
so  small  a  degree,  is  possessed  by  you  as  a  conscious,  living 
principle  and  motive.  Compare  have  love  (xiii  85;  1  John 
iv.  16) ;  han)e  peace  (xvi.  33) ;  han)e  trust  (2  Cor.  iii.  4) ;  ha/ve 
boldness  (Heb.  x.  19 ;  1  John  ii.  28). 

23.  Ye  shall  ask  (^/EwnJ^rerc).  Or,  as  Rev.,  in  margin,  o^Xr — 
question.  To  question  is  the  primary  meaning  of  the  verb^ 
from  which  it  runs  into  the  more  general  sense  of  request^  be^ 
seech.  So  Mark  vii.  26;  Luke  iv.  38;  John  xvii.  15,  etc 
Here  the  meaning  is,  ye  shaU  ask  me  no  question  (compare  ver. 
19,  where  the  same  verb  is  used).  Compare  Matt  xvi.  13 ;  xxL 
24;  John  i.  19.  Aah^  absolutely,  Luke  xxii.  68.  Note,  more- 
over, the  selection  of  the  word  here  as  marking  the  asking  on 


360 


WORD  8TDDIEB  IN  THE  NEW  TEaTAMKNT. 


/amiliar  terms.  See  on  xi.  22.  Another  verb  for  ask  occurs 
in  tlie  fotlowiog  sentence :  "  If  ye  shall  as/c  {alr^emjTe)  any- 
thing," etc.  Here  the  sense  is,  if  ye  shall  malce  any  request. 
Compai-e  Matt.  v.  42;  vii.  7,  9,  10,  etc.  Note,  also,  that  this 
word  for  asking  the  Father  marks  the  asking  of  an  inferior 
from  a  sUfKjrior,  and  is  the  word  which  Christ  never  uses  of 
ifis  (WJrt  requests  to  the  Father,     Compare  1  John  iii.  22. 

Verily,  verily.     See  on  i.  51 ;  x.  1. 

Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask — in  my  name — give.  The  beat 
tOKts  change  oaa  &v,  whatsoever,  to  avTi,  if  (ye  shall  ask)  any- 
thing ,'  and  place  in  iny  name  after  give  it  you.  So  Rev.  ^ 
ye  shall  oak  anything  of  the  Father,  He  will  give  it  you  in  my 
name.  Not  only  is  the  prayer  offered,  but  the  answer  is  given 
in  Christ's  name. 


24.  Ask  (atT«T€).  The  present  imperative,  implying  fon- 
tinuous  asking.  Be  asking.  Compare  Mark  vi.  22,  aXnjTov, 
the  aorist  imperative,  marking  a  single,  definite  petition. 

May  be  full  (^  wen-Xijpm/iein]).  Very  literally,  may  he  hav- 
ing been  fulfilled.  Rev,,  more  correctly,  y«/;W^«/,  Compare 
XT.  11. 


25.  Proverbs  {■trapoiii.ioK). 
He  had  spoken  under  tigures. 
travail. 


See  on  parables.  Matt.  xiii.  3. 
aa  the  vine,  and  the  woman  in 


Shall  shew  {ava/fye\a).  Bev.,  tell.  See  on  ver.  13.  The 
best  texts  read  dirayytXoi,  tlie  original  force  of  which  is  to 
bring  tidings yrom  (airo)  something  or  some  one. 

Plainly  {■7rapp^<rli}).     See  on  vii.  13. 

26.  Ye  shall  ask — I  will  pray.  Note  again  the  use  of  the 
two  verbs  for  asking.  Ye  shall  ask  {airqiKv^i)  \  J  will  pray 
(epQiTTjo-ai).     See  on  ver.  23. 


i 


OOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  261 

27.  Loveth  (^Xc!).  As  sons,  with  the  love  of  natural  affec- 
tion. See  on  ▼.  20.  The  same  verb  in  the  following  danse,  of 
the  love  of  the  disciples  for  Christ. 

From  God.  Some  editors  resA^from  the  Father.  Ilapd^ 
from  beside. 

28.  From  the  Father  {vapd).    The  best  texts  read,  hc^  otU 

Go  (TTopcuo/AOi).    See  on  ver.  7. 

39.  Speakett— speakett  (XoXcS?— XiTci?).  The  first,  of  the 
farm ;  the  second,  of  the  jpurpart.    See  on  ver.  18. 

30.  We  are  sure  (oZSoftey).    Better,  as  Bev.,  we  knew. 

By  this  {h  tovt^).  lit.,  in  this.  Compare  1  John  iL  8,  6 ; 
iii.  16,  19,  24 ;  iv.  9, 10, 18, 17 ;  v.  2. 

81.  Now  i&fm).  See  on  xiiL  83.  With  reference  to  the 
coming  time  of  greater  trial. 

82.  That  (&a).  See  on  ver  2,  and  xv.  12.  In  the  divine 
connsel  the  honr  cometh  that  ye  may  be  scattered,  and  may 
leave,  etc. 

To  his  own  {ek  rh  tSta).    To  his  own  home.     See  on  i.  11. 

88.  Ye  shall  have  (l^erc).  The  best  texts  read,  tx^re,  ye 
have. 

Be  of  good  cheer  {Sapaeire).    Only  here  in  John. 

I  have  overcome  (veviscr^Ka).  The  verb  occurs  only  three 
times  outside  of  John's  writings.  Only  here  in  the  Gospel, 
and  frequently  in  First  Epistle  and  Apocalypse.  Uniformly 
of  spiritual  victoiy. 


WORD  STUDIBS  IK  THE  HBW  TESTAMENT. 


CHAPTER  XYIL 

The  HiOH-PRrEeTLy  Pratke. 

"  Out  of  Obriet'e  divinely  rich  prayer-life  there  emerge,  aa 
from  au  ocean,  the  pearls  of  those  single  prayers  of  His  that 
are  preserved  to  us ;  the  prayer  given  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  for  the  use  of  llis  people — Ou,r  Fatlter;  the  ascription 
of  praise  to  God  at  the  departure  from  Galilee  (Matt.  xi.  25) ; 
the  prayers  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  and  within  tlie  precincts  of 
the  temple;  onr  high-priestly  prayer ;  the  supplication  in  Geth- 
eeinane,  and  the  prayer-words  of  the  Crucified  One — Father, 
forgive  them  —Mi,  Mi, — and  the  closing  prayer,  Fat/ier,  into 
thy  hands,  etc.,  to  which  the  exultant  cry.  It  m  finielied,  at- 
taches itself,  inasmuch  as  from  one  point  of  view,  it  may  be  re- 
garded as  a  word  of  prayer.  Add  to  these  the  mentions  of  tlie 
prayings,  the  thanksgivings,  the  heavenward  sighings  of  Christ, 
as  also  liia  aummonsea  and  encouragements  to  prayer,  and  lie 
appears  as  the  Prince  of  humanity  even  in  the  realm  of  prayer ; 
in  the  manner,  likewise,  in  which  He  has  concealed  His  prayer- 
life,  exhibiting  it  only  as  there  was  necessity  for  its  present- 
ment. If  we  regard  His  work  as  a  tree  that  towers  into 
heaven  and  overshadows  the  world,  His  prayer-life  is  the  root 
of  this  tree ;  His  overcoming  of  the  world  rests  upon  the  infi- 
nite depth  of  His  self -presentation  before  God,  His  self-devo- 
tion to  God,  His  self-immersion  in  God,  His  se]C-^:e^titude 
and  power  from  God.  In  Ilia  prayer-life  the  perfect  truth  of 
His  liuman  nature  has  also  approved  itself.  The  same  who,  as 
the  Son  of  God,  is  complete  revelation,  is,  as  the  Son  of  Man, 
complete  religion  "  (Laiige). 

In  the  "Lord's  Prayer"  (Matt,  vi.)  Christ  sets  forth  what 
His  disciples  should  desire  for  themselves.  In  this  prayer  He 
indicates  what  He  desires  for  them.  It  is  interesting  to  study 
the  forms  in  which  the  ideas  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  are  repro- 
duced and  developed  in  this. 

1.  These  words  (raOra).     Lit.,  these  thinys.     So  Eer, 


-J 


GOBPEL  OF  JOHN.  263 

Said.    John  nowhere  toys  that  Jesna  prayed^  as  the  other 
Evangelists  do. 


Thy  Son — ^thy  Son  (ow  rov  vSbv — o  vw^.  Properly,  thy 
Son — the  Son.  The  second  phrase  marks  a  change  from  the 
thought  of  personal  relationship  to  that  of  the  relation  in 
which  Jesus  manifests  the  Father's  glory. 

2.  Power  {i^va-Uuf).    Rev.,  rightly,  atUAorify.    See  on  i.  12. , 

All  flesh.  A  Hebrew  phrase,  denoting  the  whole  of  hu- 
manity in  its  imperfection.  See  Oen.  vi.  12 ;  Ps.  Ixy.  2 ; .  Isa. 
xl.  5,  etc. 

That  He  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  Thou 
hast  given  Him  {tva  irav  h  hiiwca^  airr^,  Bwrjf  avrok  fy^ijv 
alonviov).  Lit.,  that  all  that  T/iou  hast  gwen  Him,  to  them  He 
should  give  eternal  life.  All  (^rw),  singular  number,  regards 
the  body  of  Christian  disciples  ooUeotiveli/ :  to  them,  individ' 
tuMy. 

3.  Life  eternal.  With  the  article:  ^  life  eternal.  Defin- 
ing the  words  in  the  previous  verse.  2%e  Ufe  eternal  {oi  which 
I  spoke)  is  this. 

That  (&a).  Expressing  the  aim. 


light  know  {yivdnrKotHn).  Might  recognise  or  perceive. 
This  is  striking,  that  eternal  life  consists  in  knowledge,  or 
rather  t\ie  pursuit  of  knowledge,  since  the  present  tense  marks 
a  conti/mtance^  aprogressvoe  perception  of  God  in  Christ  That 
they  might  learn  to  know.  Compare  ver.  23 ;  x.  38 ;  1  John  y. 
20 ;  iv.  7,  8. 

**  I  saj,  the  ftoknowledgment  of  Ood  in  Christ 
Accepted  bj  thj  reason,  soWes  for  thee 
All  qnestions  in  the  earth  and  ont  of  it, 
And  has  so  far  advanced  thee  to  \)e  wise. 
Wonldst  thou  improve  this  to  re-prove  the  proved  ? 
In  life's  mere  minute,  with  power  to  use  that  proof* 


264  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Le*ye  Imowledge  and  revert  to  how  it  spmng  f 
Thou  haet  it ;  use  it,  and  forthwith,  or  die. 
For  this  I  sa/  is  death,  and  the  sole  death. 
When  a  man*8  loss  oomee  to  him  from  his  gain, 
Darkness  from  light,  from  knowledge  ignorance, 
And  lack  of  love  from  love  made  manifest** 

Robert  Browning,  *<  A  Death  in  the  DeMrt** 

The  relation  of  perception  of  Qod  to  character  Ib  stated  in  1 
John  iii.  2,  on  which  see  note. 

True  (aXffSiPop).  See  on  i.  9.  Compare  1  Cor.  viii.  4 ;  1 
Tim.  vi.  15. 

Jesus  Christy  whom  Thou  hast  sent.  The  Bev.  brings 
out  better  the  emphasis  of  the  Greek  order :  €nnd  Him  wham 
Thou  didst  8endy  even  Jeaus  Christ,  Didst  send  (airiareCKa/^), 
The  aorist  tense,  emphasizing  the  historic  fact  of  Christ's  mis- 
sion. 


4.  I  have  glorified — I  have  finished  {iho^tra — ir^KeLsHrti). 
The  best  texts  read,  rOsjewKrofiy  hamng  finished;  the  participle 
defining  the  manner  in  which  He  had  glorified  the  Father  upon 
earth.     So  Kev. 

To  do  {iva  ironiacoi).     lit,  in  order  that  I  should  do  (it). 

6.  With  Thyself  {iraph  aeavr^).  In  fellowship  with  Thy- 
self.    So  with  Thee  {irapiL  trot), 

I  had.    Actually  possessed. 

8.  The  words  (tA  /Si^/xara).  Compare  thy  word  (X0701/), 
ver.  6.  That  signified  the  gospel  message  in  its  entirety.  This, 
the  message  considered  in  its  constituent  parts.  See  on  Lnke 
i.  87.  Compare  v.  38,  47 ;  vi.  60,  63,  68 ;  viii.  43,  47,  51 ;  xii. 
47,  48 ;  XV.  3,  7. 

9.  I  pray  (ipcorA).  More  strictly,  I  make  request.  See  on 
xvi.  23.     The  /  is  emphatic,  as  throughout  the  prayer. 


G08PBL  OF  JOHN.  205 

10.  All  mine  (r^  ifi^  trdtrra).  All  things  thai  are  mine. 
SoSev. 

11.  I  come  (ipxpftoi).  I  am  ooming.  Spoken  of  His  de- 
parture to  the  Father. 

Holy  (^m).  See  on  eaintSj  Acte  zxvi  10 ;  also  on  1  Pet 
i  15.  Compare  1  John  ii.  20,  and  righteous  Father  {iUau)j 
ver.  25.  This  epithet,  now  first  applied  to  the  Father,  contem- 
plates  God,  the  holy  One,  as  the  agent  of  that  which  Christ 
desires  for  His  disciples — holiness  of  heart  and  life ;  being  kept 
from  this  evil  world. 

Those  whom  (crf^).  The  correct  reading  is  ^,  referring  to 
name.  Thy  name  which  Thou  hast  given  me.  So  in  ver.  12. 
Compare  Philip,  ii.  9,  10 ;  Apoc  ii.  17 ;  zix.  12 ;  zxiL  4. 

12.  In  the  world.    Omit. 

I  kept  (Mipow).  Imperfect  tense.  /  oontifiued  to  keep. 
The  /  is  emphatic:  /kept  them,  now  do  Thou  keep  them. 

I  kept  {ii>vKa^).  Rev.,  rightly,  I  guarded.  The  A.  Y. 
overlooks  the  distinction  between  the  two  words  for  keeping. 
The  former  word  means,  I  preserved  them ;  the  latter,  I  gua/tded 
them  as  a  means  to  their  preservation.  See  on  reserved,  1  Pet 
i.  4. 

Is  lost — perdition  {airi»XiTo-—ifn^Xelai9).  A  play  of  words: 
''None  of  tiiem perished,  but  the«^n  qfpertshing^  (Westcott). 

The  scripture  (^  ypa^).  See  close  of  note  on  v.  47,  and  on 
Mark  xii.  10. 

15.  From  the  evil  (rot)  irovffpov).  Or,  the  evil  one.  This 
rendering  is  according  to  John's  usage.  See  1  John  ii.  13, 14 ; 
iii.  12 ;  v.  18, 19 ;  and  compare  xii.  31 ;  xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  11.  Jfhom 
(itc)j  lit,  otU  of  J  means  out  of  the  hands  qf. 


366  WORD  STUDIES  I](f  THB  NBW  TB8TAMBNT. 

17.  Sanctify  {atfCaaov).  ConBtantlj  used  in  the  Septuagiut 
to  express  the  entire  dedication  and  consecration  of  both  per- 
sons and  things  to  God.  See  Exod.  xxix.  1,  36 ;  xl.  13 ;  Lev. 
xxii.  2,  3.    Rev.,  in  margin,  oonascrate.    See  on  x.  36. 

Through  thy  truth  {iv  tQ  aXofl^la  <rov).  The  best  texts 
omit  thy.  Through  {ip)  is  to  be  rendered  literally,  in,  marking 
tlie  sphere  or  element  of  consecration.  Bev.,  sanctify  t/iern  in 
the  truth. 

Thy  word  (o  Xoyo^  6  a^).  Properly,  the  ward  which  is  thine. 
See  on  xv.  9. 

18.  Sent  (aTreoreiXa? — aTritrreika).^  On  a  mission.  See  on 
Hatt.  X.  16. 

Sanctify.    See  on  ver.  17. 

20.  Shall  believe  {irKrreva^vrwv).  The  best  texts  read 
wurrevovTtop,  the  present  participle,  that  believe.  The  future 
body  of  believers  is  conceived  as  actually  existing. 

On  me  through  their  word.  The  Greek  order  is,  believe 
through  their  wo7'd  on  me.  ^^  Believe  through  their  word  "  forms 
a  compound  idea. 

21.  One.    Omit. 

24.  They — whom  (069).  The  best  texts  read  h,  that  which. 
The  construction  is  similar  to  that  in  ver.  2,  ^^  that  He  should 
give  eternal  life,"  etc.  Like  wav,  ally  in  that  passage,  that  which 
here  refers  to  the  body  of  believers  taken  collectively. 

I  will  (SiXM).     See  on  Matt.  I  19.* 

My  glory.    The  glory  which  is  mine. 


*  Oodet  says  that  this  expremion  **  is  nowhere  else  found  in  the  month  ol 
Jesus.''    But  see  M*tt  viu.  8 ;  Mark  xiy.  86  ;  John  zzi.  22. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHK.  267 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

1.  Compare  Matt.  xxvL  30 ;  36-46 ;  Mark  ziv.  26 ;  82-42 ; 
Luke  xxiL  39-46. 

1.  Brook  (x^ifidpJMv).  From  x^^^  winteTy  and  j^to^  to  flow. 
Properly,  a  winter  torrent.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Rev.,  in  margin,  r<wine.  In  classical  Greek  it  occurs  in  De* 
mosthenes  in  the  sense  of  a  drai/a  or  oonduU,  It  may  be  taken 
as  equivalent  to  the  Arabic  wady^  which  means  a  stream  and 
its  bed,  or  properly,  the  valley  of  a  stream  even  when  the 
stream  is  dry. 

Kidron  {KAhpvtv).  Which  might  also  be  rendered  of  the 
oedarSj  which  some  editors  prefer.  There  is  some  uncertainty 
as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  ced-ar^  which  occurs  fre- 
quently, some  supposing  it  to  be  a  general  name  for  the  pine 
family.  A  tree  of  dark  foliage  is  mentioned  in  the  Talmud  by 
the  name  of  cedrun.  The  ravine  of  Kidron  separated  the 
Mount  of  Olives  from  the  Temple-Mount.  Westcott  cites 
from  Derenbourg  ("  On  the  History  and  Geography  of  Pales- 
tine ")  a  passage  of  the  Talmud  to  the  efPect  that  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives  there  were  two  cedars^  under  one  of  which  were 
four  shops  for  the  sale  of  objects  legally  pure ;  and  that  in  one 
of  them  pigeons  enough  were  sold  for  the  sacrifices  of  all 
Israel.  He  adds :  ^^  Even  the  mention  of  Kidron  by  the  sec- 
ondary and  popular  name  of  ^  the  ravine  of  the  cedars '  may 
contain  an  allusion  to  a  scandal  felt  as  a  grievous  burden  at  the 
time  when  the  priests  gained  wealth  by  the  sale  of  victims  by 
the  tioo  oeda/r%P  The  Kidron  is  the  brook  over  which  David 
passed,  barefoot  and  weeping,  when  fleeing  from  Absalom  (2 
Sam.  XV.  23-30).  There  King  Asa  burned  the  obscene  idol  of 
his  mother  (1  Kings  xv.  13).  It  was  the  receptacle  for  the  im- 
purities and  abominations  of  idol-worship,  when  removed  from 
the  temple  by  the  adherents  of  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xxix.  16) ; 
and,  in  the  time  of  Josiah,  was  the  common  cemetery  of  the 


WORD  STUDIES  DT  THE  HBW  TESTAMENT. 


citj  (2  Kings  xxiii.  6).  In  tlie  vision  of  Ezekiel  (xlvii,  5,  6,  7) 
he  goes  round  to  the  eaetern  gate  of  the  temple,  overhanging 
the  defile  of  Kidron,  smii  sees  the  waters  rushing  down  into 
the  valley  until  the  stream  becomes  a  mighty  river. 


I 


A  garden.  Neither  John  nor  Loke  give  the  name  GeiA- 
temane. 

2-12.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  47-66 ;  Mark  xvi.  43-52  ;  Lake 
xxii.  47-53. 

2.  Which  betrayed  {o  irapaSiBow).  The  present  participle, 
marking  ttie  betrayal  as  in  progress.     Lit.,  who  is  betraying. 

Resorted  {itw:^-)(^).  Lit.,  aaaembled.  The  items  of  tbie 
verse  are  peculiar  to  John, 

3.  A  band  (t^v  tnrelpav).  Properly,  the  band.  See  oa. 
Mark  XV.  16  ;  also  on  cent-urion,  Luke  vii.  2  ;  and  Acts  xxi.  31. 
Tlie  band,  or  cohort,  was  from  the  lioman  garriBOu  in  the  tower 
of  Antonia. 

Officers  {vmjpercK).  See  on  Matt.  v.  25.  Sent  from  the 
Sanhedrim.  The  temple  police.  The  Synoptists  speak  of  the 
body  which  arrested  Jesue  as  5;^Xo?,  a  muUitwle  or  rabble;  but 
both  Matthew  and  Mark  mention  tlte  band  (irtrupa)  later  in  the 
narrative  (Matt,  xxvii.  27;  Mark  xv.  16). 

Lanterns  (^ovwi').  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  A 
detail  peculiar  to  John.  Thongh  it  was  full  moon,  it  wba 
feared  that  Jesns  miglit  hide  and  escape. 

4.  That  should  come  (ra  ep^ofitva).  Lit.,  i^t  are  coming. 
The  details  in  4-9  are  peculiar  to  John. 

5.  Of  Nazareth  {-rov  Na^mpaiov).     Lit.,  the  Nasarene. 
Stood   (e«mjiMt).      Imperfect   tense.      Eev.,  correctly, 


i 


OOBPBL  OF  JOHN.  269 

8.  These.    The  disciples. 

Go  their  way  {(nrdffeuf).     Withdraw. 

10.  Simon  Peter.  The  names  of  Simon  Peter  and  Mai- 
chos  are  mentioned  only  bj  John  in  connection  with  this  inci- 
dent.   The  incident  itself  is  related  by  all  the  Evangelists. 

A  sword.  Contrary  to  the  role  which  forbade  the  carrying 
of  weapons  on  a  feast-day. 

The  high-priest's  servant.    See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  51. 

Right  ear.  Luke  and  John.  The  others  do  not  specify 
which  ear.  For  ear  John  and  Mark  have  wrdpiav,  a  diminu- 
tive ;  Luke,  ot$9>  and  Matthew,  iarriov,  a  diminutive  in  form,  but 
not  in  force.     See  on  Matt.  xxvL  51. 

11.  Thy  sword.    Omit  thy^  and  read,  the  sword. 

Sheath  (Si^io^y).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  From 
rlSfffu,  to  put.    That  into  which  the  sword  isjnU. 

The  cup.  Compare  Matt  xxvi.  39 ;  Mark  xiv.  36 ;  Luke 
xxii.  42.     Peculiar  to  John. 

12.  The  captain  (x^^^^op^o?).  See  on  Mark  vL  21,  and  on 
ceniurionj  Luke  viL  2. 

Took  {awiXafiov).  Rev.,  better,  seised.  It  is  the  technical 
word  for  arresting.  Lit.,  took  with  thenij  of  which  there  is  a 
suggestion  in  the  modem  policeman's  phrase,  go  along  with  me. 
Compare  Luke  xxii.  54. 

13-18.  Compare  Matt.  xxvL  57,  68 ;  69-75 ;  Mark  xiv.  58, 
54 ;  66-72  ;  Luke  xxii.  54-62. 

13.  Annas  first.  This  supplies  the  detail  of  an  examina- 
tion preliminary  to  that  before  the  high-priest,  which  is  omit- 
ted by  the  Synoptists. 


270  WORD  STUDIB8  IN  THB  NBW  TB8TAMJBNT. 

Father-in-law  (ireuSep^).  Only  here  in  the  New  Teeta* 
ment 

That  same  year.    See  on  xi.  49. 

16.  Followed  {fftcoXovSet),    Imperfect,  VHu/oUotoinff. 

The  other  disciple.  The  correct  reading  omits  the  article. 
Another.    Probably  John  himself. 

Palace  {avKifv).  Not  jpcUaoe,  but  ooitHy  as  Key.  See  on 
Matt.  xxvi.  3  ;  Luke  xi.  21. 

16.  Stood.    Properly,  tocu  standing. 

Door.    The  door  opening  from  the  street  into  the  oonrt 

Her  that  kept  the  door  (rg  ^po^p^).    See  on  x.  3. 

17.  The  damsel  (i}  waiSiatctf).    See  on  Acts  xii.  18. 

Art  thou  (jjkff  aif).  The  question  is  put  in  a  negative  form, 
as  if  expecting  a  negative  answer :  thou  art  not,  art  then  t 

Also.     Showing  that  she  recognized  John  as  a  disciple. 

18.  Stood.  It  is  discouraging  to  see  how  the  A.  Y.  habitu- 
ally ignores  the  imperfect  tense,  and  thus  detracts  from  the 
liveliness  of  the  narrative.     Kender,  as  Rev.,  were  standing. 

Fire  of  coals  {hvSpoKiiLv),  Only  here  and  xxi.  9.  Matthew 
does  not  mention  the  fire.  Mark  has  to  ^ok,  strictly,  the  Ught 
of  the  fire.     Luke  says  they  had  kindled  ajire  (7ri)p). 

Warmed.  Bev.,  correctly,  were  warming.  So,  ver.  25,  toae 
standing  and  toas  warming^  for  stood  and  warmed, 

19-24.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  59-68 ;  Mark  xi  v.  55-65 ;  Luke 
xxii.  63-71. 

19.  Asked  {yipwifatv).     Or,  questioned. 


OOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  271 

Doctrine  (SiZaxfjs).     Rev.,  better,  teaching. 

20,  In  the  synagogue  (ew  rp  trwarftay^).  The  best  texts 
omit  tlio  article.  Kender,  in  synagogue:  when  the  people  were 
assembled.     Like  onr  plirftee,  in  church. 


Always  resort  {-rraurore  avpep^otnai,).  For  irdtnore  always, 
read  Trofre?  all.  Xwipyovrat  ie  rather  come  togetker,  assemble. 
Rev.,  where  all  the  Jews  come  together. 

22.  Struck — with  the  palm  of  his  hand  (eSuxe  ^oTrtafia). 
Lit.,  gave  a  hloio.  Interpreters  differ  ag  to  whether  it  waa  a 
blow  with  a  rod,  or  with  t/ie  hand.  The  kindred  verb  pa-jri^m, 
from  pairk,  a  rod,  is  etytuologically  related  to  pa^S^a,  from 
pa^BiK,  a  rod,  and  occiire  Matt.  v.  39,  of  smiting  on  the  clieek, 
and  Matt.  xxvl.  67,  where  it  ie  dietinguished  from  KoKa^H^at,  to 
strike  with  the  fist.  This  latter  passage,  however,  leaves  the 
question  open,  since,  if  the  meaning  to  smite  with  a  rod  can  be 
defended,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  ite  being  understood 
there  in  that  sense.  The  earlier  meaning  of  the  word  was,  nn- 
doubtedly,  according  to  ita  etymology,  to  smite  with  a  rod.  So 
Herodotus  of  Xerxes.  "  It  is  certain  tliat  he  commanded  those 
who  scourged  {jumri^avrai)  the  waters  (of  the  Hellespont)  to 
ntter,  as  they  lashed  them,  these  barbarian  and  wicked  words" 
(vii.,  35).  And  again  :  "  The  Corinthian  captain,  Adeimantns, 
observed,  '  Themistocles,  at  the  games  they  who  start  too  soon 
are  scourged  {pavi^moi)' "  (viii.,  59).  It  passes,  in  classical 
Greek,  from  this  meaning  to  that  of  a  light  blow  with  the 
hand.  The  grammarian  Pbrynichiis  (a.d.  180)  condemns  the 
use  of  the  word  in  the  sense  of  striking  with  the  hand,  or  slap- 
ping,  as  not  according  to  good  Attic  nsage,  and  says  that  the 
proper  expression  for  a  blow  on  the  cheek  with  the  open  hand 
is  hrX  Kopprpi  TTOTofot.  This  shows  that  the  nn-Attic  phrase  had 
crept  into  nse.  In  the  Septuagitit  the  word  is  clearly  used  in 
the  sense  of  a  blow  with  the  hand.  See  laa.  1.  6  :  "I  gave  my 
cheeks  to  bloros  («'?  pa-n-Cffftara).  Hos.  xi.  4,  "Asa  man  that 
amiteth  {pa-n-i^tDv)  upon  hie  cheeks  "  (A.  V.  and  Rev,,  that  tahe 
off  the  yoke  on  their  jaws).     In   1   Kings  xxii.  24,  we  read, 


J 


278 


WORD  STCDtES  m  THB   NEW  TBSTAHBKT. 


"Zedekiali — sntoie  Micaiali  on  the  cluxk  (tVuTofe  itr\  tijv  aioff- 
rfw»)."  The  word  in  ver.  23,  ZiptK,  \i\..t  fiayest,  hence,  to  beat  or 
thraah  (compare  Luke  xii.  47),  seems  better  to  suit  the  meaning 
strike  with  a  rod ;  yet  in  2  Cor.  xi.  20,  that  verb  ib  used  tif 
smiting  in  the  face  («k  -rrfxiaafirov  tepei),  aud  in  1  Cor.  ix.  27, 
where  Paul  is  using  the  figure  of  a  hoxer,  he  says,  "  So  Jigfit 
I  (iru*cTewi>,  of  boxing,  or  fighting  witli  thsjuite),  not  as  one 
that  beateth  (Sipcav)  the  air."  These  examples  practically  de- 
stroy the  force  of  the  argnnieiit  froui  Btpeit.  It  is  iiupossible 
to  settle  the  point  conclusively ;  but,  on  the  whole,  it  seems  aa 
well  to  retain  the  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  and  Rev.* 

24.  Annas  had  sent  (airiirreiKev  6  Mjwa?).  The  best  tests 
insert  ovv,  therefore.  The  rendering  of  t!ie  aorist  by  the  plu- 
perfect here  is  inadmiBsible,  and  is  a  device  to  bring  this  ex- 
amination of  Jesus  into  harmony  with  that  described  in  Matt, 
xxvi.  56-68,  and  to  escape  tlie  apparent  inconsistency  between 
the  mention  of  the  high-priest  (Caiaphas)  as  conducting  this 
examination  and  the  statement  of  ver.  13,  which  implies  that 
this  was  merely  a  preliminary  examination  before  Annas. 
Kender,  Annm  tlterefore  sent  him. 

Bound.  Probably  lie  had  been  unbound  during  His  ex- 
amination. 

27.  The  cock  crew.  The  Greek  has  not  the  definite  article. 
See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  34.  The  use  of  the  article  would  seem  to 
mark  tlte  time,  cock-crowing,  rather  than  the  incident. 

38-38,  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  1,  2;  11-14;  Mark  xv.  1-5; 
Luke  xxiii.  1-5. 

28.  Led  (arfouaai).     Present  tense,  lead. 

Hall  of  judgment  (•n-pocrwptoi').  A  Latin  ^otA,  praiiorium, 
transcribed.    Origiually,  tke  generoTs  tent.    In  the  Roman  prov- 


•  Mr.  rifild'B  remark  ("Ollum  Norviceoft 
word  waald  coDtJDue  to  be  used  in  tlie  oldar 
tha  Imter  meKaiug  i,kaud),  oan  hardl;  be  c&ll 


")  that  it  li  inprobKbie  th*t  tha 
lenta  (tod)  aFtsr  it  bad  aoquired 
1  oonoliuire. 


i 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHsr.  273 

inces  it  was  the  name  for  the  official  residence  of  the  Roman 
govemoTy  as  here.  Compare  Acts  xxiii.  35.  It  came  to  be  ap- 
plied to  any  spacious  vUla  or  jpcUaoe.  So  Juvenal :  ^^To  their 
crimes  they  are  indebted  for  their  gardens,  palaces  (prajtoria), 
etc."  (^^  Sat.,"  i.,  75).  In  Rome  the  term  was  applied  to  the 
jprastorian  guofrdj  or  imperial  body-guard.  See  on  Philip,  i.  13. 
^^Y.y  palace. 

Early  {irp^t).  TTsed  technically  of  the  fourth  watch,  3-6 
A.M.  See  Mark  xiii.  35.  The  Sanhedrim  could  not  hold  a 
legal  meeting,  especially  in  capital  cases,  before  sunrise ;  and  in 
such  cases  judicial  proceedings  must  be  conducted  and  termi- 
nated by  day.  A  condemnation  to  death,  at  night,  was  techni- 
cally illegal  In  capital  cases,  sentence  of  condemnation  could 
not  be  legally  pronounced  on  tlie  day  of  trial.  If  the  night 
proceedings  were  merely  preliminary  to  a  formal  trial,  they 
would  have  no  validity ;  if  formal,  they  were,  ipeofacto,  illegal. 
In  neither  case  was  the  law  observed  in  reference  to  the  second 
council.  According  to  the  Hebrew  computation  of  time,  it  was 
held  on  the  same  day. 

Be  defiled  (juavB&atv).  Originally,  to  stain,  as  with  color. 
So  Homer :  "  Tinges  (ju^vrf)  the  white  ivory  with  purple."  Not 
necessarily,  therefore,  in  a  bad  sense,  like  fioXuvta,  to  besmear 
or  besmirch  with  filth  (1  Cor.  viii.  7 ;  Apoc.  iii.  4).  In  classical 
Greek,  fualvm,  the  verb  here  used,  is  the  standing  word  for 
profaning  or  unhallotmng.     So  Sophocles : 

**  Not  evAB  fearing  this  pciUUion  (jiiarfw)  dire, 
Win  I  ooneent  to  burial.     WeU  I  know 
That  man  is  powerless  to  poUute  {juaimtp)  the  gods.*' 

"  Antigone,*'  1042-1044 

And  Plato:  ^^  And  if  a  homicide  .  .  .  without  purification 
pollutes  the  agora,  or  the  games,  or  the  temples,"  etc.  (^'  Laws," 
868).  See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4.  The  defilement  in  the  present  case 
was  apprehended  from  entering  a  house  from  which  all  leaven 
had  not  been  removed. 

Vol.  II.— 18 


974 


WORD  8TITDIBS  IH  THE  NEW  TKTAMENT. 


Eat  the  Passover.  The  purpose  of  thie  work  forbids  our 
entering  upon  the  mucli- vexed  question  of  the  apparent  incon- 
sieteucj'  between  John  and  the  Sjnoptists  as  to  the  time  of 
celebrating  the  Passover. 

29.  Pilate.  Note  the  abraptneas  with  which  he  is  introduced 
as  one  well  known.  Two  derivations  of  the  name  are  given. 
Pilatua,  one  armed  with  t\iepilu?n  or  Javelin,  like  Torquatus, 
one  adorned  with  a  collar  {torques).  Or,  a  contraction  from 
Pileatiis,  wearing  the  jnleua  or  caj},  which  was  tlie  badge  of 
manumitted  slaves.  Hence  some  have  supposed  that  he  was  g 
freedrnati.  Tacitus  refers  to  hicn  as  connected  with  Christ's 
death.  "The  author  of  that  name  (Cliristian),  or  sect,  was 
Clirist,  who  was  capitally  punished  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius, 
by  Pontius  Pilate"  ("Annals,"  xv.,  44).  He  was  the  sixtli 
Itoman  procurator  of  Judtea. 

What  accusation.  Not  implying  Pilate's  ignorance  of  the 
charge,  but  his  demand  for  the  Jbrmal  accusation. 

30.  Malefactor  («a«oTroios).  Rev,,  evil-doer.  From  kokov, 
evil,  and  iraieoi,  to  do.  Luke  uses  a  different  word,  ieaKai/pyo<;, 
from  KaKov,  evil,  and  eprf<a,  to  work.     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  12. 

31.  Take  ye  him  {kd^ere  ainov  vfieK).  Tlie  A.  V.  obscures 
the  emphatic  force  of  vfieK,  you.  Pilate's  words  display  great 
practical  shrewdness  in  forcing  the  Jews  to  commit  themselves 
to  the  admission  that  they  desired  Christ's  death.  "Take  him 
ymirseloea  (&o  Rev.),  and  judge  him  according  to  yonr  law." 
"By  our  law,"  reply  the  Jews,  "lie  ought  to  rf/e."  But  tliis 
penalty  they  could  not  inflict.     "  It  is  not  lawful,"  etc. 


33.  By  what  death  (ttoi^)  ^ava.T^).  More  correctly,  hy  what 
manner  of  death.  So  Rev.  Compare  xii.  32;  Matt.  xx.  19. 
Crnciftxion  was  not  a  Jewish  punishment. 

33.  Art  thou  {<tv  vt).  Thou  is  emphatic  Th>m,  the  despised 
malefactor. 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  275 

King  of  the  Jews.  The  oivU  title.  The  theocraiio  title, 
king  qfjerad  (i.  49 ;  xii.  13)  is  addressed  to  Jesns  on  the  cross 
(Matt,  xxvii.  42 ;  Mark  xv.  32)  in  mockery. 

35.  Am  I  a  Jew?  As  if  Jesns'  question  implied  that  Pilate 
had  been  taking  coansel  with  the  Jews. 

36.  Servants  {umfpinu).  Only  in  this  passage  in  the  GU)S- 
pels,  of  Christians.  Compare  Acts  xiii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1.  Cor- 
responding with  Christ  as  a  king. 

Fight  {'ny^^^<^^o).  The  imperfect  tense,  denoting  action  in 
progress :  v)ovld  now  he  striving. 

37.  Art  thou  then  {oiicovv  elav).  The  interrogative  particle 
oificoup,  not  therefore^  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
It  is  ironical.  In  ver.  33  the  emphasis  is  on  thou :  here  npon 
Id/ng,    So  then,  after  ally  thou  art  a  king. 

Was  I  born— came  I  {yeyhnnffuiir—ikifkuSa).  Both  perfects. 
Siave  I  been  bam — am  I  come.  So  Rev.  The  Greek  order  is  2 
for  this  home  been  bom^  etc,  throwing  the  emphasis  on  Christ's 
person  and  destiny.  The  perfect  describes  His  birth  and  com* 
ing  not  merely  as  historical  facts,  but  as  abiding  in  their  results. 
Compare  this  confession  before  Pilate  (1  Tim.  vi.  13)  with  the 
corresponding  confession  before  the  high-priest  (Matt.  zzvi. 
64).  ''  The  one,  addressed  to  the  Jews,  is  framed  in  the  language 
of  prophecy  ;  the  other,  addressed  to  a  Roman,  appeals  to  the 
universal  testimony  of  conscience.  The  one  speaks  of  a  future 
manifestation  of  glory,  the  other  speaks  of  a  present  manifes- 
tation of  truth.  The  one  looks  forward  to  the  Return,  the  other 
looks  backward  to  the  Incarnation  "  (Westcott). 

Of  the  truth  (i/c  r^  akTfSeitK).  Lit,  otit  of:  sprung  from : 
whose  life  and  words  issue  from  the  truth.  See  on  xiv.  6, 
and  compare  viii.  47. 

38.  Truth.  Not  with  the  article  as  in  the  previous  verse, 
the  truth.     Jesus  meant  the  absoltUe  truth :  Pilate,  truth  in  any 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


particular  case.     "  Pilate's  exclamatioD 


either  the 


espres- 


a  of  an  aiMJent  thirst  for  truth,  nor  that  of  the  deepair  of  a 
soui  which  has  long  sought  it  in  vitin ;  it  is  the  profession  of  a 
frivolous  scepticism,  sucii  as  is  frequently  met  with  in  the  mau 
of  the  world,  and  especially  in  the  statesniaD  "  (Godet). 

Fault  {alriai').  Properly,  catt^  of  accusation.  Rev,,  crvma. 
See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  37,  and  compare  on  Matt,  xix.  10. 

39,  40.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  15-26;  Mark  vi.  15. 

39.  Ya  have  a  custom.  The  word  awi^eta,  custom,  origin- 
ally means  intimacy,  habitual  intercourse,  and  thence  naturally 
passes  into  the  meaning  of  habit  or  I'l/stom.  Only  John  puts 
the  statement  of  this  custom  into  the  mouth  of  Pilate.  Mat- 
thew and  Mark  relate  it  as  a  fact. 

At  the  Passover  (^vTw  irtMT^a).  More  specific  than  Mat- 
thew and  Mark,  where  the  expression  is  general,  xara  eopr^v, 
(Ufeast-tiTne. 

40.  Cried  {eKpav^atrav) .  Veca\w\y  oi  a  lottd,  iTnportunate 
cry ;  a  ghoul.  Plato  uses  it  of  the  howling  of  a  dog :  "  The 
yelping  hound,  howling  {xpair/d^vaa}  at  her  lord  "  ("  Repub- 
lic," 607).  Others,  of  the  cries  of  spectators  in  the  theatres  and 
of  the  croak  of  a  raven.     See  on  Matt.  xv.  22. 

Again.  Assuming  John's  recollection  of  a  previous  "crying 
out,"  which  he  has  not  recorded. 

Robber  (Xjjot^?),  See  on  Matt.  xivi.  56 ;  Mark  xi.  17 ; 
Luke  X.  30.  Matthew  calls  him  a  "notable  prisoner"  (xxvii.  16). 
Mark  states  that  he  had  made  insurrection,  and  had  committed 
murder  (xv.  7),  speaking  of  the  insurrection  as  a  well-known 
event.  Luke  says,  "for  soTne  insitrrection  {trrdaiv  rivi)  that 
had  arisen  in  the  city,  and  for  ranrder"  (xxiii.  19).  Writing 
for  Gentiles,  Luke  would  not  refer  to  the  event  as  something 
familiar.  Bandits  of  this  kind  were  numerous  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Jernsaleui  under  the  Roman  dominion.     Their  leaders 


J 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  277 

were  well  known.  Joseplius  describes  them  bj  tlie  same  word 
whicli  Matthew  uses,  eTr/oij/MW,  notable.  Their  ilepredationa 
were  often  coninjitted  under  patriotic  pretences,  so  that  Barab- 
bu  might  have  bad  in^ueutial  friends  among  the  peopla 


CHAPTER  XIX. 
1-3.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  26-30 ;  Uark  zv.  15-19. 

1.  Scourged  (ifiaaTlri<aaev),  Matthew  and  Mark  nse  the 
Greek  form  of  the  Latin  word  jfiigeUare,  tfipivyeXXMo,  wliich 
occure  only  in  those  two  instances  in  the  New  Testament. 
John  uses  the  more  common  Greek  word,  though  he  has  ^pa- 
ytWiov  {flageUum),  scourge,  at  ii.  15.  Mattliew  and  Mark, 
however,  both  use  fM<m^6<»  elsewhere  (Matt.  x.  17;  xx.  29; 
Mark  x.  34).  Its  kindred  noun,  fuiem^,  oecnrs  several  times  in 
the  metaphorical  sense  of  aj)lague.  See  on  Mark  iii.  10,  and 
compare  Mark  v.  29,  34 ;  Luke  vii.  21.  The  verb  is  need  meta- 
phorically only  once,  Heb.  xii.  6.  Scoui^ing  was  the  legal  pre- 
liminary to  crucifixion,  bat,  in  this  case,  was  indicted  illegally 
before  the  sentence  of  crucifixion  was  pronounced,  with  a  view 
of  averting  the  extreme  punishment,  and  of  satisfying  the  Jews. 
(Luke  xxiii.  22),  The  punishment  was  horrible,  the  victim  be- 
ing bound  to  a  low  pillar  or  stake,  and  beaten,  either  with  rods, 
or,  in  the  case  of  slaves  and  provincials,  with  scourges,  called 
soorpions,  leather  thongs  tipped  with  leaden  balls  or  sharp 
spikes.  The  severity  of  the  infliction  in  Jesus'  case  is  evident 
from  His  inability  to  bear  His  cross. 

2.  Crown  {a-ri^vov).  So  Matthew  and  Mark.  Luke  does 
not  mention  the  crown  of  thorns.     See  on  I  Pet.  v,  4. 

Of  thorns  {t^  axavS&v).  So  Matthew.  Mark  has  ancoi'dii^v, 
the  adjective,  made  oftAame,  which  John  also  naes  in  xix.  5. 
All  attempts  to  define  the  botanical  character  of  the  thorns 
used  for  Christ's  crown  are  guesses.  The  word  for  ttioms  used 
here  is  the  only  one  that  occure  in  the  New  Testament;  the 


1 


J 


278  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTABtENT. 

o-KoXo^  {Uiom  iQ  tlie  flesli)  of  S  Cor.  xii.  7,  being  properly  an 
impaiinff-staix. 

iJotU  tlie  crowning  wicli  tliorns  and  the  flagellation  are  favor- 
ite subjects  ill  CliriBtian  arc.  Some  of  tbu  earliest  represeuta* 
tioiia  of  tlio  latter  depict  tbe  figui'e  of  the  Lord  as  fully  draped, 
and  etauding  unbound  at  the  column,  thus  illustrating  tbe  vol- 
untariness of  His  saurihce.  lu  a  MS.  of  the  fourteenth  century, 
in  tbe  British  Museum,  He  stands,  wholly  clothed,  holding  a 
book  in  one  baud,  and  blessing  with  the  other.  The  more  de- 
vout feeling  which  predominated  in  such  representations  was 
gradually  overpowered  by  the  sense  of  physical  suffering.  The 
earlier  paintings  represented  the  back  turned  toward  the  spec- 
tator, and  the  face,  turned  in  a  forced  attitude,  exhibited  in 
profile.  Later,  the  face  and  figure  are  turned  fnll  to  the  front, 
and  the  strokes  fall  upon  the  chest.  Hence  Jerome,  in  hiscom- 
mentary  on  Matthew,  says  that  the  capacious  chest  of  God  {/) 
was  torn  with  strokes.  The  standing  position  is  the  accepted 
one,  but  instances  occur  in  which  the  Saviour  is  on  the  ground 
attached  to  tbe  column  by  one  hand.  Snch  ia  the  revolting  pict- 
ure by  L.  Cai'acci  in  the  Bologna  gallery,  in  which  the  soldier 
clutches  Jesus  by  tbe  hair  as  he  plies  the  bundle  of  twigs.  In 
a  Psalter  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  Saviour  stands  in  front 
of  the  colnmn,  covering  His  face  with  His  bands. 

According  to  the  later  type,  the  moment  chosen  is  when  the 
execution  of  tbe  sentence  is  just  beginning.  One  man  is  bind- 
ing the  hands  to  the  pillar,  another  is  binding  together  a  bundle 
of  loose  switches.  Tbe  German  representations  are  coarser  than 
the  Italian,  but  with  more  incident.  They  lack  the  spiritual 
feeling  which  appears  in  the  best  Italian  specimens. 

A  field  for  a  higher  feeling  and  for  more  subtile  treatment  is 
opened  in  tlie  moments  succeeding  the  scourging.  One  of  tbe 
very  finest  examples  of  this  is  tbe  picture  of  Velasquez,  "Christ 
at  the  Column,"  in  the  National  Gallery  of  London.  The  real 
grandeur  and  pathos  of  the  conception  assert  themselves  above 
certain  prosaic  and  realistic  details.  The  Saviour  sits  upon  tbe 
gromid.  His  arms  extended,  and  leaning  backward  to  the  full 
stretch  of  tbe  cord  which  binds  His  crossed  hands.  The  face 
is  turned  over  the  left  shoulder  full  upon  the  spectator.     Kods, 


u 


GOFPEL  OP  jomr. 

ropes,  and  broken  twigs  lie  apon  the  ground,  and  slender  streams 
of  blood  appear  upon  the  bod^.  A  guardian  angel  behind  the 
figure  of  the  Lord,  stands  bending  slightly  over  a  child  kneel- 
ing with  clasped  hands,  and  points  to  the  sufferer,  from  whose 
head  a  ray  of  light  passes  to  the  child's  heart.  The  angel  is  a 
Spanish  nursery-maid  with  wings,  and  the  face  of  the  child  is 
of  the  lower  Spanish  type,  and  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the 
exquisite  countenance  of  Murillo's  Christ-child,  which  bangs 
next  to  this  picture,  and  which  is  of  the  sweetest  type  of  An- 
dahisian  beauty.  The  Saviour's  face  is  of  a  thoroughly  manly, 
indeed,  of  a  robust  type,  expressing  intense  suffering,  but  with- 
out contortion.  The  large,  dark  eyes  are  ineffably  ead.  The 
strong  light  on  the  right  arm  merges  into  the  deep  shadow  of 
the  bound  hands,  and  the  same  shadow  falls  with  startling  effect 
across  the  full  light  on  the  loft  arm,  marked  at  the  wrist  by  a 
slight  bloody  line. 

In  the  portrayal  of  the  crowning  with  thorns,  in  a  few  in- 
stances, the  moment  is  chosen  after  the  crown  has  been  placed, 
the  action  being  in  the  mock-worship;  but  the  prevailing  con- 
ception is  that  of  the  act  of  crowning,  which  consists  in  pressing 
the  crown  upon  the  brow  by  means  of  two  long  staves.  A 
magnificent  specimen  is  Luini's  fresco  in  the  Ambrosian  Library 
at  Milan.  Christ  sits  upon  a  tribune,  clad  in  a  scarlet  robe.  Uis 
face  wearing  an  expression  of  infinite  sweetness  and  dignity, 
while  a  soldier  on  either  side  crowds  down  the  crown  with  a 
staff.  The  Italian  artists  represent  the  crown  as  consisting  of 
pliable  twigs  with  small  thorns;  but  the  northern  artists  "have 
conceived,"  to  quote  Mrs.  Jameson,  "an  awful  structure  of  the 
most  unbending,  knotted  boughs,  with  tremendous  spikes  half 
a  foot  long,  which  no  human  hands  could  have  forced  into  such 
a  form."  In  a  few  later  instances  the  staves  are  omitted,  and 
the  crown  is  placed  on  the  head  by  the  mailed  hand  of  a 
soldier. 

Put  on  (irepU^aXov).     Lit,,  i/irew  about.     Kev,,  arrayed. 

Purple  {vopifivpoOv).  An  adjective.  Found  only  here,  ver,  5, 
and  Apoc.  zviii.  16.     Mark   uses   the  noun  woptfivpa,  jmrpU, 


M 


280  WORD  STCTDIBB  IH  THB  NEW  TESTASIENT. 

which  also  occurs  in  Apoc.  xvii.  4;  xviii.  12.     See  on   Lnke 
xvi,  19,     Matthew  has  KoieKoniv,  scarlet. 

Robe  {iftdriov).  Better,  as  Rev.,  garment,  since  robe  gives 
the  impresaion  of  a  trailing  garment.  See  on  Matt.  v.  40.  Mat- 
thew has  ■)(\aii.via,  a  short  mUUary  doak  (xxviii.  28).  Luke  de- 
BciiboB  the  garment  as  Xaitvpav,  gorgeous,  hright  or  brilliant 
(xxiii.  11). 

3.  And  said.  Add  xol  ijp](pVTo  irpm  avriv,  and  kept  coming 
■unto  {Jim,  before  (^nd  said  or  kept  saying.  The  imperfect  de- 
notes the  successive  acts  of  homage  of  the  soldiers  ae  thej'  came 
np  one  after  the  other. 

They  smote  Him  with  their  hands  {eZ&ow  ain^  pa-rritrfAOr 
to).  Lit.,  k^i  giving  Sim  blows  with  their  haiuia.  See  on 
xviii.  22. 

5.  Came  Jesus  forth.    From  the  Freetorium. 

Wearing  (•^/^euv),  Not^/xui/,  bearing,  but  the  frequentative 
form  of  that  verb,  denoting  an  habitual  or  continuoue  bearing: 
hence,  wearing,  as  though  it  were  liis  natural  dress. 

6.  Thsy  cried  out.     See  on  xviii.  40. 
Crucify.     The  best  texts  omit  Him. 


Take  ye  Him  [Xa^er 
order,  "  take  llim  ye." 
xviii.  31. 


airrov  v/ick).    According  to  the  Greek 
llev.,  take  Him  yourselves.     See  on 


7.  We  have  a  law.     TFc,  emphatic.    Whatever  ytJwr  decision 
may  be,  we  have  a  law,  etc. 

By  our  law.     The  best  texts  omit  our :  Head  by  that  law, 
as  Rev, 

8.  The  more  afraid.     "  Tliese  words  of  the  Jews  produced 
an  effect  on  Pilate  for  wliich  they  were  not  prepared.     The 


A 


006PBL  OF  JOHN.  281 

smj'mg  gives  strength  to  a  dreadful  presentiment  which  was 
gradually  forming  within  him.  All  that  he  had  heard  related 
of  the  miracles  of  Jesus,  the  mysterious  character  of  His  per- 
son, of  His  words  and  of  His  conduct,  the  strange  message 
which  he  had  just  received  from  his  wife — all  is  suddenly  ex- 
plained by  the  term  *'  Son  of  God."  Was  this  extraordinary 
man  truly  a  divine  being  who  had  appeared  on  the  earth !  The 
truth  naturally  presents  itself  to  his  mind  in  the  form  of  pagan 
superstitions  and  mythological  legends"  (Godet). 

11.  He  that  delivered.    Caiaphas. 

12.  From  thenceforth  (^it  Tot^rov).  Incorrect  Bev.^  rightly, 
upon  Ms. 

Sought  {i^iirei).    Imperfect  tense.    Made  repeated  attempts. 

Caesar's  friend.  A  title  conferred,  since  the  time  of  Au- 
gustus, upon  provincial  governors.  Probably,  however,  not 
used  by  the  Jews  in  this  technical  sense,  but  merely  as  a  way 
of  saying  "  Thou  art  not  true  to  the  emperor." 

Caesar  (r^  KtUaapi).  Lit,  the  CsBsar.  The  term,  which  was 
at  first  a  proper  name,  the  surname  of  Julius  CsBsar,  adopted  by 
Augustus  and  his  successors,  became  an  appellative,  appropriated 
by  all  the  emperors  as  a  title.  Thus  the  emperor  at  this  time 
was  Tiberivs  CoBsar.  A  distinction  was,  however,  introduced 
between  this  title  and  that  of  Augustus,  which  was  first  given 
to  Octavianus  the  first  emperor.  The  title  "Augustus"  was 
always  reserved  for  the  monarch,  while  "  CcBsar "  was  more 
freely  communicated  to  his  relations ;  and  from  the  reign  of 
Hadrian  at  least  (a.d.  117-138)  was  appropriated  to  the  second 
person  in  the  state,  who  was  considered  as  the  presumptive 
heir  of  the  empire. 

13.  That  saying  (rovrov  rhv  XAyov).  The  best  texts  Tead 
T&v  X6y<ov  ro&rtov,  these  wards.  He  was  afraid  of  an  accusation 
at  Borne  before  Tiberius,  an  accusation  which  could  be  justified 
by  his  misrule. 


389  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THK  NSW  TESTAMENT. 

Judgment-seat  (j9iJ/«it«),  See  on  Acta  vii.  5.  The  beat 
texts  omit  the  article,  which  may  indicate  that  tlie  tribunal  was 
an  improvised  one. 


From  Xi9iK,  atone,  and 


The  Pavement  (Ai^arpttToi'). 
oTpwTo'?,  sCretmi  or  spread. 

Gabbathi.  From  the  Hebrew  ^oi,  "  back,"  and  meaning, 
therefore,  a  raised  place.  Thus  the  Aramaic  term  is  not  a  trans- 
lation of  the  Greek  term,  which  indicates  tliat  the  place,  wher- 
ever it  was,  was  dietinguiehed  by  a  mosaic  or  tessclated  pave- 
ment. Suetonius  relates  that  Julius  Cfesar  nsed  to  carry  about 
witli  liim  on  his  expeditions  a  portable  tesselated  pavement  for 
his  tribunal.  It  is  not  likely,  however,  that  there  is  any  allua- 
iou  to  such  a  practice  here.  Westcott  explaioe  Qabbatba  as  the 
■ridge  oflJie  Aouae. 

14.  Sixth  hour.    See  on  i.  39. 

15.  They  (ot).  The  best  texts  read  eKeivoi,  thote  (people). 
The  pronoun  of  remote  reference  isolates  and  sharply  distin- 
guishes them  from  Jesus.     See  on  xiii.  27. 

Away  with  him  (^^oi').     Lit.,  lake  awa/y. 

We  have  no  king  but  Caesar.     These  words,  uttered  by 

the  chief  priests,  are  very  significant.  These  chief  representa- 
tives of  the  theocratic  government  of  Israel  thus  formally  and 
expressly  renounce  it,  and  declare  their  allegiance  to  a  temporal 
and  pagan  power.  This  utterance  is  "  the  formal  abdication  of 
the  Messianic  hope." 

16-17.  Compare  Matt,  xxrii.  31-84;  Mark  xt.  20-33;  Luke 
xxiii.  26-33. 

16.  Delivered.  Luke  says,  delivered  to  their  wUl  {xxiii.  25). 
Pilate  pronounced  no  sentence,  but  disclaimed  all  responsibility 
for  the  act,  and  delirered  Christ  up  to  Ui&m  {ainoK),  they  hav- 
ing invoked  the  responsibility  upon  themselves.  See  Matt, 
xxvii.  24,  25. 


J 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHH.  S83 

And  led  Him  away.    The  best  texts  omit 

17.  Bearing  ifiaard^v).    See  on  xiL  6  ;  z.  81. 

His  cross  {rov  araupov  ovrot)).  The  best  texts  read  ain^  or 
iatn^t  ^^  bearing  the  cross  for  Bimsdf.^^  John  does  not  men- 
tion the  impressment  of  Simon  of  Cjrene  for  this  service. 
Compare  Matt  xxvii.  32 ;  Mark  xv.  21 ;  Lake  xxiiL  26. 

Skull.    See  on  Matt.  xxvii«  33. 

18-24.  Compare  Matt  xxvii.  85-38;  Mark  Z7.  24-28; 
Lake  xxiii.  33,  34,  38. 

18.  In  the  midst.  All  the  Synoptists  describe  the  character 
of  the  two  who  were  cracified  with  Jesas.  Matthew  and  Mark, 
rohbera ;  Lake,  malefactara  {tuucovpyov^).  All  three  ase  the 
phrase,  wie  an  the  right,  the  other  an  the  l^ftj  and  so,  sabstan- 
tiallj,  John :  an  either  side  one.  John  says  nothing  abont  the 
character  of  these  two,  bat  simply  describes  them  as  Pu)a  others, 

19.  Title  {tItKov).  Only  here  and  ver.  20,  in  the  New 
Testament.  John  nses  the  technical  Roman  term  tituhufy  a 
placard  or  notice.  Used  for  a  bill  or  notice  of  Bale  affixed  to  a 
honse.  Thas  Ovid,  of  a  heartless  creditor :  ^^  She  sent  oar 
hoasehold  goods  ander  the  placard  (sub-tiiulum) ; "  i.e.,  pat  the 
hoase  and  f arniture  ap  for  sale  (^^  Remedia  Amoris,"  302). 
Meaning  also  the  title  of  a  hook;  a/n  epitaph,  Matthew  has 
alriav,  acousation;  Mark,  iin/>fpct^  r^  airCa/i:  euperecription  of 
the  accizsation;  Lake,  iirirfpcufytf  superacription,  John  alone 
mentions  the  fact  that  Pilate  wrote  the  inscription. 

Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  King  of  the  Jews.    The  wording 

of  the  title  is  differently  given  by  each  Evangelist 

Matthew:  This  is  Jesus  the  King  of  the  Jews. 

Mark  :  The  King  of  the  Jews. 

Luke :  This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews. 

John  :  Jesus  the  Nazarene  the  King  of  the  Jews. 


284 


WORD  STDDIE8  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


The  esBential  element  of  the  superscription,  King  of  the  Jewt^ 
IB  common  to  all.  It  expressed,  on  its  face,  the  main  intent  of 
Pilate,  which  was  to  cast  contempt  on  the  Jews,  "  In  the 
senae  of  the  man  Pilate,  it  meant :  Jesua,  the  King  of  the  Jew- 
ish fanatics,  crucified  in  the  midst  of  Jews,  who  should  all  be 
thus  executed.  In  the  sense  of  the  Jews  :  Jesus,  the  eedition- 
ary,  the  King  of  the  rebels.  In  the  sense  of  the  political 
judge ;  Jesus,  for  whose  accusation  the  Jews,  with  their  am- 
biguous accusation,  may  answer.  lu  the  sense  of  the  divine 
irony  which  ruled  over  the  expression  :  Jesus,  the  Messiah,  by 
the  crucifixion  become  in  very  truth  the  King  of  the  people  of 
God  "  (Lange). 

20.  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin.  Some  editors  vary  the  order. 
Rev.,  Latin,  Greek.  Such  inscriptions  in  different  languages 
were  not  uncommon.  Julius  Capitoliuus,  a  biographer  (a.u. 
320),  in  his  life  of  the  third  Gordian,  says  that  the  soldiers 
erected  Lis  tomb  on  the  Persian  borders,  and  added  an  epitaph 
{titidum)  in  Latin,  Persian,  Hebrew,  and  Egyptian  characters, 
in  order  that  it  might  be  read  by  ail.  Hebrew  waa  the  national 
dialect,  Latin  the  official,  and  Greek  the  aommon  dialect.  Ab 
the  national  Hebrew,  King  of  the  Jews  was  translated  into 
Latin  and  Greek,  so  the  inscription  was  prophetic  that  Christ 
should  pass  into  civil  administration  and  common  speech  :  that 
the  Hebrew  Messiah  should  become  equally  the  deliverer  of 
Greek  and  Roman  :  that  as  Christ  was  the  real  centre  of  the 
religious  civilization  of  Judaism,  so  lie  should  become  the 
real  centre  of  the  world's  intellectual  movement  as  represented 
by  Greece,  and  of  its  legal  and  material  civilization  as  repre- 
sented by  Rome.  The  three  civilizations  which  had  prepared 
the  way  for  Christ  thus  concentrated  at  His  cross.  The  croaa 
is  the  real  centre  of  the  woi'ld's  history. 

21.  The  chief  priests  of  the  Jews.  A  unique  expression, 
poBBibly  by  way  of  contrast  with  the  King  of  the  Jews. 

23.  Four  parts.  All  the  Synoptists  relate  the  parting  ot 
the  garments.     The  four  pieces  to  be  divided  would  be,  the 


A 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  285 

head-gear,  the  sandals,  the  girdle,  and  the  taUith  or  square  enter 
gannent  with  fringes.  Delitzsch  thns  describes  the  dress  of 
our  Lord :  *'*'  On  His  head  He  wore  a  white  sudar^  fastened 
under  the  chin  and  hanging  down  from  the  shoulders  behind. 
Over  the  tunic  which  covered  the  body  to  the  hands  and  feet, 
a  blue  taUith  with  the  blue  and  white  fringes  on  the  four  ends, 
so  thrown  over  and  gathered  together  that  the  gray,  red-striped 
undergarment  was  scarcely  noticeable,  except  when  the  sandal- 
shod  feet  came  into  view  "  (^^  A  Day  in  Capernaum  "). 

Coat  (%iT&ya).    Or  ttmio.    See  on  Matt.  v.  40. 

Without  seam  {&pp(uf>o^^  or  apeufx^).     Only  here  in  the 

New  Testament.  From  a,  noty  and  pdirrm,  to  sew  together. 

Like  the  tunic  of  the  High-Priest.  Only  John  records  this 
detail. 

Woven  (u^oin^).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 

24.  Vesture  {IfuiTia'fjtov).  Clothing,  collectively.  Bey., 
fformentSy  for  Umtul^  is  better  than  raiment^  which  is  collective, 
while  the  word  is  used  of  the  separate  pieces  of  clothing. 

25.  There  stood.     Imperfect  tense,  loere  standing. 

Mary  Magdalene.  Strictly,  the  (i})  Magdalene.  She  is  in- 
troduced abruptly,  as  well  known. 

26.  Woman.    See  on  iL  4. 

Behold.  Canon  Westcott  remarks  upon  the  four  exclama- 
tions in  this  chapter — Behold  the  man  /  Behold  your  King  ! 
Behold  thy  son  !  Behold  thy  mother  .^  as  a  remarkable  picture 
of  what  Christ  is,  and  what  He  reveals  men  to  be. 

27.  His  own  home  (tA  1&ui).    See  on  i.  11. 

28-30.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  45-50 ;  Mark  xv.  33-37 ;  Luke 
xxiii.  44-46. 


286  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  IIEW  TESTAMENT. 

28.  Were  accomplished  (TereXea-rm).  Rev.,  witii  stricter 
rendering  of  tlie  perfect  tense,  are  Jiuished.  Finished  corre- 
epontls  better  with  it  is  finished,  ver.  30.  This  sentence  maj 
be  taken  with  tlie  preceding  one,  or  with  tliat  which  follows. 

29.  Vinegar.     See  on  Matt,  xxvii.  48. 

Hyssop.  Matthew  and  Mark  have  xaK^fup,  a  reed.  Luke 
sajH  merely  tliat  they  offered  Iliin  vinegar.  The  vinegar  min- 
gled with  gall  (Matt,  xxvii.  34),  or  the  wine  ?n,ingled  with 
myrrh  (Mark  xv.  23)  was  offered  to  Jesna  before  liis  crucifixion 
as  a  stupefying  draught.  The  hyssop  gives  a  hint  of  the 
height  of  the  cross,  as  the  greatest  length  of  the  hyssop  reed 
was  not  more  than  three  or  four  feet.  The  vinegar  in  this 
esse  was  offered  in  order  to  revive  Christ.  John  does  not  men- 
tion the  stupefying  draught. 

30.  Gave  up  the  ghost  {irapk^Ke  ra  Trvevfui).  Rev.,  his 
spirit.  Matt.,  tt0^«ej',  dismissed.  Mark,  i^emrevtrfv,  breathed 
forth  (his  life).  So  Luke,  who  adds,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands 
/  coTninend  (-TrapaTiSefuu,  see  on  Luke  ix.  16)  my  spirit." 

31-42.  Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  57-61 ;  Mark  xv.  42-47  ;  Lake 
xxiii.  50-60. 

3i,  The  Jews — Sabbath.  The  Jews,  who  had  so  recently 
asserted  their  sole  allegiance  to  Ceesar,  are  now  scrupulous  about 
observing  the  letter  of  the  taw. 

3'2.  Brake  the  legs.  A  detail  recorded  only  by  John.  This 
crurifragium,  leg-breaking,  consisted  in  striking  the  logs  with 
a  heavy  mallet  in  order  to  expedite  death.  It  was  sometimes 
inflicted  as  a  punishment  upon  slaves.  Some  horrible  illustra- 
tions are  furnished  by  Suetonius,  in  his  lives  of  Augustus  and 
Tiberius. 


34.  With  a  spear  (XoTxi?)-  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 

Properly,  the  head  of  a  epe-ir.     So  Ilerodotue,  of  the  Arabians 
"They  also  had  spears  (oi'iyias)  tipped  with  an  antelope's  horn 


irn    ^^^B 


GOSPEL  OP  JOHN. 

Bharpened  like  a  tpear-poitU  (XoT^fij?)"  (vii.,  96).  Used  also,  aa 
here,  for  tlie  spear  iteetf. 

Pierced  {ew^ev).  Only  here  in  the  New  Teatameot.  The 
qiiegtion  has  been  raieed  whether  tlie  Evangeliet  meane  to  de- 
scribe a  ffo^h  or  a.prick.  Another  verb  ia  rendered  pierced  in 
ver.  37,  tlie  quotation  froHi  Zech.  xii.  10,  i^Kivrqaav,  wliich 
occurs  also  at  Apoc.  i.  7,  witii  reference  to  Christ's  crucilixion, 
and  is  used  in  claBsical  Greek  oi putting  out  tfte  eye»,  or  stabbing, 
and  in  the  Septuagint  of  Saul's  request  to  his  armor-bearer: 
"  Draw  thy  sword  and  thrust  me  through  therewitli "  (1  Chron. 
X.  4).  The  verb  used  here,  however,  vuacte,  is  also  tised  to 
deecribe  severe  and  deadly  wounds,  as  in  Homer : 

"  Aa  he  Bprang 
Into  bifl  CKT,  IdameneDB,  expert 

To  wield  the  pondaronB  jiTslin.  thruBl  (rif )  Its  blftd* 
Through  hU  right  ihoulder.     From  the  car  he  fell. 
And  the  duk  ntghc  of  detth  cune  over  him." 

'■ni«d,"y.,  45-i7. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  the  body  was  merely  pricked  with 
the  spear  to  ascertain  if  it  were  yet  alive.  There  seems,  on  the 
whole,  no  reason  for  departing  from  the  ordinary  understanding 
of  the  narrative,  that  the  soldier  inflicted  a  deep  thrust  on  the 
side  of  Jesus  (compare  xx.  25,  27) ;  nor  is  it  quite  apparent  why, 
as  Mr.  Field  urges,  a  distinction  should  be  kept  up  between  the 
two  verbs  in  vv.  34  and  37.* 

Blood  and  water.  It  has  been  argued  very  plausibly  that 
this  was  a  natural  phenomenon,  the  resnlt  of  a  ruptare  of  the 

■Mr,  Field  (" Otinm  NofTioeow ") oWms  that  tivaf,  \%  the  milder  word, 
and  citei  «  cariooB  illuatrntion  from  Plntarah  ("  Life  of  CleometieB'*}.  Cleo- 
menet  and  hia  partj  escape  from  prison,  and  endeavor  to  raise  the  town  and  to 
get  possessloii  of  the  citadel.  Failing  in  this,  tliey  resolve  upon  euicide.  It  in 
arranged  that  one  of  the  number  is  not  to  kill  himself  until  he  shall  be  assared 
that  all  the  rest  are  dead.  When  all  are  stretched  on  the  gronnd.  tb«  xurTlTor 
goei  ronnd  and  tria  each  viilh  his  dagger  (tv  (npiSifTafimrtiiuim).  When  he 
pomes  to  Cleomenes,  he  pride*  (v^u)  bin)  on  the  uikle  [rupk  ri  afiifif),  and 
sees  him  contract  his  fane. 


UUI       ] 


ass  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HBW  TBBTAMBNT. 

lieart  wliicit,  it  is  assumed,  was  the  iniinediate  caiiBi;  of  death, 
and  which  was  followed  by  an  effusion  of  blood  into  the^W- 
cardium.  Tills  blood,  separated  into  its  thicker  and  more  liquid 
parts,  flowed  forth  when  the  pericardium  was  pierued  bj  the 
spear.*  I  think,  however,  witli  Meyer,  that  John  evidently  in- 
tends to  describe  the  incident  as  something  entirely  unexpected 
and  marvellous,  and  that  this  explanation  better  euits  the  solemn 
asseveration  of  ver.  35.  That  the  fact  Lad  a  symbolic  meaniiig 
to  the  Evangelist  is  evident  from  1  John  v.  6. 

35.  Hs  that  saw  it  bare  record  (o  eupaKon  fiefiaprvptjKev). 
Rev.,  rendering  the  perfect  tense  in  both  verbs,  h^  that  hath 
geen  /tatA  home  witness.  This  can  refer  only  to  the  writer  of 
this  Gospel.     Compare  1  John  i.  1. 

True  {afut^ivri).  Genuine,  according  to  the  true  ideal  of 
what  testimony  should  be.     See  on  i.  d. 

And  he  {KaKelvm).  This  pronoun  ia  urged  by  some  as  a 
reason  for  regarding  the  witness  as  some  other  than  John,  be- 
cause it  is  the  pioooun  of  remote  reference.  But  ix.  37  shows 
clearly  that  a  speaker  can  use  this  pronoun  of  himself;  and  it 
is,  further,  employed  in  this  (iuepel  to  indicate  a  person  "aa 
possessing  the  quality  which  is  the  point  iu  question  in  an  emi< 
nent  or  even  exclusive  degree  "  (Godet).     See  i.  18 ;  v.  39. 

True  (aXrj^).  Lit.,  true  things.  As  distinguished  from 
false.  Thus,  by  the  use  of  the  two  words  for  true,  there  are 
brought  out,  aa  Westcott  remarks,  "the  two  conditions  which 
testimony  ought  to  satisfy ;  the  first,  that  he  who  gives  it  should 
be  competent  to  speak  with  authority ;  and  the  second,  that  the 
account  of  his  experience  should  be  exact." 

38.  A  disciple  of  Jesus.  Matthew  calls  him  a  rich  man; 
Mark,  an  Konoraiile  counsellor,  i.e.,  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrim ; 
and  Lnke,  a  counsellor,  good  and  just. 


•  See  Willl»in  Strand,  "Phjaiol  Theorj  of  the  De«h  of  ChrieL" 


I 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  289 

Besought  {ffposTifae).  Better,  as  Bev.,  cuked.  See  on  xi.  22 ; 
xvi.  23.  Mark  adds  that  he  went  in  boldly y  which  is  suggestive 
in  view  of  John's  statement  of  his  secret  discipleship,  a  fact 
which  is  passed  over  by  the  Synoptists. 

Gave  him  leave.  According  to  Boman  law.  XJlpian,  a 
Boman  jurist  of  the  third  century,  says :  ^^  The  bodies  of  those 
who  are  capitally  punished  cannot  be  denied  to  their  relatives. 
At  this  day,  however,  the  bodies  of  those  who  are  executed  are 
buried  only  in  case  permission  is  asked  and  granted ;  and  some- 
times permission  is  not  given,  especially  in  the  cases  of  those 
who  are  punished  for  high  treason.  The  bodies  of  the  executed 
are  to  be  given  for  burial  to  any  one  who  asks  for  them."  Avaric- 
ious governors  sometimes  sold  this  privil^e.  Cicero,  in  one  of 
his  orations  against  Yerres,  has  a  terribly  graphic  passage  de- 
scribing such  extortions.  After  dwelling  upon  the  tortures  in- 
flicted upon  the  condemned,  he  says :  ^^  Yet  death  is  the  end. 
It  shall  not  be.  Can  cruelty  go  further  ?  A  way  shall  be  found. 
For  the  bodies  of  the  beheaded  shall  be  thrown  to  the  beasts. 
If  this  is  grievous  to  parents,  they  may  buy  the  liberty  of 
burial"  (v.,  45).     Compare  Matt.  xiv.  12 ;  Acts  viii.  2. 

39.  Came  Nicodemus — came  by  night.  The  contrast  is 
marked  between  his  first  and  his  second  coming. 

Mixture  (jjUyfjLo).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Some 
authorities  read  tkiry/ia,  a  roU. 

Pounds.  Boman  pounds,  of  nearly  twelve  ounces.  The 
large  quantity  may  be  explained  by  the  intention  of  covering 
the  entire  body  with  the  preparation,  and  by  the  fact  that  a 
portion  was  designed  for  the  couch  of  the  body  in  the  grave. 
Compare  the  account  of  the  burial  of  Asa,  2  Chron.  xvL  14. 
^'  Extraordinary  reverence  in  its  sorrowful  excitement  does  not 
easily  satisfy  itself  "  (Meyer). 

40.  Linen  cloths  (oSovtov;).  Used  only  by  John,  if  Luke 
xxiv.  12  is  rejected,  as  by  some  editors.    The  Synoptists  all 

Vol.  n.— 10 


tQli  WORD  STUDIEa  IN  THE  NEW  TEBTAME^tT. 

liave  aivSdiv,  linen  clotK.  See  on  Mark  xiv.  51.  Mattliew  and 
Luke  have  hrrvXt^ev,  rolled  or  iBrapped,  and  Mark  ivetK-riaai, 
w^utul,  instead  of  JubD'e  t&i}trav,  hound. 

With  the  spices.  Spread  over  tlie  sheet  or  bandages  in 
wliieli  the  body  was  wrapped. 

The  manner  of  the  Jews.  Aa  contrasted  witli  that  of  the 
Egyptians,  for  instance,  whicli  is  thns  described  by  Herodotus; 
"  Tiiey  take  first  a  crooked  piece  of  iron,  and  with  it  draw  out 
the  brains  through  tlie  nostrils,  thna  getting  rid  of  a  portion, 
wiiile  the  skull  is  cleared  of  the  rest  by  rinsing  with  drugs ; 
next  they  make  a  cut  along  the  fiank  with  a  sharp  Ethiopian 
Etone,  and  take  out  the  whole  contents  of  the  abdomen,  which 
they  then  cleanse,  washing  it  thoroughly  with  palm-wine,  and 
again,  frequently  with  an  infusion  of  pounded  aromatics. 
After  this  they  fill  the  cavity  with  the  purest  bruised  myrrh, 
with  cassia,  and  every  other  sort  of  spicery  except  frankincense, 
and  sew  up  the  opening.  Tlien  the  body  is  placed  in  natrum 
(subcarbonate  of  soda)  for  seventy  days,  and  covered  entirely 
over.  After  tiie  expiration  of  that  space  of  time,  which  must 
not  be  exceeded,  the  body  is  washed,  and  wrapped  round,  from 
head  to  foot,  with  bandages  of  fine  linen  clotli,  smeared  over 
with  gum"  (ii.,  86).  Or,  possibly,  a  contrast  may  be  implied 
with  the  Roman  custom  of  burning  the  bodies  of  the  dead. 
Tacitus  says  of  the  Jews :  "  The  bodies  of  the  deceased  they 
choose  rather  to  bury  than  bum,  following  in  this  the  Egyptian 
custom ;  with  whom  also  they  agree  in  their  attention  to  the 
dead  "  ("  History,"  v.,  5). 

To  bury  {ivrai^i^eiv).  Properly,  to  pre^re  for  hurioL 
See  on  xii.  7.  Compare  Septuagint,  Gen.  I.  2,  where  the  same 
word  is  used  for  emhaltning  the  body  of  Joseph. 

41.  A  garden.     Mentioned  by  John  only. 

New  {kmvov).  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29.  John  omits  the  de- 
tail of  the  tomb  being  hewn  in  the  rock,  which  is  common  to 
all  the  Synoptists. 


A 


G06PBL  OF  JOHN.  291 


CE AFTER  XX. 

1,  2.  Compare  Matt  zxviii.  1 ;  Mark  xvi.  2-4 ;  Luke  zxiv. 
1-8. 

1.  First  day  of  the  week  (rg  /u^i  r&v  aafifidrtov).  The 
Hebrew  idiom,  cUpy  one  of  the  week.  See  on  Luke  iv.  31 ; 
Acts  XX.  7. 

Dark.  Matthew  says,  (u  it  began  to  dawn;  Mark,  when  the 
9un  was  risen;  Luke,  very  ea/rly  in  the  tnorm/ng^  or  at  deep 
dawn;  see  on  Luke  xxiv.  1. 

Taken  away  {jipiihov  he).  Lifted  ovi  of.  All  the  Sjnop- 
tists  have  rotted. 

2.  Loved  (i^tkeC).  The  word  for  personal  affection.  In 
xiii.  23  ;  xxi.  7,  20,  ff^Aira  is  nsed.     See  on  ▼.  20. 

We  know  not.  The  plural  indicates  that  Marj  was  not 
alone,  though  she  alone  is  mentioned  as  coming  to  the  tomb. 
She  maj  have  preceded  the  others. 

3.  Came  to  ifipx^^'^^  ^^)*  Wrong.  The  tense  is  the  im- 
perfect ;  they  were  coming.     Bev.,  they  went  toward. 

4.  They  ran  {irpexpy).  Still  the  imperfect,  they  were  run- 
ning. How  much  the  A.  Y.  loses  bj  its  persistent  ignoring  of 
the  force  of  this  tense. 

Did  outrun  {irpoiBpafie  Tdxi>ov).  Lit,  ran  on  in  front  more 
quickly.  Dante,  addressing  the  spirit  of  John  in  Paradise 
sajs: 

'*  O  hoi  J  father,  spirit  who  beholdest 
What  thou  belieyedst  so  that  thou  o*eroame8t» 
Toward  the  sepulchre,  more  youthful  feet/' 

*«  Paradise/'  zziv.  124-120. 


292  WORD  arnoiES  in  the  nkw  testament. 

5.  Stooping  down  {irapaicvi^iK).  See  on  Jas.  L  25,  and 
compare  1  Pet.  i.  12.  See  also  Song  of  Solomon,  ii.  9  (Sept.). 
"  lie  lookeih  forth  i^apaKunrrav)  at  the  windows." 

Seeth  OXi^et).  Simple  sight.  Compare  tbe  intent  gaze  of 
Peter  (Sewpet),  ver.  6,  which  discovered  the  napkin,  not  seen 
by  John. 

7.  Napkin  (o-ouSopwi').     See  on  Luke  xix,  20. 

Wrapped  togethar  {ivrervKirfiikvov).  Rev.,  much  better, 
roU&lup.  The  orderly  arrangement  of  ever^'thing  in  the  tomb 
marks  the  absence  of  haste  and  precipitation  in  the  awakening 
and  rising  from  the  dead. 

8.  Believed.  This  word  is  explained  by  what  follows.  He 
believed  (at  length)  that  Jesus  was  risen  ;  for  up  to  this  time 
(ouScttm)  he,  with  hts  fellow-discipio  (plural,  yBeitrav)  knew  not, 
etc.  The  singular  number,  Ae  believed,  as  Meyer  profoundly 
remarks,  "  only  satisfies  tlie  never-to-be-forgotten  ^rsonai  ex- 
perience of  that  moment,  though  it  does  not  exclade  the  con- 
temporaneous faith  of  Peter  also."  On  knew  i^urav),  aeo  on 
ii.  24. 

9.  The  scripture  (r^v  yptupifv).  The  passage  of  scripture. 
See  on  v.  47.     The  reference  may  be  to  Ps.  xvi,  10. 

Must.  On  this  necessity  attaching  in  the  divine  counsel  to 
tlie  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  see  Matt.  xxvi. 
54 ;  Mark  viii.  31  ;  Luke  ix,  22  ;  xvii.  25  ;  xxii.  37 ;  xxiv.  7, 
26,  44 ;  John  iii.  14  ;  xii.  34  ;  Acts  L  16. 

11-18.  Compare  Mark  xvi.  12,  13  ;  Luke  xxiv.  13-35. 

11.  Stood,  Imperiect,  icas  standing,  or  continued  standing^ 
after  the  two  apostles  had  gone  away. 

12.  Seeth  (3etupe().     Rev.,  heholdeth.     See  on  ver.  5. 

Angels.  Angels  are  rarely  mentioned  in  John's  narrative. 
See  i.  51  ;  xii.  29  j  xx.  13. 


rative.  j 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  293 

13.  She  saith.  She  is  so  absorbed  in  her  grief  and  love 
that  she  is  not  appalled  by  the  supernatural  manifestation 
which,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  have  terrified  her, 
but  enters  into  conversation  as  if  addressed  by  a  human  being. 

14.  Turned  herself  back.  Canon  Westcott,  with  that 
beautiful  subtilty  of  perception  which  so  eminently  cjiaractcr- 
izes  him,  remarks :  ^^  We  can  imagine  also  that  she  became 
conscious  of  another  Presence,  as  we  often  feel  the  approach 
of  a  visitor  without  distinctly  seeing  or  hearing  him.  It  may 
be,  too,  that  the  angels,  looking  toward  the  Lord,  showed  some 
sign  of  His  coming.'^ 

Saw  {SempeT).  Present  tense.  Bev.,  beholdeth.  She  looks 
at  Him  steadfastly  and  inquiringly  as  at  a  stranger.  The  ob- 
servance of  these  distinctions  between  verbs  of  seeing^  is  very 
important  to  the  perception  of  the  more  delicate  shading  of  the 
narrative. 

Knew  not  (^Sei).  Indicating  a  knowledge  based  on  spiritual 
fellowship  and  affinity,  an  inward,  conscious,  sure  conviction  of 
His  identity. 

16.  Saith  unto  Him,  Rabboni.  Insert,  as  Bev.,  after  JERm, 
in  Hebrew. 

17.  Touch  mo  not  0^))  am>5  inrrm)).  The  verb,  primarily, 
means  to  fasten  to.  Hence  it  implies  here,  not  a  mere  mom- 
entary touch,  but  a  cUtiffing  to,  Mary  thought  that  the  old 
relations  between  her  Lord  and  herself  were  to  be  renewed  ; 
that  the  old  intercourse,  by  means  of  sight,  sound,  and  touch, 
would  go  on  as  before.  Christ  says,  ''  tlie  time  for  this  kind 
of  intercourse  is  over.  Henceforth  vour  communion  with  me 
will  be  by  faith  through  the  Spirit.  This  communion  will  be- 
come possible  through  my  ascending  to  the  Father." 

My  Father.  The  best  texts  omit  the  pronoun  and  read  the 
Father.     See  on  xii.  26.     This  expression,  emphasizing  the  re- 


804  WORD  ST0DIE8  IK  THH  HHW  TESTAMKNT. 

latlon  of  God  to  liumauity  rather  than  to  Clirist  himself,  is  ex- 
plained by  what  foUowB — "  my  Father  and  your  Father." 

My  brethren.  The  word  brethr&n,  applied  to  the  disciples, 
occurs  before  (vii.  3,  5,  10),  but  not  the  phrase  my  brethren, 
which  follows  from  vw/  Father  and  your  Father.  Compare 
Matt,  xsviii.  10. 

I  ascend  {ovaQaivta).  The  present  tense  is  used,  not  in  the 
sense  of  tlie  near  future,  but  implying  that  He  had  already  en- 
tered upon  that  new  stage  of  being  which  the  actual  ascension 
formally  inaugurated.  The  resurrection  was  really  the  begin- 
ving  of  the  ascension. 

18.  Came  and  told  (epxertu  ayyiXKova^a),     Lit.,  cometh  tell- 


19-23.  Compare  Mark  xvi.  14-18 ;  Luke  xxiv.  36-49. 
19.  Assembled.    Omit. 

21.  Hath  sent  {atrea^oKKev).  Tfote  the  distinction  between 
this  verb  and  that  applied  to  the  sending  of  the  disciples  (•ire/i- 
ww).     See  on  i.  6. 

22.  Breathed  on  them  {eve^v(n)<Tep).  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  act  was  symbolic,  after  the  manner  of 
the  liebrew  prophets.     Compare  Ezek.  xxxvii.  5. 

The  Holy  Ghost.  The  article  is  wanting.  The  gift  be- 
stowed was  not  that  of  tlie  j>ersonal  Holy  Spirit,  but  rather  an 
earnest  of  that  gift ;  an  effimon  of  the  Spirit. 

23.  Remit  {i^Txe).  Only  here  in  this  Gospel  in  connection 
with  sina.  Often  in  the  Synoptists  (Matt.  vi.  12 ;  ix.  5 ;  Mark 
ii.  5  ;  Luke  v.  23,  etc.). 


25.  Printer. 


i 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  295 

Put— thrust  (fidKoo).  The  same  verb  in  both  cases.  Hence 
better,  as  'Rev.jjnU  for  thrust. 

I  will  not  (ov  fjkif).    Double  negative:  m  naunge. 

26.  Then  came  Jesus.  There  is  no  connecting  particle, 
ihen^  and  the  verb  is  in  the  present  tense.  The  abrapt  Jesus 
cometh  is  more  graphic. 

27.  Be  not  (ji^  ^luov).  Lit.,  become  not.  Thomas  was  in  a 
fair  way  to  become  unbelieving,  through  his  doubt  of  the  resur- 
rection. 

Faithless — believing  {airurrof; — irurrisi).  There  is  a  corre- 
spondence of  the  words  here,  to  which,  perhaps,  the  nearest  ap- 
proach in  English  is  tmbeUevmgj  helievmg. 

29.  Thomas.    Omit 

31.  Are  written  {yeypamTOi).  Ha/oe  been  or  stand  written. 
The  perfect  tense.  John'd  intent  was  to  write  a  gosjpd  rather 
than  a  biography. 


CHAPTER  XXL 

1.  Showed  {iifMvipoMrep).  This  rendering  might  easily  con- 
vey merely  the  sense  of  appeariiig ;  but  its  meaning  is  much 
deeper.  Occurring  frequently  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is 
used  most  frequently  of  God  and  Christ,  or  of  men  in  their  re- 
lation to  these.  Thus,  of  Christ  in  person  while  upon  earth 
(Mark  xvi.  12,  1 4;  John  i.  31 ;  ii.  11 ;  1  Pet  i.  20;  1  John  i. 
2).  Of  the  works  of  Christ  (John  ii.  11 ;  ix.  3  ;  1  John  iii.  5). 
Of  Christ  in  redemption  (1  John  iii.  5).  Of  Christ  in  His  sec- 
cond  coming  (1  John  ii.  28).  Of  Christ  in  glory  (1  John  iii.  2; 
Col.  iii.  4).  It  is  used  of  God.  Of  His  revelation  to  men  of  the 
knowledge  of  Himself  (Rom.  i.  19).  Of  His  manifestation  in 
Christ  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  Of  His  righteousness  (Rom.  iii.  21). 
Of  His  love  (1  John  iv.  9).     It  is  used  of  men.     As  epistles 


296  WORD  STUDIKS  IN  THK  SBW  TE8TAMKKT. 

manifesting  the  cliarscter  and  spirit  of  Christ  (2  Ck>r.  iii.  3 ;  t, 

11).  In  tlie  indgnieiit  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  lu  all  these  cases  the 
appearing  is  not  iiierelj'  an  appeal  to  sense,  but  is  addressed  to 
spiritual  perception,  and  contemplates  a  moral  and  spiritual 
effect.  It  is  the  setting  forth  of  the  law  or  will  or  character  of 
God ;  of  the  person  or  work  of  Christ ;  of  the  character  or 
deeds  of  men,  with  a  view  to  the  disclosure  of  their  quality  and 
to  the  producing  of  a  moral  tinpressioD.     Eev.,  manifested. 

Sea.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  18. 

Of  Tiberias.  Not  elsewhere  in  the  Gospels.  The  Synop- 
tists  say,  Sea  of  Oalilee  or  Lake  of  Oenneaaret. 

3.  A  ship  (to  irKoiov).  Itev.,  the  boat;  restoring  the  article, 
which  indicates  a  familiar  implement.     See  on  Luke  v.  2. 

Immediately.    Omit. 

That  night.  The  emphatic  prononn  that  {iiceCvr})  may  in- 
dicate that  their  ill  success  was  unusual. 

Caught  {evLaaav).  So  ver.  10.  The  verb  means  to  lay  hold 
of,  and  is  nowhere  else  used  in  tlie  New  Testament  of  taking 
fish.  Elsewhere  in  this  Gospel  always  of  the  seizure  of  Christ 
by  the  authorities  (vii.  30,  32,  44 ;  viii.  20 ;  x.  39  ;  xi.  57).  Of 
apprehending  Peter  and  Paul  (Acts  xii.  4;  2  Cor.  xi.  32).  Of 
tlie  taking  of  the  beast  ( Apoc  xix.  20).  Of  taking  by  the  hand 
(Acts  iii.  7). 

4.  Was  come  (yevofUvTy;).  The  best  texts  read  the  present 
participle,  yivofieut}^,  is  coming.  Itev.,  when  day  itjos  now  break- 
ing. The  A.  V.  does  not  agree  so  well  with  the  fact  that  Jesus 
was  not  at  once  recognized  by  the  disciples,  owing  in  part,  per- 
haps, to  the  imperfect  light- 
On  the  shore  (ew  tou  airfiaXov).    Rev.,  beach.    See  on  Matt. 

xiii.  3.  The  preposition  (It,  to,  makes  the  phrase  equivalent  to 
"  Jesus  came  to  the  beach  and  stood  there," 


J 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  297 

5.  Children  (ttcuS^).  Or^  little  children.  Used  also  by  John, 
in  address,  twice  in  tlie  Firdt  Epistle  (ii.  18, 18),  where,  how- 
ever, the  more  common  word  is  retcvla,  little  children. 

Have  ye  any  moat  (^  n  Trpoa^Ayuw  l^ere)?  The  inter- 
rogative fAff  Ti  indicates  that  a  negative  answer  is  expected: 
you  ha/oe  noty  I  suppoeej  anything.  Ilpo<r^6r)fiov  is  equivalent 
to  in^^Lpiovt  what  is  added  to  bread  at  a  mealy  especially  fish. 
See  on  vi.  9.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Wye,  any 
eupping-thing.* 

6.  The  net  (S£rruoy).    See  on  Matt.  iv.  18 ;  xiii.  47. 

Were  not  able  {ovk  Urxyaav).  See  on  Luke  ziv.  30;  xvL 
3 ;  Jas.  V.  16. 

To  draw  (cAxOo-oa).  Into  the  boat  Compare  avpovre^,  ver. 
8,  dragging  tlie  net  behind  the  boat 

7.  Fisher's  coat  {hreniilmpi).  An  upper  garment  or  blouse. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  In  the  Septnagint,  1  Sam. 
xviii.  4,  ^  robe  which  Jonathan  gave  to  David.  2  Sam.  xiii. 
ISythe  royal  virgin  ga/rment  of  Tamar.  The  kindred  verb, 
iirevSvofiai,  occurs  twice  (2  Cor.  v.  2,  4),  meaning  ^^tobe  clothed 
vfpon^^  with  the  honse  which  is  from  heaven,  i.e.y  clothed  as  with 
an  upper  garment.     See  on  that  passage. 

Naked.  Not  absolutely,  but  clothed  merely  in  his  under- 
garment or  shirt. 

8.  A  little  ship  (r^  ifKjoiopU^.  The  noun  is  diminutive. 
Rev.,  the  lUUe  boat.  It  is  hardly  probable  that  this  refers  to  a 
smaller  boat  accompanying  the  vessel.  Compare  the  alterna- 
tion of  irXoiop  and  irXoidpiov  in  vi.  17,  19,  21,  22,  24. 

Two  hundred  cubits.    A  little  over  a  hundred  yards. 


^  fix*"  ^<<  ^^  y<^  anyOnSngy  is  the  usual  question  addreased  bj  a  bystander 
to  those  employed  in  fishing  or  bird  catching.  Equivalent  to  Iumdc  you  had  any 
ipartf    See  Aristophanes,  *' Clouds/'  781. 


298  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

With  fishes  {t&v  Ix^wov).  Or,  the  net  of  the  Jiahea.  SoWjra 
Rev.,  full  o/Jlshes. 

9.  They  were  come  to  land  {airififfa-av  ek  rifp  yrfp).  Not 
of  the  arrival  of  the  boat,  but  of  the  going  ashore  of  the  boat* 
men.     Rev.,  therefore,  correctly,  they  got  out  tipon  the  land. 

A  fire  of  coals.    Charcoal.    See  xviii.  18. 

Fish  (o^piov).    See  on  vi.  9. 

Bread  (aprop).    Or,  a  loaf.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  1 ;  viL  9. 

10.  Of  the  fish  {r&v  iy^upitov).  As  in  ver.  9.  Einpliasizing 
the  fish  SLBfood. 

Ye  have  caught  {hnda-are).  See  on  ver.  3.  Bengel  says : 
"  By  the  Lord's  gift  they  had  caught  them:  and  yet.  He  cour- 
teously says,  that  thet/  have  caught  them." 

11.  Went  up.    Into  the  vessel. 

To  land  {hrl  t^9  7^).     Strictly,  upon  the  land. 

Great  fishes.  All  authorities  agree  as  to  the  abundance  of 
fish  in  the  Lake  of  Galilee.  M.  Lortet,  cited  by  Dr.  Thomson, 
says  that  two  castings  of  the  net  usually  filled  his  boat.  Beth- 
saida  (there  were  two  places  of  that  name  on  the  lake)  means 
House  of  the  Fisheries,  The  fame  of  the  lake  in  this  partic- 
ular reached  back  to  very  early  times;  so  that,  according  to 
the  Rabbinical  legend,  one  of  the  ten  fundamental  laws  laid 
down  by  Joshua  on  the  division  of  the  country  was,  that  any 
one  might  fish  with  a  hook  in  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  so  that 
they  did  not  interfere  with  the  free  passage  of  boats.  The 
Talmud  names  certain  kinds  of  fish  which  might  be  eaten  with- 
out being  cooked,  and  designates  them  as  sinaU  fish^.  So 
iy^dpui  is  rendered  in  John  vi.  9.  Possibly  the  expression 
great  fishes  may  imply  a  contrast  with  the  sfnuM  fishes  which 
swarmed  in  the  lake,  and  the  salting  and  pickling  of  which  was 
a  special  industry  among  its  fishermen. 


GOSPBL  OF  JOHN.  299 

12.  Dine  {apumio'aTe).  Bather,  breakfast.  In  Attic  Greek 
apurrov  signified  the  midrday  meal;  the  evenmg  meal  being 
known  as  hehrvov.  The  regular  hour  for  tlie  apiarov  can- 
not be  fixed  with  precision.  The  drift  of  authority  among 
Greek  writers  seems  to  be  in  favor  of  noon.  The  meal  described 
here,  however,  evidently  took  place  at  an  earlier  hour,  and 
would  seem  to  have  answered  more  nearly  to  the  aucparia-fia,  or 
breakfast  of  the  Greeks,  which  was  taken  directly  upon  rising. 
Plutarch,  however,  expressly  states  that  both  names  were  ap- 
plied to  the  morning  meal,  and  says  of  Alexander,  ^^He  was 
accustomed  to  breakfast  (fipUrra)  at  early  dawn,  sitting,  and  to 
sup  {iSelirvei)  late  in  the  evening."  In  Matthew  xxii.  4,  it  is  an 
apurrov  to  which  the  king's  wedding-guests  are  invited. 

Ask  {i^iaai).  Rev.,  inquire.  Implying  careful  and  pre* 
cise  inquiry.  It  occurs  only  three  times  in  the  New  Testament; 
of  Herod's  command  to  search  diligently  for  the  infant  Christ 
(Matt.  ii.  8),  and  of  the  apostles'  inquiring  out  the  worthy  mem- 
bers of  a  household  (Matt.  x.  11). 

13.  Bread — fish.  Both  have  the  article — the  loaf,  the  fish — 
apparently  pointing  to  the  provision  which  Jesus  himself  had 
made. 

Giveth  them.  Nothing  is  said  of  His  partaking  Himself. 
Gompare  Luke  xxiv.  42,  43. 

14.  The  third  time.  The  two  former  occasions  being  re- 
corded in  XX.  19,  26.  The  appearance  to  Mary  Magdalene  is 
not  counted,  because  the  Evangelist  expressly  says  to  His  dis- 
ciples. 

15.  Simon,  son  of  Jonas.  Compare  Christ's  first  address 
to  Peter,  i.  43.  He  never  addresses  him  by  the  name  of  PeAer^ 
while  that  name  is  commonly  used,  either  alone  or  with  Simon, 
in  the  narrative  of  the  Gospels,  and  in  the  Greek  form  Peter^ 
not  the  Aramaic  Cephas,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  is  always 
employed  by  Paul.     For  Jonas  read  as  Rev.,  John. 


SOO  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Lovest  {uyawa^).  JesuB  nses  the  more  <JigDiAed,  really  iho 
nobler,  but,  as  it  seems  to  Peter,  in  the  ardor  of  his  affection, 
the  colder  word  for  love.     See  on  v.  20. 

More  than  these.  More  than  these  disciples  love  me. 
Compare  xiii.  37;  Matt.  xxvi.  33,  The  question  conveys  a 
gentle  rebuke  for  his  former  extravagant  professions. 

I  love  (0(Xw).  Peter  substitutes  the  warmer,  more  affection- 
ate word,  and  omits  all  comparison  with  hia  fellow-dificiples. 

Feed  {/3d(r«).     See  on  1  Pet.  v.  2. 

L&mbs  (apvia).  Diminntive:  little  lamlis.  Gk>det  remarlts: 
"There  is  a  remarkable  resemblance  between  the  present  sit- 
nation  and  that  of  the  two  scenes  in  the  previous  life  of  Pet«r 
with  which  it  is  related.  He  had  been  called  to  the  ministry 
by  Jeeus  after  a  miraculons  draught  of  lislies;  it  is  after  a 
similar  draught  that  the  ministry  ia  restored  to  him.  He  had 
lost  hie  office  by  a  dental  beside  a  dre  of  coal ;  it  is  beside  a 
fire  of  coal  that  he  recovers  it." 

16.  Lovest  (arYawa.'i).  Again  the  colder  word,  but  more  than 
these  is  omitted. 

I  love  (i^iX^).     Peter  reiterates  his  former  word  expressive 

of  personal  affection. 

Feed  (irotfiotve).  A  different  word :  tend,  as  Rev.  See  oa 
1  Pet.  V.  2. 

Sheep  {■n-po^aTo).  Some  of  the  best  texts  read  irpo^aTiOt 
diminutive,  little  shey}. 

17.  Lovest  (^\£(;).  Here  Jesus  adopts  Peter's  word.  Canon 
Westcott,  however,  ascribes  Peter's  use  of  ^{ke<a  to  his  hu- 
mility, and  his  hesitation  in  claiming  that  higher  love  which 
is  implied  in  uyaTra?.     This  seems  to  lue  to  be  less  natural,  ant^ 

to  be  refitiiiig  too  nuich. 


i 


GOSPEL  OF  JOHN.  301 

18.  Young  {v€(&T€po^).  litf  yotmger.  Peter  was  apparently 
of  middle  age.    See  Matt  yiiL  14. 

Thou  girdedat  thyself  {i^vin/e^  a-eavrov).  The  word  may 
have  been  suggested  by  Peter's  girding  his  fisher's  coat  round 
him.  The  imperfect  teuse  signifies  something  habitual.  Thou 
toast  want  to  dothe  thyself  and  to  come  and  go  at  will. 

Walkodat  (irepuirArev;).  Lit.,  walkecUt  about.  Peculiarly 
appropriate  to  describe  the  free  activity  of  vigorous  manhood. 

Stretch  forth  thy  hands.  The  allusion  to  the  extending  of 
the  hands  on  the  cross,  which  some  interpreters  have  found 
here,  is  fanciful.  It  is  merely  an  expression  for  the  helpless- 
ness of  age. 

Whither  thou  wouldost  not.  According  to  tradition  Peter 
suffered  martyrdom  at  Borne,  and  was  crucified  with  his  head 
downward. 

19.  By  what  death  (irolif).  Properly,  hy  what  manner  of 
death.     So  Rev. 

20.  Leaned  {ophrea-ev).  Bev.,  leaned  hack.  See  on  xiii.  25. 
The  reference  is  to  the  special  act  of  John,  leaning  back  to 
whisper  to  Jesus,  and  not  to  his  position  at  table. 

21.  And  what  shall  this  man  do  (a8ro9  tkrl;)\  lit, 
and  this  one  what  t 

22.  Till  I  come  (^  l/oxo/Mii).  'RAther^  while  I ani  coming. 
Compare  ix.  4  ;  xii.  36,  36 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  13. 

What  Is  that  to  thee  (r/  irpb^  a-e ;)  f  lit.,  what  as  concerns 
theef 

23.  Should  not  die  {ovk  airol^viia'Kei).     Lit.,  dieth  not. 


302  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

24,  25.  Many  interpreters  think  that  these  two  verses  were 
written  by  some  other  hand  than  John's.  Some  ascribe  vv.  24 
and  25  to  two  different  writers.  The  entire  chapter,  though 
bearing  nnmistakable  marks  of  John's  authorship  in  its  style 
and  language,  was  probably  composed  subsequently  to  the  com- 
pletion of  the  OospeL 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF  JOHN. 


CHAPTER  I. 


The  term  icoSoXon^,  catholic  or  general^  applied  to  the  EpiB^ 
ties  of  James,  Peter,  John,  and  Jnde,  was  used  from  the  sec- 
ond century  onward  in  the  sense  of  something  addressed  to  the 
faithful  generally^  as  distinguished  from  Christians  of  particu- 
lar nations  or  cities,  as  the  Galatians  or  Ephesians.  Hence, 
Clement  of  Alexandria  speaks  of  the  letter  of  Acts  xv.  as  ^^  ^ 
catholic  letter  of  all  the  Apostles,  given  to  the  faithful."  The 
term  was  also  used  of  letters  specially  addressed,  but  with  a 
general  application,  which  made  no  claim  to  canonical  authority. 

In  the  later  Western  Church  the  group  of  letters  known  as 
catholic  was  called  canonical  through  a  mistaken  interpi*etation 
of  the  words  of  Junilius,*  who  referred  to  the  letters  of  James, 
2  Peter,  Jude,  2  and  3  John  as  added  by  many  to  the  collection 
of  canonical  books.  This  was  understood  to  mean  that  the 
term  canonical  applied  to  those  books  peculiarly. 

1.  Compare  John  i.  1,  9,  14.  The  construction  of  the  first 
three  verses  is  somewhat  involved.  It  will  be  simplified  by 
throwing  it  into  three  parts,  represented  respectively  by  vv.  1, 
2,  3.  The  first  part.  That  which  was  from  the  beginning — 
Wordof  Life^  forms  a  suspended  clause,  the  verb  being  omitted 
for  the  time,  and  the  course  of  the  sentence  being  broken  by 
ver.  2,  which  forms  a  parenthesis  :  and  the  Life — manifested 

*  About  A.D.  550,  generally  believed  to  have  been  a  Bishop.  The  anthor 
of  a  work  **  De  Partibos  Divina  Legis,"  a  kind  of  introduotion  to  the  laored 
writings 


304 


WORD  8TDDIB8  IR  THH  NEW  TE8TAMKST. 


'unto  liS.  Ver.  3,  in  order  to  resume  the  broken  sentence  of 
ver.  1,  repeats  in  a  condensed  form  two  of  tlie  clauses  in  tli&t 
verse,  that  whieh  we  have  seen  and  heard,  and  fiiriiislies  tlie 
governing  verb,  -we  declare.  Thus  tlie  simple  seuteuce,  divested 
of  parenthesis  and  resumptive  words  would  be,  We  declare  wUo 
you  thai  which  was  Jrotn,  the  beffinning,  that  which  we  have 
seen  with  our  eyes,  thai  which  toe  beheld,  and  our  hatids  handled 
concerning  the  Word  of  Life. 

That  which  (S).  It  is  disputed  whether  John  uses  this  in  a 
personal  sense  as  equivalent  to  He  whom,  or  in  its  strictly  neut- 
er sense  as  meaning  something  relating  to  the  person  and  reve- 
lation of  Clirist.  On  the  whole,  the  irepi,  concerning  (A.  V., 
of),  seems  to  be  against  the  personal  sense.  The  successive 
clauses,  that  which  was  from  tike  beginning,  etc.,  express,  not 
the  Sternal  Word  IHmself,  but  something  relating  to  ar predi- 
cated concerning  (""cpO  Him.  The  indefinite  thai  which,  is  ap- 
proximately defined  by  tliese  clauses  ;  that  about  the  Word  of 
Life  which  was  from  the  beginning,  that  which  appealed  to 
sight,  to  hearing,  to  touch.*  Strictly,  it  is  true,  the  Trepl  is  ap- 
propriate only  with  we  have  heard,  but  it  is  used  with  tlie  other 
clanaes  in  a  wide  and  loose  sense  {compare  John  xvi.  S).  "  The 
subject  is  not  merely  a  message,  but  all  that  liad  been  made 
dear  through  manifold  experience  concerning  it  "  (Westcott). 

Was  (^i*)-  Not  i^ivero,  came  into  being.  See  on  John  i.  3  ; 
vii.  34  ;  viii.  58.  It  mkw  already  existing  when  the  successioa 
of  life  began. 

From  the  beginning  {dir*  apyiii).  The  phrase  occurs  twice 
in  the  Gospel  (viii.  44  ;  xv.  27)  ;  nine  times  in  tlie  First  Epis- 
tle, and  twice  in  the  Second.  It  is  used  both  absolutely  (iii.  8 ; 
ii.  13,  14),  and  relativelg  (John  xv.  27 ;  1  John  ii.  24).  It  ia 
here  contrasted  with  "t'n  the  beginning"  (John  i.  1).  The 
difference  ia  that  by  the  words  "  in  the  beginning,"  the  writer 


w  of  Alford  and  Wmteott.     Ebrard  and  Huther  m^atun 


i 


FIRST  HPI8TLB    OF  JOHK  805 

places  himself  at  the  initial  point  of  creationi  and,  looking  back 
into  eternity,  describes  that  which  was  already  in  existence 
when  creation  began.  ^^  The  Word  was  in  the  beginning."  In 
the  words  ^^from  the  beginning,"  the  writer  looks  back  to  the 
initial  point  of  time,  and  describes  what  has  been  in  existence 
from  that  point  onward.  Thus,  ^^{n  the  beginning "  charac- 
terizes the  absolute  divine  Word  as  He  was  hefore  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world  and  at  the  foundation  of  the  world.  ^^  From 
the  beginning  "  characterizes  His  development  in  time.  Kote 
tlie  absence  of  the  article  both  here  and  in  John  L  1.  Not  the 
banning  as  a  definite,  concrete  fact,  but  as  apprehended  by 
man  ;  that  to  which  we  look  as  ^'  beginning." 

Have  heard — have  aeen  {luerfKoofiei^-^wpdKafAey).  Both  in 
the  perfect  tense,  denoting  the  still  abiding  effects  of  the  hear- 
ing and  seeing. 

With  our  eyea.  Emphasizing  the  direct,  personal  experi- 
ence in  a  marvellous  matter. 

Have  looked  upon  {iSeaadfAeSa).  Bev.,  correctly,  hehdd. 
The  tense  is  the  aorist ;  marking  not  the  abiding  effect  of  the 
vision  upon  the  beholder,  but  the  historical  manifestation  to 
special  witnesses.  On  the  difference  between  this  verb  and 
€(Dp€uea/jL€v,  we  have  seen^  see  on  John  i.  14, 18. 

Have  handled  {iy^\4if^ap).  The  aorist  tense.  Bev., 
handled.  For  the  peculiar  force  of  the  verb  see  on  Luke  xxiv. 
89.  The  reference  is,  probably,  to  ha^ndle  me  (Luke  xxiv.  39), 
and  to  John  xx.  27.  This  is  the  more  noticeable  from  the  fact 
tliat  John  does  not  mention  the  fact  of  the  Besnrrection  in  the 
Epistles,  and  does  not  use  the  word  in  his  own  narrative  of  the 
Besuri'ection.  The  phrase  therefore  falls  in  with  the  numerous 
instances  in  which  John  assumes  the  knowledge  of  certain  his- 
toric facts  on  the  part  of  his  readers. 

Of  the  Word  (ir^pX  rov  Xotov).   Better,  as  Bev.,  otmeefning 

the  Word. 

Vol.  IL— 80 


306  WOKD  STUDIES  TH  THE  WBW  TESTAMENT. 

Of  life  (TiJ?  foJ^).  Lit,,  the  life.  See  on  John  i.  4.  The 
phrsBe  o  X070?  T^9  Siw^i;,  the  Word,  of  the  Life,  occurs  nowhere 
elae  in  the  New  Testament.  The  nearest  appi-oacii  to  it  i§ 
Philip,  ii.  16  ;  but  there  neither  word  has  the  article.  In  the 
phrase  words  of  eternal  life  (Joliu  vi.  68),  and  in  Acts  t.  20, 
all  the  words  of  this  life,  p^fiara  is  used.  The  question  is 
whether  \6yoi;  is  used  here  of  the  Personal  Ward,  as  John  i.  ]. 
or  of  the  divine  message  or  revelation.  In  the  four  passages  of 
the  Goepel  where  X670?  is  nsed  in  a  personal  senee  {John  i.  1, 
14),  it  is  used  ahsolulely,  the  Wo7-d  (ooinpare  Apoe.  xix,  13). 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  often  used  relatively  in  the  Kew  Tes- 
tament ;  as  word  of  the  kitigdom.  (Matt.  xiii.  19) ;  word  of 
this  salvation  (Acts  xiii.  26) ;  wtml  of  I/ts  grace  (Acts  sx.  32) ; 
word  of  truth  (Jaa.  i.  18).  By  John  ^oifp;  of  life,  is  often  used 
in  order  to  characterize  the  word  which  accompanies  it.  Thus, 
crovm  of  life  (Apoc.  ii.  10) ;  water  of  life  {Apoc.  xxi.  6)  ;  book 
of  life  (Apoc.  iii.  5) ;  bread  of  life  (John  vi.  35) ;  i.e.,  the 
water  which  is  living  and  communicates  life  ;  the  book  which 
contains  the  revelation  of  life  ;  the  bread  which  imparts  life. 
In  the  same  sense,  John  vi.  68 ;  Acts  v.  20.     Compare  Titns 


Though  the  phrase,  the  Word  of  lite  Life,  does  not  elsewhere 
occur  in  a  personal  sense.  I  incline  to  regard  its  primary  refer- 
ence as  personal,"  from  the  obvious  connection  of  the  thought 
with  John  i.  1,  4.  "In  the  beginning  was  the  Word, — in  Him 
was  life."  '^As  John  does  not  purpose  to  say  tliat  he  an- 
nounces Christ  as  an  abstract  single  idea,  bnt  that  he  declares 
his  own  concrete  historical  experiences  concerning  Christ, — so 
now  he  continues,  not  M«  Logos  {Word),  but  concerning  the 
Word,  we  make  annunciation  to  yon"  (Ebrard).  At  the  same 
time,  I  agree  with  Canon  Westcott  that  it  is  most  probable 
that  the  two  interpretations  are  not  to  bo  sharply  separated. 
"The  revelation  proclaims  that  which  it  includes;  it  has,  an- 
nounces, gives  life.  Id  Christ  life  as  the  subject,  and  life  as 
the  charad^r  of  the  revelation,  were  absolutely  united." 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  307 

2.  This  verse  is  parenthetical.    Compare,  for  similar  inter* 
mptions  of  the  constraction,  ver.  3 ;  John  i.  14 ;  iii.  16,  81 ; 
35 


And  {teal).     See  on  John  i.  10 ;  viii.  20. 

The  Life  (17  (>r^).  The  Word  Himself  who  is  the  Life.* 
Compare  John  xiv.  6 ;  v.  26  ;  1  John  v.  11, 12.  Life  expresses 
the  natnre  of  tUe  Ward  (John  i.  4).  The  phrase,  the  Life^  besides 
being  equivalent  to  ike  Word^  also  indicates,  like  ike  IHUk  and 
ike  lAgktj  an  aspect  of  His  being. 

Was  manifested  {iffxEveptoSff).  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  Corre- 
sponding with  ihe  Word  was  made  ftesh  (John  i.  14).  The  two 
phrases,  liowever,  present  different  aspects  of  the  same  trnth. 
The  Word  became  fleshy  contemplates  simply  the  historic  fact 
of  incarnation.  The  life  was  ma,nifestedy  sets  forth  the  unfold* 
ing  of  that  fact  in  the  various  operations  of  life.  The  one  de- 
notes the  objective  process  of  the  incarnation  as  such,  the  other 
the  result  of  that  process  as  related  to  human  capacity  of  re- 
ceiving and  understanding  it.  ^'  The  reality  of  the  incarnation 
would  be  undeclared  if  it  were  said,  '  The  Word  was  mani- 
fested;' the  manifoldness  of  the  operations  of  life  would  be 
circumscribed  if  it  were  said,  '  The  Life  became  flesh.'  The 
manifestation  of  the  Life  was  a  consequence  of  the  incarnation 
of  the  Word,  but  it  is  not  coextensive  with  it "  (Westcott). 

Have  seen — bear  witness — shew.  Three  ideas  in  tha 
apostolic  message :  experienoej  iesiim^nt/y  o/munmcem^ni. 

Bear  witness.    See  on  John  i.  7. 

Shew  {cnrarffiXXofiev).  Better,  as  Be  v.,  declare.  See  on 
John  xvi.  25.     So  here.     The  message  comes  from  {airo)  God. 


*  The  sitndent  should  consaltf  on  John's  use  of  the  term  Life^  Gaoon  West- 
eott^s  "  additional  note'*  on  1  John  ▼.20.  "  Oommentarj  on  the  Epistles  of 
John/'  p.  204. 


508  WORD  STDUna  IN  THE  NEW  TE8TAMEKT, 

That  eternal  life  {-rtjv  ^mtjv  t^h  aUivtov).  A  particularly 
f&ult;  traDBlaCion,  since  it  utterly  fails  to  express  the  develop- 
ment  of  the  idea  of  life,  wliicii  is  distinctly  contemplated  by 
the  original.  Render,  as  Rev.,  the  life,  the  eternal  life  ;  or  the 
l^e,  even  the  etenud  life.  For  a  eimilar  repetition  of  the  art- 
icle compare  1  John  ii.  8;  iv.  9;  2  John  11.  This  particular 
phrase  occurs  only  here  and  ii.  25.  John  uses  ^ui)  auovtm 
eternal  life,  and  ^  awivto;  ^i)  the  eternal  life,  the  former  ex- 
pressing the  getwral  conception  of  life  eternal,  and  the  latter 
eternal  life  o*  the  special  gift  of  Christ.  Aitovio'i  eternal,  de- 
scribes the  life  in  its  quality  of  not  being  measured  by  titne,  a 
larger  idea  than  that  of  mere  duration. 

Which  (^w).  Not  the  simple  relative  ^  which,  but  defin- 
ing the  quality  of  the  life,  and  having  at  the  same  time  a  kind 
of  confirmatory  and  explanatory  force  of  the  word  eternal:  see- 
ing that  it  was  a  life  divine  in  its  nature — "  with  the  Father" — 
and  therefore  independent  of  temporal  conditions. 

With  the  Father  (Trpos  toc irarepo).  See  on  with  God{John 
i,  1),  In  living,  active  relation  and  communion  with  the  Father. 
"The  preposition  of  motion  with  the  verb  of  repose  involves 
eternity  of  relation  with  activity  and  life"  (Coleridge).  Tlie 
life  eternally  tended  to  the  Father,  even  as  it  emanated  from 
Him.  It  came  forth  from  Him  and  was  manifested  to  men, 
but  to  the  end  that  it  might  take  men  into  itself  and  unite  them 
with  the  Father.  The  manife.station  of  life  to  men  was  a  reve- 
lation of  life,  as,  first  of  all  and  beyond  all,  centring  in  God. 
Hence,  though  life,  abstractly,  returns  to  God,  as  it  proceeds 
from  God,  it  returns  bearing  the  redeemed  world  in  its  bosom. 
The  complete  divine  ideal  of  life  includes  impartation,  but  im- 
partation  with  a  view  to  the  practical  development  of  all  that 
receives  it  with  reference  to  God  as  its  vivifying,  impelling, 
regulating,  and  inspiring  centre. 

The  Father.  See  on  John  xii.  26.  The  title  "the  Father" 
occurs  rarely  in  the  Syiioptista,  and  always  with  reference  to 
the  Son.     In  Paul  only  thrice  (Rom.  vi,  4 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Eph. 


FIRST  EPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  309 

ii.  18).  Kowhere  in  Peter,  James,  Jnde,  or  the  Apocalypse. 
Freqaent  in  John's  (Gospel  and  Epistles,  and  in  the  latter,  uni- 
formly.* 

3.  The  regular  course  of  the  sentence,  broken  by  ver.  2,  is 
now  resumed,  by  the  repetition  of  that  wJach  we  have  seen  and 
heard.  Only  the  order  is  reversed :  seen  and  heard  instead  of 
heard  and  seen  (ver.  1),  and  the  two  elements  of  experience, 
sight  and  hearing,  are  thrown  together  without  the  repeated 
relative  that  which.  In  ver.  1,  the  climax  advanced  from  the 
lower  evidence  of  hearing  to  that  of  sight.  Here,  in  recapitu- 
lating, the  process  is  reversed,  and  the  higher  class  of  evidence 
is  put  first. 

Unto  you  alao  {ical  ifuii).  The  also  is  variously  explained. 
According  to  some,  referring  to  a  special  circle  of  Christian 
readers  beyond  those  addressed  at  the  conclusion  of  the  GospeL 
Others,  again,  as  referring  to  those  who  had  not  seen  and  heard 
as  contrasted  with  eye-witnesses.  Thus  Augustine  on  John 
XX.  26  sqq.  ^^  He  (Thomas)  touched  the  man,  and  confessed 
the  Gk)d.  And  the  Lord,  consoling  us  who,  now  that  He  is 
seated  in  heaven,  cannot  handle  Him  with  the  hand,  but  touch 
Him  by  faith,  says,  ^  Because  thou  hast  seen  thou  hast  believed ; 
blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen  and  believe.'  It  is  toe 
that  are  described  ;  toe  that  are  pointed  out  May  there  there- 
fore come  to  pass  in  us  that  blessedness  which  the  Lord  pre- 
dicted should  be :  the  Life  itself  has  been  manifested  in  the 
flesh,  so  that  the  thing  which  can  be  seen  with  the  heart  alone 
might  be  seen  with  the  eyes  also,  that  it  might  heal  our  hearts." 

Fellowship  {icoaftovlav).  This  word  introduces  us  to  one  of 
the  main  thoughts  of  the  Epistle.  The  true  life  in  man,  which 
comes  through  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  con- 
sists in  fellowship  with  God  and  with  man.  On  the  word,  see 
on  Acts  ii.  42  ;  Luke  v.  10.  The  verb  teoivtovioi},  to  come  intofd- 
loioshipy  to  he  made  a  part/ner^  to  he  pa/rtaTcer  of  occurs  1  Pet. 

*  Let  the  student  by  all  means  consult  Canon  Westoott's  **  additloiud  note  " 
on  p.  27,  of  his  '*  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  John.** 


310 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TE8TAMEHT. 


iv,  13  J  2  Jolin  1 1 ;  Heb.  ii,  14,  etc.  The  expression  here,  e^"' 
lauvaviav,  is  stronger,  since  it  expresses  the  enjoyment  or  realises- 
tion  of  fellowship,  as  compared  with  the  mere  fact  of  fellow- 
ship.    See  on  John  xvi.  22. 

Our  fellowship  (4  Kotimivia  i;  ^fierefta).  More  strictly,  the 
fellowship,  that  which  is  oun,  according  to  John's  character- 
istic practice  of  defining  and  emphasizing  a  noun  by  an  article 
and  poBBessive  pronoun.  See  ou  John  x.  27.  Ours  (possessive 
instead  of  personal  pronoun)  indicating  fellowship  as  a  diatin- 
gitiehing  mark  of  Christians  rather  than  as  merely  something 
enjoyed  by  tliem. 

With  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  (/leri  tov  •n-oTpos  koX 
fieri  TOV  viov  aiiTov).  Note  the  repeated  preposition  /«to  with, 
distinguishing  tlie  two  persons,  and  co-ordinating  the  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father,  and  the  fellowship  with  the  Son,  thus 
implying  Bamenesa  of  essence.  The  fellowship  with  both  con- 
templates both  as  united  in  the  Godhead.  Plato  says  of  one 
who  lives  in  unrestrained  desire  and  robbery,  "Such  an  one  is 
the  friend  neither  of  God  nor  man,  for  he  is  incapable  of  com- 
munion {KaanDveiv  aSwariK),  and  he  who  is  incapable  of  com- 
munion {Koamvla)  is  also  incapable  of  friendship  "  ("  Gorgias," 
507).  So,  in  the  "Symposium"  (188),  he  defines  divination  as 
"the  art  of  communion  {leotviavia)  between  gods  and  men." 

4.  These  things.    The  whole  Epistle. 

Write  we  unto  you  {fpa^ofiev  vfMv).  The  best  texts  read 
^fieU  we,  instead  of  vfiiv  to  you.  Both  the  verb  and  the  pro- 
noun are  emphatic.  The  writer  speaks  with  conscious  authority, 
and  his  message  is  to  be  not  only  announcud  {airtvffeWofiep, 
ver.  3),  but  vn-itten.  We  ■lorite  is  emphasized  by  the  absence 
of  the  personal  object,  to  you. 


Your  joy  (^  X"^?^  iifi&v).     The  beat  texts  read  ^fiav,  ottr, 
though  either  reading  gives  a  good  sense. 


J 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  311 

FuW  {veirXrfpm^pfj).  More  correctly ,  fulfilled.  Frequeutin 
John.  See  John  iii  29  ;  yii.  8 ;  xii.  38 ;  xv.  11 ;  2  John  12 ; 
Apoa  vi.  11.  ^^  The  peace  of  reconciliation,  the  blessed  con- 
scioosness  of  Bonship,  the  happy  growth  in  holiness,  tlie  bright 
prospect  of  future  completion  and  glorj, — all  tliese  are  but 
simple  details  of  that  which,  in  all  its  length  and  breadth  is 
embraced  by  one  word,  Eternal  Life^  the  real  possession  of 
which  is  the  immediate  source  of  our  joj.  We  have  joj, 
Christ's  joj,  because  we  are  blessed,  because  we  have  life  itself 
in  Christ"  (Diisterdieck,  cit.  by  Alford).  And  Augustine: 
"  For  there  is  a  joy  which  is  not  given  to  the  ungodly,  but  to 
those  who  love  Thee  for  thine  own  sake,  whose  joy  Thou  thy- 
self art.  And  this  is  the  happy  life,  to  rejoice  to  Thee,  of 
Thee ;  this  is  it  and  there  is  no  other  "  (''  Confessions,"  x.,  22). 
Alford  is  right  in  remarking  that  this  verse  gives  an  epistolary 
character  to  what  follows,  but  it  can  hardly  be  said  with  him 
that  it  ^^  fills  the  place  of  the  ^^aZ/Tca^  greetrng^  lit,  rejaioej  so 
common  in  the  opening  of  Epistles."  * 

5.  This  then  is  (/cal  a&rq  itrriv).  Rev.,  correctly  and  liter* 
ally,  and  this.  According  to  the  proper  reading  the  verb 
stands  first  in  order  {itrrlv  airq^  with  emphasis,  not  merely  as 
a  copula,  but  in  the  sense  '^  tiiere  exists  this  as  the  message." 
For  a  similar  use  of  the  substantive  verb,  see  v.  16, 17 ;  ii.  15 ; 
John  viii.  50. 

Message  {hrayyeKla).  This  word,  however,  is  invariably 
used  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of  promise.  The  best 
texts  read  ar/yeXla,  message^  which  occurs  only  at  iii.  11 ;  and 
the  corresponding  verb,  arffiXhM,  only  at  John  xx.  18. 

We  have  heard  of  Him  {axfj/e6afi€P  aw  airrov).  A  form  of 
expression  not  found  elsewhere  in  John,  who  commonly  uses 
wop'  avTov.  See  on  John  vi.  46.  The  phrase  here  points  to 
the  ultimate  and  not  necessarily  the  imjnediate  source  of  the 
message.     Not  only  John,  but  others  in  earlier  times  had  heard 


*  Bat  not  New  Testament  epistles.    Xcdpttp  greeting^  ooonrs  in  no  addreiB  of 
•n  Apostolic  epistle,  except  in  that  of  James.     See  on  Jas.  i.  1. 


312 


WORD  8TUDIB8  IS  THB  NBW  TBSTAHBNT. 


this  mesBage.  Compare  1  Peter  i.  10,  11,  'Awo  points  to  tM 
source,  irapd  to  the  giver.  Thus,  John  v.  41,  "I  receive  not 
honor/wm  {wapd)  men."  They  are  not  the  heatowers  of  honor 
upon  me,  Ver.  44,  "  How  can  ye  believe  which  receive  honor 
from  (iro^ti)  one  another ; "  tlie  honor  whicli  men  liave  to  give, 
"  and  seek  not  the  honor  that  cometli  front,  {■napd)  God  ;  "  the 
lioiior  which  God  alone  bestows.  On  the  other  hand,  I  John 
iii.  22,  "  Whatsoever  we  ask  we  receive  ^tyw*  (diro)  Hira,"  the 
ultimate  source  of  our  gifts.  So  Matt.  xvii.  25 ;  •'^  Of  (airo) 
whom  do  tlie  kings  of  the  earth  take  cuetom — of  {airo)  tlieir 
own  children  or  ff  (diri^  strangers  !  "  What  is  the  legitimate 
and  ultimate  source  of  revenue  in  states  ? 

Declare  {avarfyeXXanev).  Compare  the  simple  verb  arfyek- 
Xeiv  to  bring  tidings,  Jolm  xx.  18,  and  only  there.  'Avt^ffiK- 
Xew  is  to  bring  the  tidings  up  to  (ofa)  or  back  to  him  who  re- 
ceives tiiem.  'AirarfyiXKeiv  Is  to  annouuce  tidings  as  coming 
from,  (<iiro)  some  one,  see  Matt.  ii.  8;  John  iv.  51.  Karay- 
7c'\\cii'  is  to  proclaim  wiiA  authority,  so  ae  to  spread  the  tid- 
ings down  among  {Kara)  those  who  hear.  See  Acta  xvii.  23. 
Found  only  in  the  Acts  and  in  FauL 

God  is  Light  (deot  ^^  iintv).  A  statement  of  the  absolute 
natnre  of  God.  Not  a  light,  nor  the  light,  with  reference  to 
created  beings,  as  tlie  light  of  tnen,  the  light  of  the  icorld,  but 
eiriipiy  and  absolutely  God  is  light,  in  ilia  very  nature.  Cora- 
pare  God  it  spirit,  and  see  on  John  iv.  24 :  Ood  is  love,  1  John 
iv.  8,  16.  The  expression  is  not  a  metaplior.  "All  that  we 
are  accustomed  to  term  light  in  the  domain  of  the  creature, 
whether  with  a  physical  or  metaphysical  meaning,  is  only  an 
effluence  of  that  one  and  only  primitive  Light  which  appears 
in  the  nature  of  God  "  (Ebrard).  Light  is  immaterial,  dif- 
fusive, pure,  and  glorious.  It  is  the  condition  of  life.  Physic- 
ally, it  represents  glory i  intellectually,  truth;  morally,  hcii^ 
nets.  As  immaterial  it  corresponds  to  God  as  spirit;  as 
diffusive,  to  God  as  love;  as  the  condition  of  life,  to  God  aa 
lye;  as  pure  and  illuminating,  to  God  as  holiness  and  truth. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  tight  is  often  the  medium  of  God's  visi- 


I 


FIB8T  BPI8TLB  OF  JOHH.  818 

ble  revelations  to  men.  It  was  the  first  manifestation  of  God 
in  creation.  The  burning  lamp  passed  between  the  pieces  of  the 
parted  victim  in  GKkI's  covenant  with  Abraham.  God  went 
before  Israel  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  descended  in  fire  upon  Sinai, 
and  appeared  in  the  luminous  cloud  which  rested  on  the  mercy- 
seat  in  the  most  holj  place.  In  classical  Greek  ^ok  lights  is 
used  metaphorically  for  ddig/U,  deliverance^  victory^  and  is  ap- 
plied to  persons  as  a  term  of  admiring  affection,  as  we  say  that 
one  is  the  light  of  ov/r  Ufe^  or  the  delight  of  our  eyes.  So  Ulys- 
ses, on  seeing  his  son  Telemachus,  says,  ^^  Thou  hast  come, 
Telemachus,  etoeet  light  {ykuteepov  i^do^) "  (Homer,  ^^  Odyssey," 
xvi.  23).  And  Electra,  greeting  her  returning  brother,  Orestes, 
''O  dearest  light  {^rarov  4>m  "  (Sophocles,  "  Electra,"  1223). 
Occasionally,  as  by  Euripides,  of  the  light  of  truth  (^^  Iphigenia 
at  Tauris,"  1046).  No  modern  writer  has  developed  the  idea 
of  God  as  light  with  such  power  and  beauty  as  Dante.  His 
^^  Paradise  "  might  truthfully  be  called  a  study  of  light.  Light 
is  the  only  visible  expression  of  God.  Radiating  from  Him,  it 
is  diffused  through  the  universe  as  the  principle  of  life.  Thia 
key-note  is  struck  at  the  very  opening  of  ^'  the  Paradise.'' 

**  The  glory  of  Him  who  moveth  everything 
Doth  penetnite  the  universe,  and  shine 
In  one  part  more  and  in  another  less. 
Within  that  heaven  which  most  His  light  receives 
Was  I." 

"  Paradiso,"  i,  1-«L 

In  the  final,  beatific  vision,  God  Himself  is  imagined  as  a  Inm* 
inous  point  which  pours  its  rays  through  all  the  spheres,  upon 
which  the  spirits  gazed,  and  in  which  they  lead  the  past,  the 
present,  and  the  future. 

*'  O  grace  ahnndant,  hj  which  I  presumed 
To  fix  mj  sight  upon  the  Light  Eternal, 
So  that  the  seeing  I  consumed  therein  I 
I  saw  that  in  its  depth  far  down  is  lying 
Bound  up  with  love  together  in  one  volume, 
What  through  the  universe  in  leaves  is  scattered; 
Suhstance,  and  accident,  and  their  operations, 
AU  interfused  together  in  such  wise 
That  what  I  speak  of  is  one  simple  light.*' 

*'  Paradiso,'*  xzziii.,  8!»-0a 


WORD  8TDDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

"  Id  pr^Bunae  of  that  light  one  such  becomes, 
Th>t  to  nithdraw  therefrum  (or  othur  proepeot 
It  ia  imposaibte  he  e'ur  consent ; 
Because  tlie  good,  which  object  ia  of  will, 
Is  gatberud  all  Id  this,  and  out  of  it 
That  is  defective  nhich  is  perfect  there." 

■'  ParadiBO,"xxxiIl.,  100-lOS. 

"  O  Light  eterae,  aole  In  thjself  that  dvellHst, 
Sole  kaowest  thjself,  and,  kaown  unto  thyself 
And  knowing,  lorest  and  amilest  ou  tb/self  I  " 

■'  Paradiso,"  zzzUL,  124-lSC. 

Id^t  enkindlee  love. 

"  If  in  the  heat  of  lave  I  flame  npnn  thee 
Bejond  the  meoBure  that  on  earth  is  seen. 
So  that  the  valor  of  thine  eves  I  vanquish, 
Harvel  thou  not  thereat ;  for  this  proceeds 
From  perfect  sight,  which,  aa  It  apprehends, 
To  the  good  apprehended  moves  its  feet. 
Well  I  perceive  how  is  already  shining 
Into  thine  intelleet  the  eternal  Light, 
That  oulj  seen  enkindles  always  love." 

"  Paradlso,"  t. 

See  also  "  Paradiso,"  cantos  xxx.,  xxxi. 

In  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all  (koI  ctkotui  ovk  ttmv  hi  avra 

avBe/iia).  It  is  characteristic  of  John  to  e.xpress  the  same  idea 
positively  and  iiegalivelj.  See  John  i.  7,  8,  20 ;  iii.  15,  17,  20 ; 
iv.  42;  V.  24;  viii.  35;  x.  28;  1  John  i.  6,  8;  ii.  4,  27;  v.  12. 
According  to  the  Greek  order,  the  rendering  is  :  "  And  dark- 
ness there  ia  not  in  Him,  no,  not  in  any  way."  For  a  similar 
addition  of  ovSet^  not  one,  to  a  complete  sentence,  see  John  vi. 
63 ;  xii.  19 ;  xis.  11.     On  tncoria  darkness,  see  on  Jolm  i.  5. 

6.  If  we  say  {Up  e'lrafiei').     The  subjunctive  mood  puts  the 
case  as  su)pposed,  not  aa  aasuincd. 


Walk  in  the  darkness.  The  phrase  occurs  only  in  John's 
Gospel  and  First  Epistle.  Darkness  here  is  aKOTot,  instead  of 
aKorla.  (ver.  5).  See  on  Joim  i.  5,  Walk  {■mpnraT&fio'),  is, 
literally,  walkabout ;  indicating  the  habitual  coursB  of  the  life, 


A 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  ;]15 

outward  and  inward.  The  verb,  with  this  moral  Bense,  is  com* 
raon  in  John  and  Paul,  and  is  found  elsewhere  onlj  in  Mark 
yii.  5  ;  Acts  xxi.  21. 

We  lie  and  do  not  the  truth.  Again  the  combination  of 
the  positive  and  negative  statements.  See  on  ver.  5.  The 
phrase  to  do  the  truth  occurs  onlj  in  John's  Gospel  and  First 
Epistle.  See  on  John  iii.  21.  All  walking  in  darkness  is  a  not 
doing  of  the  truth.  ^'  Right  action  is  true  thought  realized. 
Every  fragment  of  right  done  is  so  much  truth  made  visible" 
(Westcott). 

7.  We  walk  in  the  light  {h  r^  ^arrl  irepv/rarA/iev).  The 
phrase  occurs  only  in  the  First  Epistle.  WcUkj  as  above.  In 
the  Ughty  having  our  life  in  God,  who  is  light 

He  is  in  the  light.  God  is  forever  and  unchangeably  in 
perfect  light.  Compai-e  Ps.  civ.  2  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  We  nxxlkj 
advancing  in  the  light  and  by  means  of  the  light  to  more  light. 
^^Tbe  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more 
and  more  unto  the  perfect  day  "  (Prov.  iv.  18). 

One  with  another  (jier  aXXiikav).  Not,  vw  wUh  Ood  and 
God  with  vs^  but  with  our  hrethren.  Fellowship  with  God  ex- 
hibits and  proves  itself  by  fellowship  with  Christians.  See  iv. 
7, 12 ;  iiL  11,  23. 

Of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son.  Omit  Christ.  The  hvman 
name,  Jesus^  shows  that  His  blood  is  available  for  man.  The 
divine  name.  Hie  Son,  shows  that  it  is  efficacious.  I  shall  be 
rendering  a  service  to  students  of  John's  Epistles  by  giving,  in  a 
condensed  form,  Canon  Westcott's  note,  classifying  the  several 
names  of  our  Lord  and  their  uses  in  the  Epistles. 

The  name  in  John,  as  in  the  Bible  elsewhere,  has  two  distinct, 
but  closely  connected  meanings. 

1.  The  Revelation  of  the  Divine  Being  by  a  special  title. 

2.  The  whole  sum  of  the  manifold  revelations  gathered  up  so 
as  to  form  one  supreme  revelation. 


316  WORD  STCDIES  III  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  latter  sense  is  illustrated  ia  3  John  7,  where  "  the  name  " 
absolutely  includes  the  essentia!  elements  of  the  Christian  creed, 
the  complete  revelation  of  Christ's  work  in  relation  to  Grod  and 
■nan.     Compare  John  xx.  31 ;  Acts  v.  41. 

In  ii.  12,  the  term  is  more  limited,  referring  to  Clu-ist  as  He 
lived  on  earth  and  gave  Uimself  for  "  the  brethren."  In  iii.  23 ; 
V.  13,  the  exact  sense  is  defined  by  what  follows. 

A(mJAL   NAXEe   DSED. 

(I.)  Bis  Son  JesMs  Christ,  i.  3 ;  iii.  23  ;  v.  20.  The  divine 
antecedent  is  differently  described  in  each  case,  and  the  differ- 
ence colors  the  phrase.  In  i.  23,  th«  Father  (compare  John  3). 
In  iii.  23.  God.  In  v.  20,  He  that  is  true.  Thus  the  sonship  of 
Christ  is  regarded  in  relation  to  God  as  Father,  as  God,  and  as 
aatisfying  the  divine  ideal  which  man  is  able  to  form.  The 
whole  phrase,  Hia  Son  Jesus  Christ,  includes  the  two  elements 
of  the  confessions  which  John  makes  prominent. 

1.  JesuB  is  the  Son  of  God  (iv,  15 ;  v.  5). 

2.  Jesus  is  the  Christ  (ii.  22 ;  v.  1). 


The  constituents  of  the  compressed  phrase  are  all  used  sep- 
arately by  John. 

{1 .)  Jesus,  ii,  22 ;  V.  1 ;  iv,  3  (where  the  correct  reading  omits 
Chiitt).  The  thought  is  that  of  the  Lord  in  His  perfect  his- 
toric humanity. 

(2.)  Christ.  2  John  9.  Pointing  to  the  preparation  made 
under  the  old  covenant, 

(3).  Jesus  Christ,  ii.l;  v.  6;  2  John  7.  Combining  the  ideas 
of  true  humanity  and  messianic  position. 

In  iv.  15,  the  reading  is  doubtful :  Jesus  or  Jesus  Christ. 

On  iv,  2,  see  note. 

(4.)  The  Son.  ii.  22,  23,  24;  iv.  U;  v.  13.  The  absolute  re- 
lation  of  Sonship  to  Fatherhood. 

(5.)  The  Son  of  God.  iii.  8 ;  v.  10, 12, 13,  20.  Compare  Bit 
•S'lim  (iv.  10;  v.  9),  where  the  immediate  antecedent  is  o  Se6^ 
God;  and  v.  18,  He  that  was  hegoiten  of  God.  Combination 
of  the  ideas  of  Christ's  divine  dignity  and  divine  sonship. 


k 


I 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  317 

(6.)  Jesus  His  (God's)  Son.  i.  7.  Two  truths.  The  blood  of 
Christ  is  available  and  efficacious. 

(7).  His  (God's)  Son,  His  only  Son.  iv.  9.  The  nniqaenesg 
of  the  gift  IB  the  manifestation  of  love. 

The  Son  in  various  forms  is  eminently  characteristic  of  the 
First  and  Second  Epistles,  in  which  it  occurs  more  times  than 
in  all  Paul's  Epistles. 

Kvpwi  Lord,  is  not  found  in  the  Epistles  (omit  from  2  John 
3),  but  occurs  in  the  Gospel,  and  often  in  the  Apocalypse. 

The  expression,  the  Hood  of  Jesus  His  Son,  is  chosen  with  a 
profound  insight  Though  Ignatius  uses  the  phrase  Hood  of 
God,  yet  the  word  Hood  is  inappropriate  to  the  Son  conceived 
in  His  divine  nature.  The  word  Jesus  brings  out  His  human 
nature,  in  which  He  assumed  a  real  body  of  flesh  and  blood, 
which  blood  was  shed  for  us. 

Cleanseth  {Ko^^aplfyi).  See  on  Mark  viL  19.  Not  only^br- 
gives  but  removes.  Compare  Tit.  ii.  14 ;  Heb.  ix.  13  sq. ;  22  sq. ; 
Eph.  v.  26  sq. ;  Matt.  v.  8 ;  1  John  iiL  3.  Compare  also  ver.  9, 
w\\%Teforgvoe{a^)  and  cleanse  {tcaSapiarf)  occur,  with  an  obvious 
difference  of  meaning.  Note  the  present  tense  deanseth.  The 
<;leansing  is  present  and  contmv^yus.  Alexander  (Bishop  of 
Derry)  cites  a  striking  passage  from  Victor  Hugo  ("  Le  Parri- 
cide"). The  usurper  Canute,  who  has  had  a  share  in  his 
father's  death,  expiring  after  a  virtuous  and  glorious  reign, 
walks  towards  the  light  of  heaven.  But  first  he  cuts  with  his 
sword  a  shroud  of  snow  from  the  top  of  Mt.  Savo.  As  he 
advances  towards  heaven,  a  cloud  forms,  and  drop  by  drop  his 
shroud  is  soaked  with  a  rain  of  blood. 

All  sin  {irdini^  ofiaprit^).  The  principle  of  sin  in  all  its 
forms  and  manifestations;  not  the  separate  manifestations. 
Compare  all  joy  (Jas.  i.  2) ;  all  patience  (2  Cor.  xiL  12) ;  all 
vrisdom  (Eph.  i.  8) ;  all  diligence  (2  Pet.  i.  5). 

8.  That  we  have  no  sin.  "On  that,  may  be  taken  merely 
as  a  mark  of  quotation :  ^^  If  we  say,  sin  we  have  not.^^  On  the 
phrase  to  home  sin^  see  on  John  xvi.  22,  and  compare  havefd- 


318 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NHW  TKBTAMBNT, 


lototiAip,  ver.  3.  Sin  {afiapriap)  is  not  to  be  uoderstood  of 
original  sin,  or  of  sin  before  conversion,  but  geneniUy.  "  It  la 
obvions  that  this  ^etf  dfiopriap  (to  have  sin),  is  infinitely 
di versified,  according  to  the  Buccessive  measure  of  the  purifica- 
tion and  development  of  the  new  man.  Even  the  apostle 
John  doee  not  exclude  himself  from  the  universal  if  we  gay" 
(Ebrard). 

Heathen  authors  say  very  little  about  sin,  and  classic  pagan- 
ism had  little  or  no  conception  of  sin  in  the  Gospel  sense.  The 
nearest  approach  to  it  was  by  Plato,  from  wJiose  works  a  toler- 
ably complete  doctrinal  statement  might  be  gathered  of  the 
origin,  nature,  and  effects  of  sin.  The  fundamental  idea  of 
dfutpria  (sin)  among  the  Greeks  is  physical ;  the  missing  of' a 
ma/rk  (see  on  Matt.  i.  21 ;  vi.  14);  from  which  it  develops  into 
a  meiaphi/sical.  meaning,  to  wander  in  the  nnderiftanding.  This 
assumes  knowledge  as  the  basis  of  goodness ;  and  sin,  there- 
fore, is,  primarily,  ignorance.  In  the  Platonic  conception  of 
flin,  tntellectual  en-or  is  tlie  prominent  element.  Thus :  "  What 
then,  I  said,  is  the  result  of  all  this?  Is  not  this  the  result — 
that  other  things  are  indifferent,  and  that  wisdom  is  the  only 
good, and  ignorance  theonlyevil?"  ("Eiuhydemus,"381).  "The 
business  of  the  founders  of  the  state  will  be  to  compel  the  best 
minds  to  attain  that  knowledge  which  lias  been  already  declared 
by  us  to  be  the  greatest  of  all — they  must  continue  to  rise  until 
they  arrive  at  the  good"  ("Republic,"  vii.,  51  St).  I'lsto  repre- 
sents sin  as  the  dominance  of  the  lower  impulses  of  the  soul, 
which  is  opposed  to  nature  and  to  God  (see  "Laws,"  Is.,  863. 
"  Republic,"  i.  351).  Or  again,  as  an  inwai-d  want  of  harmony. 
"May  we  not  regard  every  living  being  as  a  puppet  of  the  gods, 
either  their  plaything  only  or  created  with  a  purpose — which 
of  the  two  we  cannot  certainly  know  ?  But  this  we  know,  that 
these  affections  in  na  are  like  coi-ds  and  strings  which  pull  lis 
different  and  opposite  ways,  and  to  opposite  actions ;  and  herein 
lies  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice  "  ("  Laws,"  i.,  644). 
He  traces  most  sins  to  the  iiitluence  of  the  body  on  the  soul. 
"  In  this  present  life,  I  reckon  that  we  make  the  nearest  ap- 
proach to  knowledge  when  we  liave  the  least  possible  commun- 
ion or  fellowship  with  the  body,  and  are  not  infected  with  the 


I 


bodilj  nature,  but  remain  pure  until  the  hour  when  God  him- 
Belf  IB  pleased  to  release  us.  And  then  tlie  foolishness  of  the 
body  will  be  cleared  away,  and  we  shall  be  pure,  and  hold  con- 
verse with  other  pure  souls,  and  know  of  ourselves  the  clear 
light  everywhere,  which  is  no  other  than  the  light  of  truth" 
("  Phiedo,"  67).* 

We  find  in  the  claeetcal  writers,  however,  the  occasional  sense 
of  the  universal  faultiness  of  mankind,  though  even  Plato  fur- 
nishes scarcely  any  traces  of  accepting  the  doctrine  of  innate  de- 
pravity. Thus  Theognis :  "  The  sun  beholds  no  wholly  good  and 
virtuous  man  among  those  who  are  now  living"  (615).  "  Bat 
haviug  become  good,  to  remain  in  a  good  state  and  be  good,  is 
not  possible,  and  is  not  granted  to  man.  God  only  has  this 
blessing;  but  man  cannot  help  being  bad  when  the  force  of 
circumstances  overpowers  him  "(Plato,  "  Protagoras,"  344), 
"How,  then  :  is  it  possible  to  be  sinless  ?  It  is  impossible ;  but 
this  is  possible,  to  strive  not  to  sin"  ("  Epictetus,"  iv.,  12,  19). 

We  deceive  ourselves  (eourow  Tr\av5>tKv).  Lit.,  we  lead 
ourselves  astray.  See  on  Ifarkxii.  34;  Matt,  xxvii.  63,64; 
Jude  13.  Not  only  do  we  err,  we  are  responsible  for  it.  The 
phrase  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  For  the  verb  as  ap- 
plied to  deceivers  of  various  kinds,  see  Matt.  xxiv.  4 ;  Apoc.  ii. 
20  ;  xiii.  14 ;  xis.  20 ;  xii.  9 ;  xx.  3.  Compare  wXdvoi  deceivers 
(2  John  7) ;  ttXoi^  error  {Jude  11  ;  1  John  iv.  6). 

The  truth.  The  whole  Goapel.  All  reality  is  in  God.  He 
is  the  only  true  God  (oK^Stvm,  John  xvii.  3 ;  see  on  John  i.  9). 
This  reality  is  incarnated  in  Christ,  the  Word  of  God,  "  the 
very  image  of  His  substance,"  and  in  His  message  to  men. 
This  message  is  the  trutfi,  a  title  not  found  in  tlie  Synoptists, 
Acta,  or  the  Apocalypse,  but  in  the  Catholic  Epistles  (Jaa.  v.  19; 
1  Pet.  i.  22  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  2),  and  in  Paul  (2  Cor.  xiii.  8  ;  Eph.  i. 
13,  etc.).  It  is  especially  characteristic  of  the  Gospel  and  Epis- 
tles of  John. 

*  The  Rtndent  mn;  proflUU;  oonault  on  Plato's  view  ot  dn,  Ackenntnii, 
"The  Christivi  Element  in  PIMo,"  p.  S7,  «q. 


320  WORD  8TUDIBH  IN  THB  HBW  TH8TAMKHT. 

Tlie  truth  is  represented  hy  Joha  objectively  and  Gubjeo- 
tivelj'. 

1.  Ohjectimdy.  In  the  person  o£  Chriet.  He  is  the  Trut/i. 
the  perfect  revelation  of  (Jod  (John  i.  18;  xiv.  6).  His  man- 
hood is  true  to  the  absolute  Isvr  of  right,  which  is  the  law  of 
love,  and  is,  therefore,  our  perfect  pattern  of  manhood. 

Tnith,  absolutely  existing  in  and  identitied  with  God,  was 
also,  in  some  measure,  diffused  in  the  world.  The  Word  was  in 
the  world,  before  as  after  the  incarnation  (John  i.  10.  See  on 
John  i.  4,  5).  Clirtst  often  treats  t!ie  truth  as  something  to 
which  He  came  to  bear  witness,  and  which  it  was  His  mission 
to  develop  into  clearer  recognition  and  expression  ^John  xviii. 
37).  This  He  did  through  the  embodiment  of  truth  in  His 
own  person  {John  i.  14, 17 ;  xiv.  6),  and  by  His  teaching  (John 
viii.  40 ;  xvii.  17) ;  and  His  work  is  carried  out  by  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  (John  xvi,  13),  sent  by  God  and  by  Christ  himself  (John 
xiv.  26 ;  xvi.  7).  Hence  the  Spirit,  even  as  Christ,  is  the  Truth 
(1  John  V.  6).  The  whole  sum  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  and 
of  the  Spirit,  is  the  Truth  (1  John  ii.  21 ;  2  John  1). 

This  truth  can  be  recognized,  apprehended,  and  appropriated 
by  man,  and  can  be  also  rejected  by  him  (John  viii.  32 ;  1  John 
ii.  21 ;  John  viii.  44). 

2.  Subjectively.  The  truth  is  lodged  in  man  by  the  Spirit,  and 
communicated  to  his  spirit  (John  xiv.  17;  xv.  26;  xvi,  13).  It 
dwells  in  man  (1  John  i.  8 ;  ii.  4 ;  2  John  2),  as  revelation,  com- 
fort, guidance,  enlightenment,  conviction,  impulse,  inspiration, 
knowledge.  It  is  the  spirit  of  truth  as  opposed  to  tfie  spirit 
of  error  (1  John  iv,  6),  It  translates  itself  into  act.  God's  true 
children  do  the  truth  (John  iii.  21 ;  1  John  i.  6).  It  bringa 
sancti&cation  and  freedom  (John  viii.  32;  xvii.  17).  See  od 
John  xiv.  6,  17. 

9.  Confess  (6fio\oy&fLev).  From  o/ioi,  one  and  the  same, 
and  XeycD,  to  say.  Hence,  primarily,  to  say  t/te  same  thing  as 
another,  and,  therefore,  to  admit  the  truth  of  an  aticusation. 
Compare  Ps.  Ii.  4.  The  exact  phrase,  ofioXoyetv  t&?  a/iapTiaii 
confess  the  sins,  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    Compare  i^o/io\oyfiaSat  tl/iopTi'ac  {TrapaTTTot/MaTa)  Matt, 


_J 


iii.  6 ;  Mark  i.  5  ;  Jae.  v.  16.     See  oa  Matt.  iii.  6 ; 
xxii.  6 ;  Acts  xix.  18 ;  Jbb.  t.  16. 

Sins.  Note  the  plaral,  as  compared  with  the  eingtilar,  sin,  in 
the  previous  verse.  See  note.  The  plural  indicates  tliat  the 
confession  is  lo  be  upeeijic  as  well  as  getieral.  Augustine's 
words  are  exactly  to  the  point,  but  his  play  upon  j>ardon  and 
confess cuavoi  be  reproduced  in  English.  "Vis  ut  illeignoscaU 
Tu  agnoace."    Do  you  wish  Him  toforgi/m  t   Do  you  confess. 

Faithful  (TTtoTos).  True  to  Hie  own  nature  and  promises; 
keeping  faith  with  Himself  and  with  man.  The  word  is  ap- 
plied to  God  as  fulfilling  His  own  promises  (Heb.  x.  23 ;  xi.  11) ; 
as  fulfilling  the  purpose  for  which  He  has  called  men  (1  Thess.  v. 
3i ;  1  Cor.  i.  9) ;  as  responding  with  guardianship  to  the  trust 
reposed  in  Him  by  men  (I  Cor.  x.  13  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  19).  "  He 
ahideth  faithful.  He  cannot  deny  Himself"  (2  Tim.  ii.  13). 
The  same  term  is  applied  to  OhriBt  (2  Thess.  iii.  3  ;  Heb.  iii.  2 ; 
ii.  17).     God's  faithfulness  is  here  spoken  of  not  only  as  eseea-  i 

tial  to  His  own  being,  but  as  faithfulness  toward  us;  "fidelity 
to  that  nature  of  truth  and  light,  related  to  His  own  essence, 
which  rules  in  us  as  far  as  we  confess  our  sins"  (Ebrard).  The 
essence  of  the  message  of  life  is  fellowship  with  God  and  with 
His  children  (ver.  3).  God  is  light  (ver.  5).  Walking  in  the  light 
we  \i&yB  fellowakip,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  constantly  ap- 
plied to  cleanse  us  from  sin.  which  is  ddrkness  and  which  inter- 
rupts fellowship.  \i  we  walk  in  darkness  we  do  not  the  truth. 
If  we  deny  our  sin  the  trnth  is  not  in  us.  If  we  confess  our 
sins,  "  God,  by  whom  we  were  called  unto  the  feUowship  of  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  \afaitl\ftd"  (1  Cor.  i.  9)  to  forgive 
our  sins,  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness,  and  thus  to  re- 
store and  maintain  the  interrupted  fellowship. 

Just  (&'ueau><i].  Rev.,  rigfUeoiis.  From  Zlitri  right.  The 
term  is  applied  both  to  God  and  to  Christ.  See  Apoc.  xvi.  5 ; 
John  xvii.  25;  1  John  ii.  1;  iii.  7;  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  The  two 
woris,  faithful  and  righteous,  imply  each  other.  They  unite 
in  a  true  conception  of  God's  character.     God,  who  is  absolute  i 

Vol..  II.— 21 


332  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  ITEW  TESTAMENT. 

righiness,  mnst  be  faiiAful  to  His  own  nature,  and  Ilia  right 
eiiud  dealing  with  men  who  partake  of  that  nature  and  walk  iti 
feiloweliip  with  lliin,  is  simply  fidelity  to  Himself,  "lliglit- 
eoiisiiese  is  truth  passing  into  action  "  (Westcott). 

To  forgive  {^a  ^fi)-  See  John  xx.  23;  1  John  iL  12. 
Priraarily  the  word  means  to  send  away,  dlsmiaa ;  hence  of 
sida,  to  remit,  as  a  debt.  Clea/nsing  (ver.  7)  contemplates  th& 
jiorsonal  character  of  the  sinner;  remiseW7t,  his  acte.  See  on 
Matt.  vi.  12;  Jas.  v.  15.  To  forgive  is,  literally,  that  he  may 
forgive.  On  John's  use  of  Iva  in  order  that,  see  on  John  xv. 
13 ;  \iv.  31.  Forgiveness  answers  to  the  essential  ^rpoae  of 
Ilia  faithful  and  righteous  being. 

Our  sins  {riv  a-futprlaii).  Sin  is  defined  by  John  sa  avoftla, 
lii'wleasneas.  Compare  Kom.  vi.  19.  A.  V.,  transgress lati  of  the 
law  (1  John  iii.  4).  It  may  be  regarded  either  as  condition  or 
as  act ;  either  with  reference  to  the  normal,  divine  ideal  of  man- 
hood, or  to  an  external  law  imposed  upon  man  by  God.  Any 
departure  from  the  normal  ideal  of  man  as  created  in  God's 
image  puts  man  out  of  true  relation  and  harmony  with  his  true 
self,  and  therefore  with  God  and  with  his  fellow-man.  He  thus 
comes  into  false,  abnormal  relation  with  right,  love,  truth,  and 
light.  He  walks  in  darkness  and  forfeits  fellowship  with  God. 
Lawlessness  is  darkness,  lovelessiiess,  selfishness.  This  false 
principle  takes  shape  in  act.  He  doeth  (xoteZ)  or  comviitteth  sin. 
Jle  doeth  laioletaness  (t^v  uvoiiiav  irotet;  1  John  iii.  4,  8).  He 
transgresses  the  words  {p^futra,  John  xvii.  8)  of  God,  and  His 
commandments  {ivroXai,  1  John  ii.  3)  as  included  and  expressed 
in  His  one  word  or  message  {Xoyos,  1  John  ii.  7,  14).  Similarly 
the  verb  aftapraveiv  to  sin,  may  signify  either  to  le  sinful  (1 
John  iii.  6),  or  to  c0m7n.it  sin  (1  John  i.  10).  Sin,  regarded  both 
as  principle  and  act,  is  designated  by  John  by  the  term  afmpTia. 
The  principle  expressed  in  the  specific  acts  is  ^  a/MtpTia  (John 
i,  39),  which  occurs  in  this  sense  in  Paul,  but  not  in  the  Synop- 
tists,  nor  in  Acts.  Many  of  the  terms  used  for  sin  by  other 
New  Testament  writers  are  wanting  in  John  ;  as  atreffeia  un- 
godliness (see  on  Jude  14) ;  dat^elv  to  he  ungodly  (2  Pet.  ii.  6) ; 


b 


^ 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  323 

wapafiaJveiv  to  trangreM ;  irapdficurif:  transgression;  irofOr 
^drrf^  transgressor  (see  on  Matt.  vi.  14 ;  Jae.  ii.  11) ;  irapavo- 
lieiv  to  act  contrary  to  the  la/u)  ;  ira^pavofjUa  breach  of  law  (see 
on  Acts  xxiii.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  16) ;  irapdwrwfui  trespass  (see  on 
Matt.  vi.  14). 

To  cleanse.    See  on  ver.  7. 

Unrighteousness  (oBiKiasi).  With  reference  to  S/icoto? 
righteous.  The  righteous  One  who  calls  ns  into  fellowship  with 
Himself,  purges  away  the  tmrighteousness  which  is  contrary  to 
His  natnre,  and  which  renders  fellowship  impossible.  The 
word  occurs  in  John's  writings  only  at  John  viL  18 ;  1  John  v. 
17. 

10.  We  have  not  sinned  (ou^  ^fiafyn^fca/jLoi).  Committed 
sins.  Sin  regarded  as  an  act.  The  sta^  is  expressed  by  ofiap^ 
riav  ovK  expfiev  we  home  no  (or  not)  si/n  (ver.  8). 

We  make  Him  {^oiovyu^  avrov).  A  phrase  characteristic  of 
John.     See  John  v.  18 ;  viii.  63 ;  x.  33 ;  xix.  7,  12. 

His  word  (o  X0709  avrov).  Not  the  personal  Word,  as  John 
i.  1,  but  the  divine  message  of  the  Gospel.  See  Luke  v.  1 ; 
viii.  11 ;  Acts  iv.  31 ;  vi.  2,  7,  etc.  Compare  "  the  truth  is  not 
in  us  "  (ver.  8).  The  triUh  is  the  substance  of  the  word.  The 
word  carries  the  truth.  The  word  both  moves  the  man  (John 
viii.  31,  32)  and  abides  in  him  (John  v.  38 ;  viii.  37).  The 
man  also  abides  in  the  word  (John  viii.  31). 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  My  little  children  {reicvla  fiov).  Tetcvlov,  little  chUdj 
diminutive  of  riicvov  child^  occurs  in  John  xiii.  33 ;  1  John  ii. 
12, 28 ;  iii.  7, 18 ;  iv.  4  ;  v.  21.  This  particular  phrase  is  found 
only  here  (best  texts  omit  my  in  1  John  iii.  18).  Used  as  a  term 
of  affection,  or  possibly  with  reference  to  the  writer's  advanced 
age.     Compare  Christ's  word,  irod^ia  children  (John  xxi.  5) 


324  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NKW  TKSTAMEST. 

which  John  also  uses  (1  John  il.  13,  18).  In  the  familiar  storjr 
of  John  and  the  young  convert  who  became  a  robber,  it  is  re- 
lated that  the  aged  apostle  repaired  to  the  robber's  haunt,  and 
tliat  the  young  man,  on  seeing  him,  took  to  flight.  John,  for- 
getful of  his  age,  ran  after  him,  crying:  "O  my  son,  why  dost 
thou  fly  from  me  thy  father !  Thou,  an  armed  man, — I,  an  old, 
defenceless  one!  Have  pity  upon  me!  My  eon,  do  not  fear! 
There  is  still  hope  o£  life  for  thee.  I  wish  myself  to  take  the 
burden  of  all  before  Christ.  If  it  is  necessary,  I  will  die  for 
thee,  as  Christ  died  for  us.  Stop!  Believe!  It  is  Christ  who 
sends  me."  * 

I  write.  More  personal  than  we  vrrite  (i.  4),  and  thus  better 
suiting  the  form  of  address,  my  litUe  children. 

If  any  man  sin,  we  have.  The  change  from  the  indeflnite 
third  person,  any  man,  to  the  first  person,  we  have,  is  eignifl- 
cant.  By  the  loe  have,  John  assumes  the  possibility  of  sinful 
acta  on  the  part  of  Christians,  and  of  himself  in  common  with 
them,  and  their  common  need  of  the  intervention  of  the  divine 
Advocate.  So  Augustine:  "He  said,  not  'ye  have,'  nor  'ye 
have  WW,'  nor  'ye  have  Christ  himself ; '  but  he  put  Christ,  not 
himself,  and  said  'ww  have,'  and  not  '■ye  have.'  He  preferred 
to  place  himself  in  the  number  of  sinners,  so  that  he  might 
have  Christ  for  his  advocate,  rather  than  to  put  himself  as  the 
advocate  instead  of  Christ,  and  to  be  found  among  the  prond 
who  are  destined  to  condemnation." 

An  advocate  {trap6jc\irTov).     See  on  John  xiv.  16, 

With  the  Father  (irpos  tov  ■jraripa).  See  on  %cith  God,  John 
].  1.  An  active  relation  is  indicated.  On  the  terms  the  Father 
and  my  Father,  see  on  John  iv.  21. 


The   righteous.     Compare  righteoua,  i. 
article  in  the  Greek.     Jeaua  Christ  righlanta. 


I.    There  is  no 
See  on  i.  9. 


•  The  itorj  in»j 

vol.  i.,  p.  08. 


b«  foanl  It  length  in  Oodet'i  "  CommsiiUrj  on  John," 


1 


FIBST  RFISTUI  OP  JOHN.  825 

3.  And  He  (iciu  airo^).     The  Ha  is  emphatic:  thai  same 
/esus:  Be  himself. 

The  propitiation  {tKaafio^).  Onlj  here  and  iv.  10.  From 
tKdoKOfjMi  to  nppease,  to  conciliate  to  otie^s  self,  which  occura 
i^iike  xviii.  13  ;  Ueb.  ii.  17.  The  noiiu  rneaiia  original]^  an  ap- 
j>easi7ig  or  propitiating,  and  passes,  through  Alexandrine  usage, 
into  the  sense  of  the  means  of  appeasing^  as  here.  Tlie  construct- 
ion is  to  be  particularly  noted  ;  for,  in  tlie  vuitter  of  {irepi)  our 
simi;  the  genitive  case  of  tliat  for  whic-h  pmpiLiation  is  made. 
In  Heb.  ii.  17,  the  accusative  case,  also  of  tlie  sins  to  be  pro- 
pitiated. In  classical  usage,  on  the  other  hand,  the  habitual 
construction  is  the  accusative  (direct  objective  case),  of  theper- 
son  propitiated.  So  in  Homer,  of  the  gods.  &e6v  iSAaieeadai 
is  to  make  a  god  propitious  to  one.  See  "  Liad,"  i.,  386,  472. 
Of  men  whom  one  wishes  to  conciliate  by  divine  honors  after 
deatii.  So  Herodotus,  of  Philip  of  Crotona.  "  His  beantj 
gained  him  honors  at  the  hands  of  the  Egestaaans  which  they 
never  accorded  to  any  one  else ;  for  they  raised  a  hero-temple 
over  his  grave,  and  they  still  projntiate  him  {avrov  tKaaKovrai) 
with  sacrifices"  (v..  47).  Again,  "The  Parians,  having  pro^ 
2>itiaied  Thernistodes  {&efU<TTQKkia  iKaadfifvoC)  with  gifts, 
escaped  the  visits  of  the  army  "  (viii.,  112).  The  change  from 
this  construction  shows,  to  quote  Canon  Westcott,  "  that  the 
scriptural  conception  of  the  verb  is  not  that  of  appeasing  one 
who  is  angry,  with  a  personal  feeling,  against  the  offender ;  but 
of  altering  the  character  of  that  which,  from  without,  occasions 
a  necessary  alienation,  and  interposes  an  inevitable  obstacle  to 
^  fellowship.      Such    phrases   as   'propitiating   God,'  and  God 

^B  '  being  reconciled '  are  foreign  to  the  language  of  the  New 

^1  Testament.     Man  is  reconciled  (2  Cor.  v.  16  sqq. ;  Rom.  v. 

^1  10  sq.).     There  is  a  propitiation  in  the  matter  of  the  sin  or  of 

^1  the  sinner." 

H  Thi 

■  for 


For  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  {irepi  oKou  tov  KOfffusv). 
The  sins  of  (A.  V.,  italicised)  should  be  omitted ;  as  in  Rev., 
for  the  whole  worUl.  Compare  1  John  iv.  14 ;  John  iv.  42 ; 
xii.  32.     "The  propitiation  is  as  wide  as  the  sin"  (Bengel), 


326  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THE  NEW  TESTAMEETT. 

If  lueii  do  uot  experieuce  its  benefit,  the  fault  is  aot  ia  its  ef- 
ficacy. Dusterdieck  (cited  by  Uutiier)  saye,  "  The  pi-opitiatiua 
has  its  real  efficacy  fur  the  wiiule  world  ;  to  believers  it  brings 
life,  to  unbelievers  death."  Luther :  "  It  is  a  pateiit  fact  that 
thou  too  art  a  part  of  the  whole  world  ;  so  that  thiue  heart  can- 
not deceive  itself,  and  think,  the  Lord  died  for  Peter  and  Paul, 
but  not  for  me."     On  Koa^/tav  world,  see  on  John  i.  9. 

3.  Hereby  {iv  tovt^).  Lit.,  m  this.  Characteristic  of  John. 
See  John  xiii.  35  ;  xv,  8 ;  xvi  30 ;  1  John  ii.  5 ;  iiL  24 ;  iv. 
13  ;  V.  2  ;  iii.  16 ;  iii.  10 ;  iv,  2.  The  expression  points  to 
what  follows,  "  if  we  keep  His  commandments,"  yet  with  a 
covert  reference  to  that  idea  as  generally  implied  in  the  pre- 
viouB  words  concerning  fellowship  with  God  and  walking  ia 
the  light. 

We  know  {yivaaicofi^p).    Or,  jyerceive.    By  experience,  from 

day  to  day ;  distinguished  from  olhafiev  we  ktMW,  expressing 
absolute,  immediate  knowledge  of  a  fact  once  for  all.  Com- 
pare 1  John  iii.  2. 

That  we  know  {oti  iyvwKafiev).  Or,  more  literally,  havs 
come  to  know.  John  does  not  use  the  compound  forms  hrirft»- 
oxrKtiv  and  eirlrjvaMTt-i  (see  on  Matt,  vii,  16.  See  Luke  i.  4; 
Acts  iv.  13  ;  Rom.  i.  28  ;  Eph.  i.  17,  etc.),  nor  the  kindred  word 
rfiStaK  kiiowl^ilge  (Luke  i,  77  ;  Rom.  ii.  20.  etc.). 

We  keep  His  commandments  {ra^  hn-oha'i  avrov rqpaiiev). 
A  phrase  peculiar  to  John  and  occurring  elsewhere  only  Matt, 
xix.  17  ;  1  Tim,  vi.  14.  In  1  Cor.  vii.  19,  we  find  tij/mjo-w 
hnoXSiV  the  keeping  of  the  commandmejita.  On  -nipia)  to  keep^ 
Bee  on  1  Pet.  L  5. 


4.  A  liar.    Compare  we  lie,  i.  6. 


In  him  (^  rovTif).    Emphatic.     lit.,  in  thia  one  the  InUK  it 
not.     See  on  i.  8. 


i 


FTRHT  BPISTLB  OP  JOHN. 


327 


5.  Keepeth  His  word  (tij^  airroO  tw  \6yov).  Note  the 
changed  phrase  :  tttorU  for  ciiinmandinenla.  The  word  is  the 
revelatioQ  regarded  as  a  whole,  which  iuchides  all  the  separate 
commandmeiUa  or  i/^unctioiie.  See  the  use  of  Xoyoi  word,  aud 
et^oXiJ  jn'ecej>(,  iu  Johu  xiv.  21-24. 

Is  the  tove  of  God  perfected  (^  opfdirrj  toD  6eov  rereKeua- 
TO*).  Rev.,  rendering  the  perfect  tense  more  closely,  hui/i 
tk&  love  of  God  been  jKrfected.  The  change  in  the  form  of  this 
antithetic  clanse  is  striking,  lie  who  claims  to  know  God,  yet 
lives  in  disobedience,  is  a  liar.  We  should  expect  as  an  offset 
to  this  :  lie  that  keepeth  His  commandments  is  of  the  tnUh  ■ 
or,  the  truth  w  in  hijn.  Instead  we  have,  "  In  him  has  tlie  love 
of  God  been  perfected."  In  other  words,  the  obedient  child  of 
God  ifi  characterized,  not  by  any  representative  trait  or  quality 
of  his  own  personality,  bnt  merely  as  the  subject  of  the  work 
of  divine  love :  as  the  sphere  in  which  that  love  accomplishes 
its  perfect  work. 

The  phrase  fj  arfdirq  tow  Sew  the  love  of  God,  may  mean 
either  ifie  love  which  God  shores,  or  thu  looe  of  which  God  is  the 
offset,  or  the  love  which  is  chariKAeristic  of  Oo<i  whether  mani- 
fested by  Himself  or  by  His  obedient  child  through  His  Spirit. 
John^s  usage  is  not  decisive  like  Paul's,  according  to  which  the 
love  of  God  habitually  means  the  love  which  proceeds  from 
and  is  manifested  by  God.  The  exact  phrase,  the  love  of  God 
or  ilie  love  of  the  Father,  is  found  in  iii.  16  ;  iv.  9,  in  the  un- 
doubted sense  of  the  love  of  Gwi  to  men.  The  same  sense  is 
intended  in  iii.  1,  9,  16,  though  differently  expressed.  The 
s  doubtful  in  ii.  5  ;  iii.  17;  iv,  12.  Men's  love  to  God 
is  clearly  meant  in  ii.  15  ;  v.  3.  The  phrase  occurs  only  twice 
in  the  Gospels  (Luke  xi.  42  ;  John  v.  42),  and  in  both  cases  the 
J  is  doubtful.  Some,  as  Ebrard,  combine  the  two,  and 
explain  the  love  of  God  as  the  mutual  i-elation  of  love  het/ween 
God  and  tnen. 

It  is  not  possible  to  settle  the  point  decisively,  but  I  incline 
to  the  view  that  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  love  of  God  as  ex- 
poimded  by  John  is  tfte  love  which  God  has  made  known  and 
which  answers  to  His  nature.     In  favor  of  this  is  the  general 


A 


838  WORD  STDDIBB  IK  THB  NBW  TBBTAHENT. 

QBSge  of  irf6/Tt}  lam,  in  the  New  Testament,  with  the  subjective 
genitive.*  The  object  is  more  commonly  expressed  by  e«  to- 
warda,  or  to.  See  1  Thesa.  iii.  12 ;  Col.  i.  4 ;  1  Fet.  iv.  8. 
Still  stronger  is  John's  treatment  of  the  subject  in  eh.  iv. 
Here  we  have,  ver.  9,  the  manifettation,  of  the  love  of  God  in 
OS  (ec  ^M*")-  By  our  life  in  Christ  and  our  love  to  God  we  are 
a  manifestation  of  God's  love.  Directly  following  Uiis  is  a 
definition  of  the  essential  natare  of  love.  "  In  this  is  love ; 
Le.,  herein  consists  love :  not  that  we  have  loved  God,  but  that 
lit  loved  us  "  (ver.  10).  Onr  mutual  love  is  a  proof  that  God 
dwells  in  us.  God  dwelling  in  us,  Uis  love  is  perfected  in  ns 
(ver.  12),  The  latter  clause,  it  would  seem,  must  be  explained 
according  to  ver.  10.  Then  {ver.  16),  "We  have  known  and 
believed  the  love  that  God  hath  in  us "  (see  on  John  xvi.  22, 
on  the  phrase  have  love).  "  God  is  love  ; "  that  is  His  nature, 
and  lie  imparts  this  nature  to  be  the  sphere  in  which  His  chil- 
dren dwell,  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God." 
Finally,  our  love  is  engendered  by  His  love  to  us.  "  We  love 
Uim  because  He  first  loved  ns  "  (ver,  19). 

In  harmony  with  this  is  John  xv.  9.  "  As  the  Father  loved 
me,  I  also  loved  you.  Continue  ye  in  my  love."  My  lov« 
must  be  explained  by  /  loved  you.  This  is  the  same  idea  of 
divine  love  as  the  ^here  or  elemeni  of  renewed  being;  and 
this  idea  is  placed,  as  in  the  passage  we  are  considering,  in 
direct  connection  with  the  keeping  of  the  divine  eoramand- 
ments.  "  If  ye  keep  my  commandments  ye  shall  abide  in  ray 
love." 

This  interpretation  does  not  exclude  man's  love  to  God.  On 
the  contrary,  it  includes  it.  The  love  which  God  has,  is  re- 
vealed as  the  lo'oe  of  God  in  the  love  of  His  children  towards 
Him,  no  less  than  in  His  manifestations  of  love  to  them.  The 
idea  of  divine  love  is  thus  complex.  Love,  in  its  very  essence, 
is  reciprocal.  Its  perfect  ideal  requires  two  parties.  It  la  not 
enough  to  tell  ns,  as  a  bare,  abstract  truth,  that  God  is  love. 
The  truth  must  be  rounded  and  filled  out  for  us  by  the  apprecia- 


),  tf  Ood,  tf  On  Father,  raprMenti  God  aa  ths  fu^M 


I 


FIRST  BFI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  ^       829 

ble  exertion  of  divine  love  npon  an  object,  and  bj  the  response 
of  the  object.  The  love  of  Ood  is  perfected  or  completed  bj  the 
perfect  establishment  of  the  relation  of  love  between  God  and 
roan.  When  man  loves  perfectly,  his  love  is  the  love  of  Grod 
shed  abroad  in  his  heart.  His  love  owes  both  its  origin  and 
its  nature  to  the  love  of  Ood. 

The  word  verily  {aKf)l^ik)  is  never  used  bj  John  as  a  mere 
formula  of  affirmation,  but  has  the  meaning  of  a  qualitative 
adverb,  expressing  not  merely  the  actual  existence  of  a  thing, 
but  its  existence  in  a  manner  most  absolutely  corresponding  to 
oKfj^ui  truth.  Compare  John  i.  48 ;  viii.  31.  Hath  been 
perfected.  John  is  presenting  the  idecU  of  life  in  God.  ^^  This 
is  the  love  of  Otod  that  we  keep  Uis  commandments."  There- 
fore whosoever  keepeth  God's  wordy  His  message  in  its  en- 
tirety, realizes  the  perfect  relation  of  love. 

We  are  in  Hinfi.  Compare  Acts  xvii.  28.  See  note  on  iL 
15. 

6.  He  abideth  in  Him  {iv  ain-^  fUveiv).  To  aibide  in  God 
is  a  more  common  expression  with  John  than  to  be  in  Oody  and 
marks  an  advance  in  thought  The  phrase  is  a  favorite  one 
with  John.  See  John  xv.  4  sqq. ;  vi.  56 ;  1  John  ii.  24,  27,  28; 
iii.  6,  24 ;  iv.  12  sq. ;  15  sq.  Bengel  notes  the  gradation  in  the 
three  phrases  '^  to  know  Hiniy  to  be  in  Himy  to  abide  in  Him} 
knowledge,  fellowship,  constancy." 

Ought  (o<^/X€i).  An  obligation,  put  as  a  debt.  See  Luke 
xvii.  10,  and  on  debtSy  Matt.  vi.  12.  The  word  expresses  a 
special,  personal  obligation,  and  not  as  hel  m/usty  an  obligation 
in  the  nature  of  things.  See  John  xx.  9,  and  compare  1  John 
iii.  16  ;  iv.  11 ;  3  John  8. 

He  {iK€ivo^).  Always  of  Christ  in  the  Epistles  of  John. 
See  iK€lvTf<;,  referring  to  ofJMprla  sin,  1  John  v.  16. 

7.  Brethren  (oSeX^l).  The  correct  reading  is  Arfamfrot 
beloved.  The  first  occurrence  of  this  title,  which  is  suggested 
by  the  previous  words  concerning  the  relation  of  love. 


880  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

No  new  commandment  {ouk  imoXijp  Kaivrjv).    The  Ilev, 

properly,  places  tliese  worda  first  iu  the  sentence  as  emphatic, 
the  point  of  tlie  verse  lying  in  the  antithesis  between  the  new 
ant]  the  old.     On  Tiew,  see  on  Matt,  xxvi,  2!). 

Old  {traXai^v).  Four  worda  are  need  in  the  New  Testament 
for  oitl  or  eUier.  Of  these  yipav  and  TrpttT^vrepo^  refer  merely 
to  the  age  of  men,  or,  the  latter,  to  official  position  baaed  pri- 
marily upon  age.  llence  the  official  term  elder.  Between  the 
two  othera,  li-pj(aio'!  and  xaXato?,  the  distinction  is  not  sharply 
matutaiued.  'Ap^aitxt  empliasizes  the  reaching  back  to  a  be- 
ginning {ap-)(fi').  ThuE  Satan  is  "  that  old  (op^oioi;)  serpent," 
whose  evil  work  was  c<.>eval  with  the  beginning  of  time  (Apoc. 
xii.  y ;  XX,  2).  The  world  before  the  flood  is  "  tlie  old  (apj(a'u»i) 
world"  (2  Pet.  ii.  5),  Mnaaon  wa8"an  t>W(iipxa*w) disciple;" 
not  aged,  but  having  been  a  disciple  from  the  beginning  (Acta 
xxi.  16).  Sopiioclca,  in  "Trachinise,"  555.  givea  both  words. 
"  I  had  an  old  {■ira'Kaiov)  gift,"  i.e.,  received  long  ago,  "  from 
the  0^  (dp^^aiou)  Centanr."  The  Centaur  ie  conceived  as  an 
old-world  creature,  belonging  to  a  state  of  thin^  which  has 
passed  away.  It  carries,  therefore,  the  idea  oi  old-fashioned ; 
peculiar  to  an  obsolete  state  of  things. 

naKauK  carries  the  sense  of  woiii  out  by  time,  injury,  sorrow, 
or  other  causes.  Thus  the  oW garment  (Matt.  ix.  16)  is  iraKaiiiv. 
So  the  ohl  wine-skins  (Matt.  ix.  17).  The  old  men  of  a  living 
generation  compared  with  the  young  of  the  same  generation 
are  waXatot.  In  troKaio^  the  simple  conception  of  time  dom- 
inates. In  d[y)(iuoi  there  ia  often  a  snggestion  of  a  character 
iinswering  to  the  remote  age. 

The  commandment  is  here  called  old  because  it  belonged  to 
the  first  stage  of  the  Chriatian  church.  Believera  had  had  it 
from  the  beginning  of  their  Christian  faith. 

Commandment.  The  commandment  of  love.  Compare 
John  xiii.  3i.  Tiiis  commandment  ia  fulfilled  in  walking  as 
Chriat  walked.     Compare  EpL.  v.  1,  2. 

S.  New  commandment.  The  commandment  of  love  ia 
both  old  and  ncv.     Old,  because  John's  readers  h&ve  had  it 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  331 

from  the  beginning  of  their  Christian  experience.  New^  be- 
canse,  in  the  unfolding  of  Christian  experience,  it  has  developed 
new  power,  meaning,  and  obligation,  and  closer  correspondence 
"  with  the  facts  of  Christ's  life,  with  the  crowning  mystery  of 
Ilis  passion,  and  with  the  facts  of  the  Christian  life." 

Which  thing  is  true  (2  l<mv  dXi;.^).  The  expression  which 
ihingy  or  th^it  which,  refers  either  to  the  comtnandment  of  love^ 
or  to  the  fact  stated,  viz.,  that  the  old  commandment  is  new. 
The  fact  that  the  old  commandment  is  new  is  trae  in  Him  and 
in  us.     On  the  whole  I  prefer  this. 

In  Him  and  in  us.  For  tcSj  read  you.  The  fact  that  the 
old  commandment  is  new,  is  true  in  Sim  (Christ),  since  He 
gave  it  as  a  new  commandment,  and  illustrated  it  by  His  word 
and  example.  It  is  true  in  youj  since  you  did  not  receive  it 
until  Christ  gave  it,  and  since  the  person  and  life  of  Christ  are 
appealing  to  you  in  new  lights  and  with  fresh  power  as  your 
Christian  life  develops.     In  Him,  points  back  to  as  He  walked. 

Because.    Explaining  the  apparent  paradox. 

The  darkness  {fi  aicorria).  See  on  John  i.  5.  Gk)d  is  light} 
and  whatever  is  not  in  fellowship  with  God  is  therefore  dark- 
ness. In  all  cases  where  the  word  is  not  used  of  physical  dark- 
ness, it  means  moral  insensibility  to  the  divine  light;  moral 
blindness  or  obtuseness.  Compare  John  viii.  12 ;  xii.  35,  46 ; 
1  John  ii.  9,  11. 

Is  past  {irapdryercu).  Wrong.  The^>a«nn^  is  not  represented 
as  accomplished,  but  as  in  progress.  Bev.,  rightly  rendering 
the  present  tense,  is  passing  anjoay. 

The  true  light  (to  ^m  to  aKf\l^iv6v\  Lit.,  the  light,  the 
true  (light).  See  on  that  eternal  life  (i.  2).  True,  not  as  dis- 
tinguished from  false,  but  as  answering  to  the  true  ideal.  See 
on  John  i.  9.  The  true  light  is  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ. 
See  on  1  John  i.  5. 


Shineth  {tpaivet,).  See  on  John  i.  5.  Compare  Apoc.  i.  16 ; 
riii.  12;  xxi.  23;  2  Pet,  i.  19.  See  also  Rom.  xiii.  11  sqq. ; 
Tit.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  4. 

9.  Hateth  (jiur&p).  The  sharp  issue  is  maintained  here  as 
in  Christ's  words,  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me  "  (Loke 
xi.  23).  Men  fall  into  two  classes,  those  who  are  in  fellowship 
with  God,  and  therefore  walk  in  light  and  love,  and  those  who 
are  not  in  fellowship  with  God,  and  tlierefore  walk  in  darkness 
and  hatred.  "A  direct  opposition,"  says  Bengel ;  where  love 
is  not,  there  is  hatred.  "  The  heart  is  not  einptj."  See  John 
iii.  20 ;  vii.  7 ;  xv.  18  sqq. ;  xvii.  14.  The  word  hate  is  opposed 
both  to  the  love  of  natural  affection  {•^'Keiv),  and  to  the  more 
discriminating  sentiment — hve  founded  on  a  just  estimate  {arfa- 
trav).  For  tlie  former  see  John  xii.  23  ;  xv.  18,  19 ;  compare 
Luke  xiv.  26.  For  the  latter,  1  John  iii.  14,  15 ;  iv.  20 ;  Matt. 
V.  43  ;  Ti.  24  ;  Eph.  v.  28,  29.  "  In  the  former  case,  hatred^ 
which  may  become  a  moral  duty,  involves  the  subjection  of  an 
instinct.  In  the  latter  case  it  expresses  a  general  determina- 
tion of  character  "  (Westcott). 

His  brother  {jov  aSeXijxiv).  His  fellow-Christian.  The  sin- 
gular, hTother,  is  characteristic  of  this  Epistle.  See  w.  10,  11 ; 
iii.  10,  15,  17;  iv.  20,  21 ;  v.  16.  Christians  are  called  in  the 
New  Testament,  Christians  (Acts  xi.  26;  xxvi.  28 ;  1  Pet.  iv. 
16),  mainly  by  tliose  outside  of  the  Christian  circle.  Discipl^y 
applied  to  all  followers  of  Christ  (John  ii.  11 ;  vi.  61)  and 
strictly  to  the  twelve  (John  xiii.  5  sqq.).  In  Acts  xix.  1,  to 
those  who  had  received  only  John's  baptism.  Not  found  in 
John's  Epistles  nor  in  the  Apocalypse.  Brethren.  The  firrt  \ 
title  given  to  the  body  of  believers  after  the  Ascension  (Acts  L  ] 
15,  where  the  true  reading  is  aZeK^v  h-ethren,  for  ixa^TOiv 
disinjtl^s).  See  Acts  ix.  30 ;  x.  23  ;  xi.  29 ;  1  Tliess.  iv.  10 ;  v. 
26  ;  1  John  iii.  14 ;  3  John  5,  10 ;  John  xxi.  23.  Peter  has  ^ 
aSfKifio-n}'!  the  brotherhood  (1  Pet.  ii.  17;  v.  9).  The  helievert. 
Under  three  forms:  The  helievers  (oi  TrKrrol;  Acts  x.  45 ;  1 
Tim.  iv.  12);  they  t/iat  believe  {ol  TviuTevovTe^;  1  Pet.  ii.  7 ;  1 
TliesE.  i.  7;  Eph.  i.  19);  they  that  believed  {oi  Trurreuffarrcc ; 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  .    888 

Acts  ii.  44 ;  iv.  32 ;  Heb.  iv.  3).  The  saints  {oi  iyioi)  ;  charac- 
teristic of  Paul  and  the  Apocalypse.  Foar  times  in  the  Acts 
(ix.  13,  32,  41 ;  xxvi.  10),  and  once  in  Jude  (3).  Also  Heb.  vL 
10  ;  xiii.  24.  In  Paul,  1  Cor.  vi.  1 ;  xiy.  33 ;  Eph.  i.  1, 15,  etc. 
In  Apocalypse  v.  8 ;  viii.  3,  4;  xi.  18,  etc. 

Until  now  (fo9  ofni).  Though  the  light  has  been  increasing, 
and  though  he  may  claim  that  he  has  been  in  the  light  from 
the  first  The  phrase  occurs  in  John  ii.  10;  v.  17;  xvi.  24; 
and  is  used  by  Paul,  1  Cor.  iv.  13 ;  viii.  7 ;  xv.  6. 

10.  Abideth  (jiivei).    See  on  ver.  6.    Compare  ver.  9,  is  in. 

Occasion  of  stumbling  {aKtipSaXov).  See  on  offend^  Matt 
y.  29.  For  the  image  in  John,  see  John  vi.  61 ;  xi.  9  ;  xvL  1 ; 
Apoc.  ii.  14.  The  meaning  is  not  that  he  gives  no  occasion  of 
stumbling  to  others,  but  that  there  is  none  in  his  own  way. 
See  John  xi.  9,  10. 

11.  Is — walketh — whither.  The  condition  of  him  who 
hates  is  viewed  as  related  to  hemg^  €U!tiony  and  tendency. 

He  goeth  {tnraryei).  Or,  is  going.  See  on  John  vi.  21 ;  viii. 
21. 

Hath  blinded  {MjiKMoev).  For  the  image  see  Is.  vi.  10. 
See  on  closed^  Matt.  xiii.  15.  Compare  John  i.  5,  and  see  note 
on  KariXafiev,  overtook;  John  xii.  35,  40.  The  aorist  tense, 
blindedj  indicates  a  past,  definite,  decisive  act.  When  the  dark- 
ness overtook,  it  blinded.  The  blindness  is  no  new  state  into 
which  he  has  come. 

12.  Little  children.  See  on  ver.  1,  and  John  L  12.  Koft 
children  in  age,  but  addressed  to  the  readers  generally. 

Name.    See  on  John  i.  12 ;  ii.  23. 

13.  Fathers.    Indicating  age  and  authority. 


334  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Have  known  (eyvtoicaTe).  Hev.,  correctly,  ye  kiu>w.  Knowl- 
edge ia  the  characteriBtic  otJatAers/  knowledge  as  the  fmit  of 
experience.     Ye  have  perceived,  therefore  ye  know. 

Have  overcome  {vevue^Kare).  Compare  John  xvi.  33.  The 
image  is  characteristic  of  the  Apocalypse  and  First  Epistle. 
See  Apoc.  ii.  7,  11,  17,  26 ;  xii.  11 ;  xxL  7 ;  1  John  ii.  li ;  iv. 
4 ;  V.  4,  5. 

The  evil  one  {tov  Tovtjpov).  See  on  wichednesa,  Mark  vii. 
22 ;  evils,  Luke  iii.  19  ;  evil  spirits,  Luke  vii.  21.  The  prince 
»E  darkness  is  styled  by  John  o  £taj3o\o«  Ute false  ac<yus<T  (John 
viii.  44;  xiii.  2;  1  John  iii.  8,  10.  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1):  6  Sa- 
Tava.<;  StUan,  the  adversary  (John  xiii.  27;  compare  o  xar^yap 
the  accuser,  properly,  in  court,  Apoc.  xii.  10) :  o  Trovifp6<i  the 
evil  07ie  {5ohn  xvii.  15;  1  John  ii.  13,  14;  iii.  13;  v.  18,  19): 
0  ap)(av  TOV  KoafMv  tovtov  the  rtder  of  this  world  (John  xiL  31 ; 
xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  11).  Note  the  abrupt  introduction  of  the  word 
here,  as  indicating  something  familiar. 

I  have  written  {eypa-^).  Or,  strictly,  /wrote.  Compare  / 
write  (vv.  12,  13),  and  note  the  change  of  tenae.  The  past 
tense,  I  vyrote,  does  not  refer  to  some  previous  writing,  as  the 
Gospel,  but,  like  the  present,  to  this  Epistle.  The  present,  / 
write,  refers  to  the  immediate  act  of  writing :  the  aorist  is  the 
epistolary  aoriat,  by  which  the  writer  places  himself  at  the  read- 
er's stand-point,  regarding  the  writing  as  past.  See  on  1  Pet. 
V.  12.  /  write,  therefore,  refers  to  the  Apostle'a  immediate 
act  of  writing ;  /have  mrittsn,  or  /  lorote,  to  the  reader's  act  of 
reading  the  completed  writing. 

Little  children  {iraiSia).  Compare  retcvla  little  children 
(ver.  1 ),  which  emphasizes  the  idea  of  kinship,  while  this  word 
emphasizes  tiie  idea  of  suhordinaiion  and  consequent  discipline. 
Ilence  it  is  the  more  appropriate  word  when  spoken  from  the 
etand-point  of  autkoriiy  rather  than  of  affection. 

Ve  have  known  (ryiwKOTe).     Kev.,  correctly,  ye  know. 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  335 

The  Father.  In  his  rightful  authority,  as  a  Father  over 
little  children. 

14.  Him  that  is  from  the  beginning.  The  eternal,  pre- 
existent  Christ,  who  was  from  the  beginning  (John  i.  1).  The 
eternal  Son,  through  whom  men  are  brought  into  the  relation 
of  children  of  God,  and  learn  to  know  the  Father.  The  knowl- 
edge of  God  involves,  on  the  part  of  both yo^r*  and  children^ 
the  knowledge  of  Christ. 

Strong  {urxypoC).  See  on  vxia  not  cbbUy  Luke  xiv.  30;  locynr^ 
not,  Luke  xvL  3. 

15.  The  world  {top  Kocfiov).     See  on  John  i.  9. 

The  love  of  the  Father  (17  arydin^Tov  irarpa^).  The  phrase 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  It  means  love  tauHirda 
the  Father,  yet  as  generated  by  the  Father's  love  to  man. 
Compare  1  John  iii.  1.     See  on  love  of  Oodj  ver.  5. 

Is  not  in  him.  This  means  more  than  that  he  does  not  love 
Grod  :  rather  that  the  love  of  God  does  not  dwell  in  him  as  the 
ruling  principle  of  his  life.  Westcott  cites  a  parallel  from 
Philo :  "  It  is  impossible  for  love  to  the  world  to  coexist  with 
love  to  God,  as  it  is  impossible  for  light  and  darkness  to  co- 
exist." Compare  Plato.  "  Evils,  Theodorns,  can  never  pass 
away;  for  there  must  always  remain  something  which  is  ant- 
agonist to  good.  Having  no  place  among  the  gods  in  heaven, 
of  necessity  they  hover  around  the  earthly  nature,  and  this 
mortal  sphere.  Wherefore  we  ought  to  fly  away  from  earth  to 
heaven  as  quickly  as  we  can ;  and  to  fly  away  is  to  become  like 
God,  as  far  as  this  is  possible ;  and  to  become  like  Him  is  to 
become  holy  and  just  and  wise  "  (*'  The»tetus,"  176). 

16.  All  (Trai/).  Not  all  things  severally,  but  aU  that  i$  in 
the  world  coUectiveh/,  r^arded  as  a  unit. 

The  lust  (17  hnSvfjUa),     See  on  Mark  iv.  19. 


888  WORD  STUDIES  DT  THE  WBW  TF3TAMENT. 

Of  the  flesh.  Sensual  appetite.  The  desire  whicit  resides 
in  the  Jlesh,  not  the  desire  ./or  the  flesli.  For  this  subjective 
usage  of  the  genitive  with  Ivst,  see  John  viii.  44  ;  Kom.  i.  24; 
Apoc.  xviii.  14.  Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  11 ;  Titus  ii.  12.  The  luat 
of  the  flesh  involves  the  appropriatioa  of  the  desired  object. 
On  thejleah,  see  on  John  i.  14. 

The  lust  of  the  eyes.  This  is  iuclnded  in  the  lust  of  the 
flegh,  as  a  specific  manifestation.  All  merely  sensual  desires  be- 
long to  the  economy  which  "  is  not  of  the  Father."  The  desire 
of  the  eyes  does  not  involve  appropriation.  It  is  satisfied  with 
coniemplating.  It  represents  a  higher  type  of  desire  than  th« 
desii  e  of  the  Jlesh,  \j\  that  it  seeks  menial  pleasure  where  the 
other  aeeka  phi/aical  gratification.  There  is  thus  a  significant 
hint  in  this  passage  that  even  high  artistic  gratification  ina; 
have  no  fellowship  with  God. 

The  pride  of  life  {v  at^ovela  tow  ^lov).  Rev.,  vainglory. 
The  word  occurs  only  here  and  Jas.  iv.  16,  on  which  see  note. 
It  means,  originally,  «»»^(y,  braggart  talk  or  display  ;  swagger  ; 
and  thence  an  insolent  and  vain  assurance  in  one's  own  re- 
sources, or  in  the  stability  of  earthly  things,  which  issues  in  a 
contempt  of  divine  laws.  The  vainglory  of  life  is  the  vain- 
glory which  belongs  to  the  present  life.  On  ^&?  life,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  fwij  life,  see  on  John  i.  4. 

Of  the  Father  (eV  tov  xar/jot).  Do  not  spring  forth  from 
the  Father.  On  the  expression  elvai,  ex  to  be  of,  see  on  John  i.  46. 
"  He,  therefore,  who  is  always  occupied  with  the  cravings  of 
desire  and  ambition,  and  is  eagerly  striving  after  them,  must 
have  all  his  opinions  mortal,  and,  as  far  as  man  can  be,  must 
be  all  of  him  mortal,  because  he  has  cherished  his  mortal  part. 
But  he  who  has  been  earnest  in  the  love  of  knowledge  and  true 
wisdom,  and  has  been  trained  to  think  that  these  are  the  im- 
mortal and  divine  things  of  a  man,  if  he  attain  truth,  must  of 
necessity,  as  far  as  human  nature  is  capable  of  attaining  immor- 
tality, be  all  immortal,  for  he  is  ever  attending  on  the  divine 
power,  and  having  the  divinity  within  him  in  perfect  order,  ha 
has  a  life  perfect  and  divine"  (Plato,  "Timseus,"  f 


i 


PIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN. 


3S7 


^m  XXI 


17.  Forever  (€«  t6v  aiwva).  The  only  form  in  which  aiStv 
age,  life,  occurs  in  the  Gospel  and  Epistlea  of  John,  except  ix 
Toil  alavov  since  the  world  began  (John  ix.  32).  Some  old  ver- 
sions add,  "as  God  abideth  forever." 

18.  Little  children  {-iraihia).     See  on  ver.  13. 

The  last  hour  {itrxarrj  &pa).  The  phrase  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  On  John's  use  of  &pa  fiour,  as  marking  a 
critical  season,  see  John  ii.  4;  iv.  21,  23;  v,  25,  28;  vii.  30; 
viii.  20 ;  xii.  23,  27  ;  xvi.  2,  4,  25,  32.  The  dominant  sense  of 
the  expression  Ijiat  days,  in  the  New  Testament,  is  that  of  a 
period  of  suffering  and  struggle  preceding  a  divine  victory. 
See  Acts  ii.  17 ;  Jas.  v.  3 ;  1  Pet.  i.  20.  Hence  the  phrase  here 
does  not  refer  to  the  end  of  the  world,  but  to  the  period  pre- 
ceding a  crisis  in  the  advance  of  Christ's  kiugdom,  a  changeful 
and  troublous  period,  marked  by  the  appearance  of  "  many  an- 
tichrists." 

Antichrist.  Peculiar  to  John  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
absence  of  the  article  shows  its  currency  as  a  proper  name.  It 
may  mean  one  who  stands  against  Christ,  or  one  who  stands 
instead  of  Clirist ;  just  as  avriaTpa-njyoii  may  moan  either  one 
who  stands  in  the  place  of  a  irrpaTijyo'i  prcstor,  a  j^roprcetor 
(see  Introd.  to  Luke,  vol.  i.,  p.  246,  and  note  on  Acts  xvi,  20), 
or  an  opposing  general.  John  never  uses  the  word  ^euSo^yjw- 
Tov  false  Christ  (Malt.  xxiv.  24;  Mark  xiii.  22).  While  the 
fahe  Christ  is  merely  a  pretender  to  the  Messianic  office,  the 
Antichrist  "  a,m\\i  C\iTiet  by  proposing  to  do  or  to  preserve 
what  he  did,  while  denying  Him."  Antichrist,  then,  is  one  who 
opposes  Christ  in  the  guise  of  Christ.  Westcott's  remark  ia 
very  important,  that  John's  sense  of  Antichrist  is  determined 
hy  the  full  Christian  concept  i^m  of  Christ,  and  not  hj  the  Jewish 
conception  of  the  promised  SamiouT. 

Cometh  {^pxerai,).  The  prophetic  present,  equivalent  tow 
<Ao\U  to  coine.  The  same  term  is  used  of  Christ  (John  ziv.  3 ; 
xxi.  22;  Apoc.  xxii.  20).  > 


WORD  8TDDIES  IN  THE  KBW  TESTAMENT, 


Kov.,  more  correctly,  have  ifure 


Are  there   {yeyovamv}, 
arisen. 

Whereby  {SSev).  Lit.,  wAenoe.  Only  here  in  JohD.  It  is 
found  in  Matthew  and  Lake,  and  freqaently  in  Hebrews,  sad 
not  elsewhere. 

19.  They  went  outfrom  us  (^f^/MBc^f^VSav).  Thephraee 
went  07it  from,  may  mean  either  removal  (Apoc.  xviii.  4 ;  Jolm 
yiii.  59)  or  origin  (Apoc.  ix.  3;  xiv,  13,  15,  17;  xix.  S,  21). 
Here  the  latter,  as  appears  from  the  following  clause.  Com- 
pare Acta  XX.  30. 

Were  not  of.     See  on  John  i.  46. 

No  doubt.    A  needless  addition  of  the  A.  V. 

With  us  (/M-9'  r{fuiiv).  'Ev  ^fiiv,  amoiig  us,  would  he  more 
according  to  John's  ordinary  usage ;  but  his  thought  rests  here 
rather  on  feilowshij)  than  on  the  unity  of  believers  as  one 
body. 


They  might  be  made  i 
John  xxi.  1. 


lanifest  (<paP€pa>3wiiv).    See  od 


They  were  not  all  {ovk  eltrlv  ■n-dtrreti).  Rev,,  more  correctly, 
they  all  are  not* 

20.  An  unction  (xpiaiui).  The  word  means  that  with 
which  the  anointing  is  performed — the  unguent  or  ointment. 
In  the  New  Testament  oTily  here  and  ver.  27.  Rev,,  an  anoint- 
ing. The  root  of  this  word  and  of  Xpttrro?,  Christ,  is  the  same. 
See  on  Matt.  i.  1.     The  anointing  is  from  the  Anointed. 


The  Holy  One.     Christ.     See  John  vi. 
iv.  27,  30 ;  Apoc.  iii.  7. 


;  Acts  iii.  14 ; 


*  Beuauae  the  verb  MpariiteB  Tiot  from  nfl.    In  snah  oises,  lecordiiig 
Teatamunt  uskge,  the  neg&Iiaii  U  oniTeraal.   The  A.  V.  no(  tUI 
Bee,  Tor  iasUuee,  1  John  UL  IS ;  Matt  ixiv.  22. 


I 


flRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  339 

Ve  know  all  things  {otSart  Travra).  The  best  texts  read 
iraio-n,  ye  all  Icnow ;  in  which  case  the  connection  ib  with  the 
following  claiiBe :  "  I  have  not  written  unto  you  becauBe  y« 
know  not  the  truth,  but  becauee  ye  know  it." 


21.  I  have  not  written  (ov«  eypa^).  Or,  /  wrote  not. 
See  on  ver,  1 3. 

22.  A  liar  (o  ^fwmj?).  Rev.,  correctly,  "  the  lisr."  For  a 
fiimilar  interrogative  phrase  see  ch.  v.  5.  It  marks  the  lively 
feeling  with  which  the  apostle  writes.  By  the  definite  article, 
the  liar,  the  lie  is  set  forth  in  its  concrete  personality  :  the  one 
who  impersonates  all  that  is  false,  as  ontichHM  represents  every 
form  of  hostility  and  oppoBition  to  ChrisL  The  denial  that 
Jesus  ia  the  Christ  is  the  representative  falsehood.  He  that 
denies  is  the  representative  liar. 

He  that  denieth  (o  opvovfittHK).  The  article  with  the  par- 
ticiple denotes  the  hahitital  denial.  Lit,  the  one  denying,  the 
one  who  habitually  represents  this  attitude  towards  Christ. 
The  words  are  aimed  at  the  heresy  of  Cerinthus,  a  man  of 
Jewish  descent  and  educated  at  Alexandria.  He  denied  the 
miraculous  conception  of  Jesus,  and  taught  that,  after  Ilia 
baptism,  the  Christ  descended  upon  Him  in  the  form  of  a  dove, 
and  that  He  then  announced  the  unknown  Father  and  wrought 
miracles ;  but  that,  towards  the  end  of  His  ministry,  the  Christ 
departed  again  from  Jesus,  and  Jesus  suffered  and  rose  from 
the  dead,  while  the  Christ  remaiued  impassible  (incapable  of 
suffering)  ai  a  spiritual  being. 

The  Father.  The  title  the  Father  occurs  always  in  ita 
simple  form  in  the  Epistle.  Never  Aw  or  our  Father,  or  the 
Father  in  heaven. 

23.  Hath  not  the  Father  (owSe  tov  iraripa  ^ei).  Properly, 
"hath  not  eivn  the  Father."  though  he  professes  to  reverence 
the  Father  while  rejecting  the  Son.     Compare  John  viii.  42. 


340  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  SEW  TESTAMENT. 

24.  As  for  you  (i^i?).  This  is  the  rendering  of  the  Rev. 
The  force  of  the  emphatic  you  at  the  beginuing  of  the  sentence 
is  utterly  lost  in  the  A.  V.,  whicb  takes  the  pronoun  simplj'  as 
nominative  to  ye  have  heard.  Tou  is  emphatic  by  way  of  con- 
traat  with  the  false  teachers  (ver.  22). 

From  the  beginning.  See  on  i.  1.  Notice  the  change  in  the 
order  of  the  repeated  Beatence,  that  ivhu;h  ye  heard  from  fJie 
beginning:  S  tJKovcraTe  air  ap^<!,  that  which  ye  heard;  the 
emphasis  being  on  their  rec^lion  of  the  message :  &  dw  dpyrfi 
tlKovaare,  that  which  ye  heard  _/>(«»  the  begimiing ;  emphasiz- 
ing the  tiine  of  the  reception  as  coincident  with  the  origin  of 
their  faith. 

In  the  Son  and  in  the  Father.  Compare  the  reverse  order 
in  ver.  22,  "  Here  tiie  thought  is  that  of  rising  through  the 
confession  of  the  Son  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Father ;  there 
the  thought  is  of  tiie  issue  of  denial  culminating  in  the  denial 
of  the  Father  "  (Westcott). 

25.  The  promise  {n  iTrarfyeXia).    See  on  Acts  i.  4. 

Eternal  life  (t^i'  tfto^v  t^v  aiatnop).  Lit.,  the  life,  the  eternal 
(life). 

26.  Seduce  {irKavwvrtov).     See  on  i.  8.     Kev.,  lead  astray. 

27.  As  for  you  (v/m«).     Emphatic,  as  in  ver.  24. 

Of  Him  (air'  airrov).     See  on  i.  5, 

The  same  anointing  (to  airro  -{(purfta).  Tlie  beat  texts 
read  ainov.  His  anointing. 

Is  truth,  and  is  no  lie.  The  characteristic  combination  of 
positive  and  negative  statement.     See  on  i.  5. 

Ye  shall  abide  {fiewXr^.  Wrong.  The  best  texts  resd 
fi^iicTc,  which  may  be  taken  either  as  imperative,  abide  ye,  or 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  341 

ae  indieative,  ye  abide.  The  mdicatire  is  preferable,  &g  aiiBwer> 
ing  to  fitvd  ahideth. 

In  Him.     Christ. 

2S.  When  He  shall  appear  (JTav  ^owpotd^).  The  beet 
texts  read  iav  if,  for  when.  So  Rev.,  which  gives  also  the 
proper  passive  force  of  iJMvtptD^,  if  He  ehaU  be  manifested. 
Mot  expressing  a  doubt  of  the  foci,  but  uncertainty  as  to  the 
circumstances.  On  <f)avep6a  to  make  manifest,  see  on  John 
xxi.  i.  John  never  usee  airoKa\\nrTti>  to  reveal,  of  the  revela- 
tion of  Christ.  Indeed,  neither  the  verb  nor  the  kindred  nonn, 
avoKoKxr^K,  occurs  in  his  writings  except  in  John  xii.  38,  which 
is  a  citation  from  Isaiah,  and  in  Apoc,  i.  1. 

We  may  have.  Tims  identifying  himself  with  his  children 
in  the  faith.     Teacher  and  pupil  must  alike  abide  in  Him. 

We  may  have  confidence  (o^tu/io-  •n-apf^jtriav).  Rev., 
holdneas.  For  the  phrase  have  boldness,  see  iii.  21 ;  iv.  17  ;  v. 
14  ;  Heb.  iii.  6  ;  x.  19  ;  Philem.  8.  For  the  word  woppt^uia 
boldness,  see  on  John  vii.  13 ;  Acts  ii.  29.  It  ie  opposed,  aa 
here,  to  eUiiypvopuu  to  be  ashamed,  in  Prov.  xiii.  5,  where  the 
Septnagint  reads  "  a  wicked  man  is  ashamed  {ata^verai)  and 
shall  not  have  boldness  {■jrappTftrlav).  Also  in  Philip,  i.  20. 
Compare  2  Cor.  iii.  12.  The  idea  of  free,  open  speech  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  the  word  :  coming  before  God's  bar  witli  noth- 
ing to  conceal.  The  thought  ie  embodied  in  the  general  confes- 
sion of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer:  "That  we  should  not 
dissemble  nor  cloke  thetn  before  the  face  of  Almighty  God 
onr  Heavenly  Father,  but  confess  them."  So  John  Wesley's 
Hymn; 

"  JetOB,  Thy  blood  uid  righteonmen 
Hj  beautj  are,  m;  glorious  dress: 
>Mldet  flaming  woTlds.  In  these  nmjei. 
With  jo;  eliikll  1  Hit  up  my  head. 

Bold  shall  t  stand  in  Th;  great  day, 
For  who  aught  to  m;  charge  shall  laj  f 
Fully  SibsolCBd  through  tbeM  I  am, — 
From  sin  and  fear,  from  guilt  aod  ahame." 


342 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  SEW  TESTAMENT. 


I 


Be  ashamed  before  Him  (al4rxuv9ufi,€v  av  airrov).  The 
et^preBsioii  ia  pe<'uliar.  Lit.,  "be  aaliamed_/rowi  Him."  The 
f  iiiidaniental  thought  ie  tliat  of  s^mrati&n  and  shrinking  from 
Gud  tlirough  the  Bhame  of  codscioub  guilt.  The  same  cou- 
stnictioii  IE  found  in  the  Septiiagint.  Isa.  i.  29,  "  Tliey  shall  he 
ashamed //v»i  their  idols."  Jer.  ii.  36,  "  Thou  shait  be  ashamed 
of  {from)  Eg^pt,  as  thou  wast  ashamed  of  {from)  AsByria." 
Jer.  xii.  13. 

Coming  (TTopoirtTia).  Lit.,  presence.  So  2  Cor.  x.  10.  Hence, 
the  presence  of  one  iwniiuf,  and  so  coming,  especially  in  the 
New  Testaiiient,  of  the  future,  visible  return  of  our  Lord  to 
raise  the  dead,  judge  the  world,  and  tinally  establish  the  king- 
dom of  God.  The  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  John,  nor 
does  he  use  evufxivaa,  which  is  Paul's  word  for  the  same  event. 

29.  If  ye  know — ye  know  {e^v  e^fp-e — yiifdxriceTe).  If  ye 
knovj  absolutely  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  perceive  that  every 
one,  etc.  See  on  John  ii.  24.  Yepercewe  may  be  taken  as 
imperative :  perceive  or  know  ye. 

Is  born  of  Him  [i^  avrov  ye^iwr^cu).  The  interpreters  dif- 
fer as  to  the  reference  of  Him  ;  some  referring  it  to  Ood,  and 
others  to  Christ.  Against  the  latter  is  the  fact  that  men  are 
not  said  to  be  horn  of  Christ,  but  of  God;  and  that  to  he  horn 
of  God  is  a  characteristic  phrase  of  John,  while  to  he  horn  cf 
Christ  ia  a  phrase  which  occurs  nowhere.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  undoubted  reference  to  Christ  in  ver.  28,  would  seem  to 
demand  a  similar  reference  here.  Men  are  said  to  abide  in 
Christ  as  well  as  in  God,  and  to  be  born  of  the  Spirit.  West- 
cott's  remark  ia  pertinent.  "  When  John  thinks  of  God  in  re- 
lation to  men,  he  never  thinks  of  ilim  apart  from  Christ  (see 
1  John  V.  20) ;  and  again,  he  never  thinks  of  Christ  in  His  hu- 
man natnre  without  adding  the  thought  of  His  divine  nature. 
Thus  a  rapid  transition  is  possible  from  the  one  aspect  of  the 
Lord's  divine-human  person  to  the  other." 

Righteous  ihUoMK).  Used  by  John  both  of  God  and  of 
Christ.     Of  God,  1  John  i.  9;  John  xvii.  25 ;  Apoc.xvi.5;  of 


FIBST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHK.  343 

GbriBt,  1  John  iL  1 ;  iiL  7.    Compare  Acts  iii.  14;  viL  52 ;  xxii 
14. 

Is  born  of  Him  (^  oimA  yeyhnn/rtu).    Boy.,  begott&iu    The 
first  oocorrenoe  of  the  phrase  in  the  Epistle. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

1.  Behold  (ISerc).  lit,  hehcUd  ye.  The  plnnd  is  pecnUar. 
The  usual  form  is  the  singular  ISe  or  V^v.  See  John  i.  29 ;  zi. 
3,  etc. ;  iv.  35 ;  xix.  26,  27.  Elsewhere  the  plural  is  used  of 
something  actually  visible  (Gal.  vL  11). 

What  manner  of  (irorair^).  The  word  is  of  infrequent 
occurrence  in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  found  in  all  the  Synop- 
tists  and  in  2  Pet.  iii.  11.  Only  here  in  John's  writings.  Orig- 
inally it  means  from  what  ootmtry  or  rcu^e  /  then,  of  what  9oH 
or  quality.    It  is  used  of  the  quality  of  both  persons  and  things. 

Hath  bestowed  (5i&»/rev).  Emphasizing  the  endovmisnt  qf 
the  receiver.  Compare  ^ap/JJoAMii,  from  x^^  gmoe^  fofoor^ 
which  emphasizes  the  good-will  of  the  giver.  See  GaL  iiL  18 ; 
Philip,  ii.  9 ;  i.  29. 

That  (ipa).     See  on  John  xv.  18. 

We  should  be  called  (/cXt^/My).  Or,  named.  As  Matt 
ii.  23 ;  xxi.  13 ;  Luke  i.  13,  31,  etc.  The  verb  is  never  used  by 
John  of  the  divine  call.    In  John  x.  3,  for  Kt£KMl  calleihy  read 

The  sons  {rhciHi).  Bev.,  better,  children.  See  on  John  i 
12. 

And  such  we  are  (/col  iaiMv).  JAi.^€ind  we  are.  Added  by 
Bev.,  according  to  the  best  texts.  A  parenthetical,  reflective 
comment,  characteristic  of  John.     See  on  i.  2. 


844  WORD  8TUDIBB  IN  THE  SEW  TBBTAMBNT. 

2.  Beloved.    See  ii.  7. 

Now  are  we  and,  etc.  The  two  tlioaghts  of  tlie  present  and 
the  future  condition  of  God'e  children  are  placed  eide  by  side 
with  the  simple  copula,  and,  as  parts  of  one  tiiought.  Christian 
condition,  now  and  eternally,  centres  in  the  fact  of  being  child- 
ren of  God.  In  that  fact  lies  the  germ  of  all  the  poesibilitiei 
of  eternal  life. 

It  doth  not  yet  appear  (ovirw  f^>avep(oSi]).  Rev.,  more  cor- 
rectly, ii  is  not  yet  inadr.  manifest.  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  The 
force  of  the  aorist  tense  is,  ioa«  never  manifenied  on  any  oo- 
oasion. 

What  we  shall  be  (ti  iaofie^a).  "Thisic/utt  suggests  some- 
thing nnspeakable,  contained  in  the  likeness  of  God  "  (Bengel). 

But  we  know.     Omit  hut. 

When  He  shall  appear  {iap  ^v€pa$^).  Rev.,  correctly,  \f 
He  {or  it)  shall  be  numifested.  We  may  render  either  "  if  it 
shall  be  manifested,"  that  is  w/iat  toe  shall  be  ;  or,  "  if  He," 
etc.  The  preceding  ftf)aiiep<o97}  it  is  (not  yet)  made  manifestt 
mnst,  I  think,  decide  us  in  favor  of  the  rendering  it.  We  are 
now  children  of  God.  It  has  not  been  revealed  what  we  shall 
be,  and  therefore  we  do  not  know.  In  the  absence  of  eoch  rev- 
elation, we  know  (through  our  consciousness  of  child  ship, 
through  Ilis  promise  that  we  shall  behold  His  glory),  that  if 
irhat  we  shall  he  were  manifested,  the  essential  fact  of  the 
glorified  condition  thus  revealed  will  be  likeness  to  the  Lord. 
This  fact  we  know  now  as  a  promise,  as  a  general  truth  of  our 
f uluie  state.  The  condition  of  realizing  the  fact  is  the  mani- 
festation of  that  glorified  state,  the  revealing  of  the  t/  SvifieSa 
what  we  shall  be;  for  that  manifestation  will  bring  with  it  the 
(ypen  vision  of  the  Lord.  When  t!ie  what  we  sIuUl  be  shall  be 
manifest,  it  will  bring  us  face  to  face  with  Uim,  and  we  shall 
be  like  Uim  because  we  shall  see  liim  as  He  is. 


As  He  is  {ko^w  eariv).     Strictly,  jtisl  as.     Rev.,  even  as. 


J 


FIRST  BPISTLE  OF  JOHK.  846 

*'  As  long  u  the  festiritj 
Of  Paradise  shall  be,  so  long  onr  love 
Shall  radiate  roond  about  ns  such  a  vesture. 
Its  brightnera  is  proportioned  to  the  ardor, 
The  ardor  to  the  vision  ;  and  the  vision 
Bquals  what  grace  it  has  above  its  worth. 

Dante,  '^Paradiso,"  xiv.,  87-42. 

3.  Every  man  that  hath  (^09  o  ix^^)-  ^  characteristic 
form  of  expression  with  John,  containing  ^'a  reference  to  some 
who  had  questioned  the  application  of  a  general  principle  in 
particular  cases."  Here  to  some  persons  who  had  denied  the 
practical  obligation  to  moral  purity  involved  in  their  hope. 
See  vv.  4,  6,  9, 10,  15,  23,  29 ;  iv.  7 ;  v.  1,  4,  18 ;  2  John  9. 

Hope.  John's  only  reference  to  Christian  hope.  The  phrase 
used  here,  to  ha/oe  the  hope  v/pon  one^  is  unique  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. Compare  hf  airr^  Sivff  ikvtovaiv  ^^  on  Him  shall  the 
Gentiles  hope  "  (Bom.  xv.  12) :  rjKirUojAev  hrl  0€^  ^Avr^  *^  we 
have  hoped  on  the  living  Ood  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  10).  On  the  force 
of  txfo^*  ^®  ^^  John  xvi.  22. 

In  Him  {hr  aur^).    Ambiguous.    Better,  as  Bev.,  set  on 

Purifieth  himself  {arfvlfyi,  Iwurrhv).  On  the  verb,  see  on  1 
Pet.  i.  22 ;  Jas.  iv.  8.  In  the  Septuagint  used  only  of  ceremonial 
purification,  and  so  four  out  of  the  seven  instances  in  which  it 
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  (John  xi.  55 ;  Acts  xxi.  24,  26 ; 
xxiv.  18).  In  the  remaining  cases,  of  purifying  ike  heart  and 
the  80ul  (Jas.  iv.  8 ;  1  Pet.  i.  22).  The  kindred  adjective  071^9 
pure^  has  a  moral  signification  in  every  case,  as  has  the  noun 
arpnynfi  purefiesa  (only  2  Cor.  vi.  6).  ^AypiafAo^  purification 
(only  Acts  xxi.  26),  ceremonial. 

He  (iKelvo^).     Christ,  as  always  in  the  Epistle. 

Pure  (071/69).  See  above.  Though  marking  moral  and 
spiritual  purity,  and  that  of  a  very  high  grade,  since  it  is  ap- 
plied to  Christ  here,  yet  it  admits  the  thought  of  possible 


346  WORD  STDDIK8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT, 

teniptatioa  or  pollution,  thus  differing  from  ayio<i,  which  meaaa 
abaolutely  holy,  Keuee  arfVK  cannot  properlj  be  applied  to 
Grod,  wlio  is  aytof  ;  bat  both  may  be  used  of  Christ,  tlie  latter 
in  virtue  of  His  human  perfection. 

4.  Whosoever  committeth  sin  (ira?  d  irotrnv  -niv  a/iopriav). 
Rev.,  better,  every  one  thai  doeth  sin.  See  on  ver.  3,  every  vum 
thai  hath,  and  note  the  frequent  repetition  of  thie  form  of  ex- 
pression in  the  present  chapter.  Compai-e  Trat  d  afiapTdvotv 
whosoever  ainneth  (ver.  6).  The  ptirase  to  do  sin  regards  sin  aa 
something  actually  realized  in  its  completeness.  Ue  that  lio^ 
nn  realizes  in  action  the  sin  {note  the  article  t^v),  that  which 
includes  and  represents  the  complete  ideal  of  aia.  Compare  (^ 
ri^hteoumiess^  ii.  29. 

Transgresseth  also  the  law  (ml  r^  ova^i/ni'  mut).  Rer., 
more  accurately,  doeth  also  Imoleatness.  Compare  Matt  xiii.  41, 
and  the  phrase  ol  ipya^oftevoi  t^h  avoftiav  ye  that  work  iniguity 
(Matt.  vii.  23). 

For  («»i).  Rev.,  correctly,  anl.  This  and  the  precediag 
clause  are  co-ordinated  after  John's 


Is  the  transgression  of  the  law  {itrrlv  4  avofila).  Rev., 
correctly,  is  lawlessness.  Sin  is  the  violation  of  the  law  of  our 
being,  the  law  which  includes  our  threefold  relation  to  God,  to 
the  men  and  things  around  us,  and  to  ourselves.  Compare 
Jae.  i.  14;  iv.  17. 

5.  Ve  know.  John's  cbaracterietic  appeal  to  Christian 
knowledge.  Compare  ii.  20,  21 ;  iv.  2,  14,  16;  v.  15,  18;  3 
John  12. 

He  (eVetixK).  Christ,  as  always  in  this  Epistle.  See  on 
John  i.  18. 

Was  manifested.  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  Including  Christ's 
whole  life  on  earth  and  its  consequences.  The  idea  of  mani- 
festation  here  assiiniea  the   fact  of  a  previous  being.     John 


FIRST  BPIBTLB  OF  JOHN.  347 

• 

uses  yarioos  terms  to  describe  the  incarnation.  He  conceives  it 
witli  reference  to  the  Father j  as  a  eendingy  a  fmseian.  Hence 
6  irifL^^  fie  He  ihai  sent  me  (John  iv.  34 ;  vi.  38 ;  ix.  4 ;  xii. 
44,  etc.) :  o  ve/jLy^a^  /*e  iranip  the  Father  that  sent  me  (John  v. 
37 ;  viii.  18 ;  xii.  49,  etc.) :  with  the  verb  afiro<rr&CKM  to  send 
as  an  envoy j  with  a  commission;  Ood  sent  {airitrreCKev)  His 
Son  (John  iii.  17 ;  x.  36 ;  1  John  iv.  10 ;  compare  John  vi.  57 ; 
vii.  29 ;  xvii.  18).  With  reference  to  the  Son,  as  a  coming^ 
regarded  as  a  historic  fact  and  as  an  abiding  fact.  As  a  his- 
toric event,  He  came  {j/jk^eu,  John  i.  11);  this  is  He  that 
cams  (o  ^X«9o>y,  1  John  v.  6).  Canfoe  forth  {i^XSov;  John  viiL 
42 ;  xvi.  27,  28 ;  xvii.  8).  As  something  abiding  in  its  effectSy 
am  comcj  hath  comsj  is  comsj  marked  bj  the  perfect  tense : 
Idght  is  come  {ikiiXuSev,  John  iii.  19).  Jesns  Christ  is  come 
{(KfiKuSora,  1  John  iv.  2).  Compare  John  v.  43 ;  xii.  46 ;  xviiL 
37).  In  two  instances  with  iJKoi>  lam  comCy  John  viii.  42;  1 
John  V.  20.  Or  with  the  present  tense,  as  describing  a  coming 
realized  at  the  moment :  whence  I  come  {ipxofjuu,  John  viii.  14) ; 
compare  John  xiv.  3, 18,  28 ;  also  Jesus  Christ  coming  {ipxp" 
fievov,  2  John  7).  With  reference  to  the  form  :  in  flesh  {cdp^. 
See  John  i.  14 ;  1  John  iv.  2 ;  2  John  7.  With  reference  to 
men^  Christ  tixu  manifested  (1  John  i.  2 ;  iii.  5,  8 ;  John  i.  81 ; 
xxi.  1,  14).* 

To  take  away  {Iva  Apfj).    See  on  John  i.  29. 

Our  sins  (r^  ofiaprla^  fujAv),  Omit  fiii&v  otir.  Compare 
John  i.  29,  rifv  ifMprtop,  the  sin.  The  plnral  here  regards  all 
that  is  contained  in  the  inclusive  term  the  sin :  all  manifesta- 
tions or  realizations  of  sin. 

In  Him  is  no  sin  (a/jLapria  iv  airr^  ovk  hmv).  Lit,  in  Him 
sin  is  not.  He  is  essentially  9iXi^  forever  without  sin.  Compare 
John  vii.  18. 

6.  Abideth.  Compare  John  xv.  4-10.  To  abide  in  Christ 
is  more  than  U>he\n  Him,  since  it  represents  a  condition  main- 

*I  am  indebted  for  the  BubstAnoe  of  this  note  to  Canon  Wettoott 


848  WORD  STUDIBS  m  THE  NBW  TBSTAMENT. 

tained  bj  communion  with  God  and  hy  tlie  habitual  doing  of 
His  will.     See  on  ii.  6. 

Sinneth  not*  John  does  not  teach  that  believers  do  not 
Bin,  but  ia  speaking  of  a  character,  a  habit.  Throughout  the 
Epistle  he  deals  with  the  ideal  reality  of  life  in  God,  in  which 
the  lo7e  of  God  and  sin  exclude  each  other  as  light  and  dark- 
Seen — known.  The  Tision  of  Christ  and  the  appropriation 
of  what  is  seen.     Rev.,  correctlj,  ktunoeUt. 

7.  Little  children.    See  on  ii.  1. 
Deceive  {trXavATui).    Rev.,  better,  lead  astray.     See  on  i.  9. 

Doeth  righteousness.     See  on  ver.  4,  and  compare  it.  29. 

Note  the  article  t^v,  the  righteousness,  in  its  completeness  and 
unity.  Not  merely  doing  righteous  acta.  "  In  hie  relation  to 
other  men  he  will  do  what  is  just;  and  in  his  relation  to  the 
gods  he  will  do  wliat  is  holj  ;  and  he  who  does  what  is  just 
and  holy  cannot  be  other  than  just  and  holy"  (Plato,  "Gor- 
giae,"  507). 

8.  The  Devil.  See  on  ii.  13.  Compare  John  viii.  44.  "The 
devil  made  no  one,  he  begot  no  one,  lie  created  no  one ;  but 
whosoever  imitates  the  devil,  is,  as  it  were,  a  child  of  the 
devil,  through  imitating,   not   tlirough  being  bom  of  him" 

(Augustine). 

SInneth.  The  present  tense  indicates  continuouBnesa.  He 
sinned  in  the  beginning,  and  has  never  ceased  to  smfront  the 

beginning,  and  still  sinneth. 

The  Son  of  God.  For  the  first  time  in  the  Epistla 
Hitherto  the  title  has  been  the  Son,  or  Ilia  Son.     See  on  i.  7. 

Might  destroy  (Xuin;).  Lit.,  ilissoloe,  loosen.  Compare 
Acta  xxvii.  41 ;  xiii.  43.     "  The  works  of  the  devil  are  repre- 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  349 

rented  as  having  a  certain  consistency  and  coherence.  They 
show  a  kind  of  solid  front.  But  Christ,  by  His  coming,  has 
revealed  them  in  their  complete  unsabstantiality.  He  has  ^  mi- 
done '  the  seeming  bonds  by  which  they  were  held  together  " 
(Westcott). 

9.  Whosoever  is  born  (ira9  6  y^yewfiiiiiH^).  On  the  form 
of  expression,  see  on  ver.  4.  Rev.,  begotten.  The  perfect 
participle  indicates  a  condition  remaining  from  the  first:  he 
who  hath  been  begotten  and  remains  Gk>d's  child. 

His  seed.    The  divine  principle  of  life. 

Cannot.  See  on  ver.  6.  Conceived  as  a  perfect  ideal,  life 
in  God  exdades  the  possibility  of  sin.  Compare  Bom.  vL 
throughoat. 

10.  In  this  {h  Tovrf»).     See  on  ii.  3. 

Children  of  the  devil  {Thcva  rod  Bm/SoXou).  The  only  oc- 
•cnrrence  of  the  phrase.  Compare  Acts  xiii.  10,  and  see  John 
viii.  44. 

Righteousness.  Here  the  article  is  wanting,  compare  ver. 
7.  Bighteousuess  is  regarded,  not  in  its  completeness,  bat  as 
bearing  a  particular  character.  It  will  be  interesting  to  follow 
out  the  same  distinction  between  the  following  words  with  and 
without  the  article:  ajiafnla  sin;  arfAwq  love;  tjmi  life; 
oKr^ia  truth. 

11.  From  the  beginning.    See  on  i.  1. 

That  (&a).  Tke  purpart  and  aim  of  the  message.  See  on 
John  XV.  13. 

12.  Cain  who  viras  {Kiiv  ^).  Who  is  not  in  the  Qreek. 
The  construction  is  irregular.  Lit.,  as  Bev.,  not  aa  Cain  wae 
of  the  evil  one. 


850  WOBD  STUDIB8  DT  THE  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

Slew  (Itr^o^).  The  verb  occurs  only  in  John,  and  only 
here  ootdde  of  the  Apocalypse.  Originally,  to  slay  by  catting 
the  throat ;  so  in  Homer,  of  cattle : 


"  tlie  niHor  train  who  da^  {€fd(mn) 
His  floeks  mnd  dow-iMMed  beeres  with  crooked  homa" 

••OdjaMj,**  1,901 

To  daughter  victims  for  sacrifice : 

"  Backward  thej  tnmed  the  necks  of  the  fat  becTes, 
And  cut  their  IhroaU  (IW^a^),  and  flajed  the  careaaaes." 

"  Iliad,"  i.,  459. 

Thence,  generally,  to  day  or  kill. 

Wherefore  (joS^  rtvo^).    lit,  on  account  of  wfuU.    Xdptp 
for  the  sake  of  on  account  of  is  elsewhere  placed  after  the 
genitive.     See  £ph.  iii.  1,  14 ;  1  Tim.  v.  14 ;  Gul.  iii.  19. 

13.  Brethren  (o&X^/).  The  only  occurrence  of  this  mode 
of  address  in  the  Epistle. 

Hate  (jucret).  Indicative  mood,  pointing  to  the  fact  as  exist* 
ing :  if  the  world  hate  you,  as  it  does. 

14.  We  know.  Emphatic;  we  as  distinguished  from  the 
world. 

Have  passed  (jierafiefiiiKafiep).    Lit,  hanye passed  over. 

From  death  {itc  rov  ^vdrov).  Lit,  oiU  of  the  death.  The 
article  marks  it  as  one  of  the  two  spheres  in  which  men  must 
be ;  dearth  or  life.  The  deaths  the  life^  present  one  of  those 
sharp  oppositions  which  are  characteristic  of  the  Epistle ;  as 
love^  hatred;  darkness^  light;  t/ruth^  a  lie.  'O  ^6vaTo<;  the  deathy 
occurs  in  John's  Epistles  only  here  and  in  the  next  clause.  In 
the  Gospel,  only  v.  24.  Personified  in  Apoc.  i.  18  ;  vi.  8  ;  ix. 
6 ;  XX.  13. 

U  nto  I  if  e  (ew  riiv  (Jawji^).  Rev.,  better,  into.  Compare  enter 
into  the  life^  Matt,  xviii.  8 ;  xix.  17. 


FIRST  EPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  851 

Because.  The  nffn  of  having  passed  into  life ;  not  the 
ffrotmd. 

We  love  the  brethren  {ayam-Afiev  roi^  aSeX(f>otk).  The  only 
occurrence  of  the  phrase.  Elsewhere,  lave  one  another^  or  love 
hi%  brother.    See  on  ii.  9. 

His  brother.    Omit. 

15.  Murderer  (di^panrorr^i^o^).  Manslayer.  Only  here  and 
John  viii.  44,  of  Mtf  deml. 

Hath  eternal  life,  etc.  The  contrast  is  suggestive  between 
the  sentiment  embodied  in  this  statement  and  that  of  Pagan 
antiquity  respecting  murder,  in  the  Homeric  age,  for  instance. 
''  With  r^ard  to  the  practice  of  homicide,  the  ordinary  Oreek 
morality  was  extremely  loose.  .  .  .  Among  the  Greeks,  to 
have  killed  a  man  was  considered  in  the  light  of  misfortune,  or, 
at  most,  a  prudential  error,  when  the  perpetrator  of  the  act  had 
come  among  strangers  as  a  fugitive  for  protection  and  hospi- 
tality. On  the  spot,  therefore,  where  the  crime  occurred,  it 
could  stand  only  as  in  the  nature  of  a  private  and  civil  wrong, 
and  the  fine  payable  was  regarded,  not  (which  it  might  have 
been)  as  a  mode,  however  defective,  of  marking  any  guilt  in 
the  culprit,  but  as,  on  the  whole,  an  equitable  satisfaction  to 
the  wounded  feelings  of  the  relatives  and  friends,  or  as  an 
actual  compensation  for  the  lost  services  of  the  dead  man.  The 
religion  of  the  age  takes  no  notice  of  the  act  whatever  "  ( Glad- 
stone ^^  Homer  and  the  Homeric  Age,"  ii.,  436). 

16.  Hereby  {h  rovr^).     See  on  ii.  3. 

Perceive  {iyvducaiiev).    Rev.,  correctly,  hncw. 

The  love.  Omit  the  italics  of  A.  Y.,  of  Oodj  and  render  as 
Bev.,  hereby  know  we  love. 

Laid  dovifn  His  life  (r^  ^^^x^  ainov  iSfftcep).  See  on  John 
X.  11. 


8S2  WORD  STUDIES  W  THE  KEW  TH3TAJJBNT. 

Wo  ought  (oipetKofiev).     See  on  il.  6. 

17.  This  world's  good  (tw  ffiov  tow  xoa/Mv).  Ttev.,  the 
worlds  goods.  Bio<!  oieaas  that  by  which  life  ia  sustained,  re- 
sources, wealth. 

Seeth  {^ewp^).  Deliberate!;  contemplates.  See  on  John  i. 
18.  Rev.,  behohleth.  The  only  occarrence  of  the  verb  in 
Joiin's  Epiatlea. 

Have  need  {■)(pe(ai>  e^ovra).     Lit.,  having  need.     Rev.,  in 


Bowels  of  compassion  (tA  tnrXdyxi'a).  See  oa  pitiful,! 
Pet  iii.  8.  Rev.,  much  better,  his  compassion.  The  word 
only  here  in  John. 

19.  Shall  assure  {-rreliiof)^).  Two  renderings  are  possible; 
the  primitive  meaning  persiuule  (Acts  xix.  26  ;  xvii.  4 ;  2  Cor. 
V.  11) ;  or  the  Becondary  and  consequent  sense,  assure,  ^iet, 
conciliate  (Matt,  xxviii.  14).  Render  as  A.  V.,  and  Rev,  as 
sure.  See  critical  note  at  the  end  of  the  commentary  on  this 
Epistle. 

Before  Him  {efiirpwr^ev  airoO).  Emphatic,  the  order  being, 
hefore  Him.  we  shall  assure  our  heart.  These  words  are  to  be 
kept  in  mind  as  the  key-note  of  what  follows. 

20.  For  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater,  etc. 
A  very  difficult  passage.  See  critical  note  as  above.  Render, 
as  Rev.,  shall  assure  our  heart  hefore  Him  whereinsoever  out 
heart  condemn  us,  because  God  is  greater  than  our  heart. 

For  (oTt).  To  be  rendered  not  as  a  conjunction  {Jbr,  because) 
bnt  as  a  relative,  in  whatsoever  or  whereinsoever. 

Condemn    {icaTayn>^KTi).      The   word   occurs   only   three 
times  in  the  New  Testament;  here,  ver.  31,  and  Gal. 
It  eigriifies   (1.)   To   note   accurately,  usually  in  a  bad 


)ad    sense.      ^^^| 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  353 

Hence  to  detect  (Prov.  xxviii.  11);  compare  Aristophanes: 
"  Having  observed  {KarayvotK)  tlie  foibles  of  the  old  iiiao  " 
("  Knighte,"  46).  To  form  an  unfavorable  prejudice  agahi»t. 
So  Herodotus.  Datia  says  to  the  Oeliaiis,  "'  Why  are  ye  fled, 
O  holy  men,  \\a,v\ag  judged  tne  (KaTar/v6irr€<t  kot  ifiAii)  in  so 
unfriendly  a  way  !  "  (vi.,  97).  (2.)  To  note  Judicially :  to  ac- 
cuse :  to  accuse  o-ne's  self.  So  Thucydides :  "  No  oiie,  when 
venturing  on  a  perilous  enterpriee,  ever  yet  passed  a  sentence 
of  faUure  on  himself"  (xaTtvyvov^  eatrrov  fit}  irfpUaeaSat  ;  iii. 
45).  2'o  give  sentence,  or  cojidemn.  To  ccrndtiim  to  death. 
"Those  who  had  fled  they  condemned  to  death"  (^varov 
jcaTayvoirres ;  Thucydides,  vi.,  60).  To  decide  a  suit  against 
otte.  Ho  Aristophanes;  "You  judges  have  no  maintenance 
if  yon  will  not  decide  against  {KarayvoMreaSe)  this  euit" 
("Knights,"  1360).  In  Gal.  ii.  11,  it  is  said  of  Peter  that,  be- 
cause of  his  conce&eions  to  the  Jewish  ritualists,  Kareyvotirfj.h'o^ 
^v  he  stood  coTuJemned  or  se1f-condem,n6d  (not  as  A.  V.,  he  wot 
to  be  blajned).  His  conduct  was  its  own  condemnation.  This 
is  the  sense  in  this  passage,  i/te  iniemal  Judgment  of  conscience. 

Because  (ort).  This  second  &n  does  not  appear  in  the  A.  V. 
It  is  a  conjunction. 

Greater  {/*€l^a)v).  Is  this  superior  greatness  to  be  regarded 
as  related  to  God's  Judgment,  or  to  His  compassion  f  If  to  His 
Judgment,  the  senso  is :  God  who  is  greater  than  our  heart  and 
knows  all  things,  must  not  only  endorse  but  emplia^ise  our  self- 
accusation.  If  our  heart  condemn,  liow  much  more  Ood,  who 
is  greater  than  our  heart.  If  to  His  compassion,  the  sense  is: 
when  our  heart  condemns  ns  we  shall  quiet  it  with  the  assur- 
ance that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  a  God  who  is  greater  than  our 
heart — who  surpasses  man  in  love  and  compassion  no  less  tbaa 
in  knowledge.  This  latter  sense  better  suits  the  whole  drift  of 
the  discnssion.  See  critical  note.  There  is  a  play  of  the  words 
ytviiiaKet  knoweth,  and  Kararfiviaaicg  condemneth,  which  is  un- 
translatable. 

21.  Beloved.    The  affectionate  address  is  sn^iested  bj  the 
preceding  thought  of  tormenting  self -accusation. 
Vol.,  II.— 2.1 


J 


854  WORD  8TUDIB8  IH  THB  VBW  TEBTAME3rr. 

Confidence  {wapptfaiat^).    Rev^  holdne8$.    See  on  iL  28. 

22.  We  ask  (oiTw^Ky).     See  on  Lnke  zi.  9. 

We  receive  of  Him  {Kafifi6»ofjL€v  air  ainov).  On  the  fonn 
of  expression,  see  on  i.  5.    For  the  thonglit,  compare  John  xv.  7. 

We  keep  {Tfipovfi€w\  See  on  1  Pet  i.  5.  Kote  the  combin* 
ation  of  keep  and  do.  Watchful  discemment  and  habitual 
practice.  Compare  Pb.  cxxiiL  2.  The  same  combination  oocors 
V.  2,  3y  where  instead  of  the  first  nypfi/Acy  ieqf^j  read  wotAfit^ 
do. 

Pleasing  {apeard).    See  John  viii.  29. 

In  His  sight  {Mmuw  airov).  Compare  IfurpoaBeif  airrtni 
before  Sim,  or  in  Sis  presence  (ver.  19).  In  Sis  sight  *^  ac- 
centuates the  thought  of  the  divine  r^ard.  Compare  John  xii. 
37  and  xx.  80  '^  (Westcott). 

23.  Believe  on  the  name  {'K'$ar€uas»^Aev  r^  ovofMri).  See 
on  John  i.  12 ;  1  John  i.  7. 

24.  Abldeth  In  Him  and  He  in  Him.  '' Therefore  let  God 
be  a  home  to  thee,  and  be  thou  the  home  of  Ood :  abide  in  Ood, 
and  let  Ood  abide  in  thee  "  (Bede). 

Spirit.  The  first  mention  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Epistle.  Never 
found  with  Soly  in  the  Epistles  or  Apocalypse. 


CSAPTER  IV. 

1.  Beloved.  Again  the  recognition  of  danger  from  false 
spirits  prompts  this  affectionate  address.     Compare  iii.  21. 

Try  (So«cifui(;eTe).  Better,  as  Rev.,  prove.  See  on  1  Pet  i.  7 ; 
Luke  xiL  55.  Compare  the  phrase  discerning  qfspvritSj  1  Cor. 
xii.  10. 


FIBST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  555 

Of  Gkxi  {iic).     OiU  of:  proceeding  from. 

False  prophets  ('^r€uSo9rpo^i/r<u).  The  term  is  applied  in 
the  New  Testament  to  rivals  of  tme  prophets  under  the  old 
dispensation  (Lnke  vi.  26 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1),  and  to  rivals  of  the 
apostles  under  the  gospel  economy  (Matt.  vii.  15  ;  xxiv.  11,  24; 
Mark  xiii.  22).  In  the  Apocalypse  to  '^  the  embodied  power 
of  spiritual  falsehood"  (zvi.  13;  xix.  20;  xx.  10).  The  false 
prophet  supports  his  claims  by  signs  and  portents  (Matt.  xxiv. 
24 ;  Acts  xiii.  6 ;  Apoc  xix.  20)  and  is  thus  distinguished  from 
the  false  teacher.  See  2  Pet  iL  1,  where  the  two  terms  occur 
together. 

Are  gone  out  {i^lsajKiAaaiv).  The  perfect  tense  indicates 
that  the  influence  of  their  going  out  on  their  false  mission  is  in 
operation  at  the  present. 

2.  Hereby  {iv  tout^).    See  on  iL  3. 

Know  ye  {yuwHTfeere).    Perceive.    See  on  John  ii.  24. 

Confesseth  (o/aoXotc!).    See  on  Matt.  vii.  23 ;  x.  32. 

That  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  {* Iffo-ovp  Xpiarbv 
hf  capicl  iXarjkAfBirra).  Lit.,  Jesus  Christ  h(wi/ng  come,  etc.  The 
whole  phrase  forms  the  direct  object  of  the  verb  oonfeeeetk. 

Of  God.    Compare  1  Cor.  xii.  3. 

3.  Is  come  in  the  flesh.  Omit.  Bender,  confesseth  not 
Jeevs.  So  Rev.  An  ancient  reading  is  \v€i  rbv  'Ifja-ovv  *^  an- 
ntdleth  or  deetroyeth  Jesus."  The  simple  Jeetis  emphasizes  the 
humanity  of  our  Lord  considered  in  itself.  See  Bom.  iiL  26 ; 
X.  9 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  4 ;  Eph.  iv.  21 ;  Heb.  ii.  9. 

This  (roSro).  Not  this  spirttj  but  this  non-coffeeeiany  sum* 
med  up  in  all  its  manifestations. 

Cometh.    See  on  ii.  18. 


S56  WOBD  STUDIES  Vf  THB  5KW  TKffTAXKST. 

4.  Have  overcome.    See  on  U.  13. 

Greater.     Compare  iiL  30. 

In  you.  The  Cbrietian  society.  Comp&re  John  vi  56 ;  xiv. 
20 ;  XV.  4-10 ;  ivu.  23,  26 ;  Gal.  ii.  20  (of  the  individual). 

He  that  is  in  the  world.  In  v.  19,  the  world  ia  said  to  be 
in  the  evil  arte.     Couipare  £ph.  ii.  2. 

5.  Of  the  world  (e«  roO  KmTf*ov}.  Proceeding  from,  as  their 
Bonrce  (^«).  Different  from  e*  t^  yijujrom  the  earth  (John  iii. 
31),  as  marking  the  whole  worldly  economy  morally  considered. 

Speak  they  of  the  world  (eV  rov  k6<timv  XaKowriv).  Aa 
ambiguons  rendering,  which  might  readily  be  interpreted  "they 
speak  concerning  the  world."  Literally  it  ia :  "  they  speak  out 
»/^the  world ;  i.e.,  the  character  of  their  utterances  corresponds 
to  their  origin.  Rev.,  "  speak  they  ae  of  the  world."  The  po- 
sition of  of  the  world  in  the  sentence  is  emphatic :  "  it  is  out  of 
the  world  that  they  speak." 

6.  Ha  that  knoweth  (o  yHtoaictav).  Lit.,  the  one  knotoing: 
he  who  is  habitually  and  ever  more  clearly  perceiving  and  re- 
cognizing God  as  his  Christian  life  unfolds.  The  knowledge  is 
regarded  &s  jirogresaive  and  not  complete.  Compare  Philip,  iii. 
12,  andHewho  is  oalUng  {6  icaXmv,  1  Thess.  v.  24),  also  o  oyoitwi' 
he  that  lovee  (ver.  7). 


Hereby  {iKravrov).  Kot  the  same  as  the  common  £v  tout^ 
(ver-  2).  It  occurs  only  here  in  the  Epistle.  'Ev  Tovrip  is  in 
this:  iK  TovTOV,  from.  this.  The  former  marks  the  residing  or 
oonaieting  of  the  essence  or  tnitli  of  a  thing  in  something  the 
appreliension  of  which  conveys  to  us  the  esfiential  natnreof  the 
thing  itself.  The  latter  marks  the  itifcre?ice  or  deduction  of 
the  truth  from  something,  as  contrat^ted  with  its  immediate 
perception  in  that  something.     Rev.,  bg  this. 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  357 

The  spirit  of  error  {ro  'nvevfui  t^  wXdinf^).  The  phrase  oc- 
ean nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  mfevfAoai 
wXdvoi^  mideadmg  spiriiSf  1  Tim.  iv.  1. 

7.  Of  God  {iic  Tov  Geov).    Flows  from  Ood. 

8.  Knoweth  not  {ovk  tyvw).  The  aroist  tense:  did  not 
knowy  from  the  banning.    He  never  knew. 

Is  love  {arfdini  iardi).  See  on  Chd  is  light  (L  5),  and  the 
truth  (i.  6) ;  also  God  is  spirit  (John  iv.  24).  Spirit  and  light 
are  expressions  of  God's  essential  nature.  Love  is  the  expres- 
sion of  His  personality  corresponding  to  His  nature.  See  on 
love  of  Ood  (ii.  5).  Trath  and  love  stand  related  to  each  other. 
Loving  is  the  condition  of  knowing. 

9.  Was  manifested.    See  on  John  xxi.  1 ;  1  John  iii.  5. 

Toward  us  (^  4a^)-  Wrong.  Not  "  among  us,"  as  John 
i.  14,  nor  ^^  in  ns ; "  but  as  Rev.,  in  margin,  in  otir  case.* 

Sent  {wiriaraKKev).  John  describes  the  incarnation  as  a 
sending^  more  freqnently  than  in  any  other  way.  ^AiroartKKM 
is  to  send  wnder  commission^  as  an  envoy.  The  perfect  tense, 
hath  senty  points  to  the  abiding  resalts  of  the  sending.  See  on 
lu.  5. 

His  only-begotten  Son  {rov  vShvairrov  riv  fiovoyanj).  Lit., 
His  Son^  the  only-begotten  (Son).  A  mode  of  expression  com- 
mon in  John,  enlarging  npon  the  meaning  of  a  noun  by  the 
addition  of  an  adjective  or  a  participle  with  the  article.  See  i.  2 ; 
ii.  7,  8,  25 ;  v.  4 ;  John  vi.  41,  44,  60,  61 ;  xv.  1,  etc.  On  only- 
begotten,  see  on  John  i.  14. 

*  So  Alford  and  Hather,  agt.  Westcott.  Westcott  lightlj  obteryes  that  the 
preposition  ^r  in,  is  constantly  used  in  the  context  to  exprew  the  presence  of 
God  in  the  Christian  body  ;  bat  it  is  most  commonly  joined  there  with  /Upn 
abideth^  ▼▼.  12, 18, 15, 16,  and  the  objective  statement,  Ood  §efU^  etc.,  defining 
the  manifestation  of  God's  love,  does  not  adjust  itself  naturallj  to  the  subject- 
ive sense  implied  in  in  u$. 


85S  WORD  STCDIBS  IK  THE  NEW  TE8TAMKST. 

10.  Propitiation.    See  on  iL  2. 

11.  So  (ovTtof).     Emphatia 
We  ought.     See  on  ii.  6. 

12.  God.  Beginning  the  sentence  emphatiosll;,  and  with- 
out the  article  :  G-od  aa  God.  "  God  hath  no  m&n  ever  yet 
Been."    Compare  John  i.  18, 

His  love.  Not  our  love  to  Him,  nor  Hia  love  to  na,  bnt  the 
love  which  is  peculiarly  His  j  which  answers  to  Hia  natare. 

14.  We  have  seen  (re-^afic^).  Have  deliberately  and 
steadfastly  coutemplated.    Compare  i.  1,  and  see  on  John  i.  14. 

Do  testify  (jtaprvpovfiev).     Kev.,  bear  witnew.    See  on  Johp 


Sent.     See  on  ver.  9. 

The  Saviour  of  the  world.  See  the  same  phrase,  John  iv. 
42,  and  compare  John  iii.  17.  SioT^p  Saviour,  occurs  in  John 
only  here  and  John  iv.  42.  Elsewhere  it  ia  applied  both  to 
Ood  {1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  ii.  3 ;  Tit.  i.  3 ;  ii.  10 ;  iii.  4 ;  Jude  25),  and  to 
Christ  (Luke  ii.  11 ;  Acta  v.  31 ;  xiii.  23  ;  2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  Tit.  i. 
4,  etc.).  The  title  ia  found  in  Paul's  Epistles  of  the  Captivity 
(Eph.  V.  23 ;  Philip,  iii.  20),  and  in  the  Pastorals  (see  above), 
but  not  in  Corinthiana,  Kotnans,  Galatiana,  or  Thessaloniana.  In 
classical  writings  the  term  is  applied  to  many  deities,  especially 
to  ZeuB  (Jupiter) ;  also  to  Hermes  (Mercury),  Apollo,  Hercules, 
and  even  to  female  deities,  aa  Fortune  and  Aphrodite  (Venus). 
"  Zeus  Soter"  (Zeus  Saviour)  was  need  as  a  formula  in  drinking  at 
banquets.  The  third  cup  was  dedic.ited  to  him.  Compare  Plato : 
"Then,  by  way  of  a  third  libation  to  the  saviour  Zeus,  let  us 
sum  up  and  reassert  what  Las  been  said"  ("Fhilebus,"  66).  The 
drinking  of  this  cup  wae  a  aynibol  of  good  fortune,  and  the 
third  time  came  to  mean  the  hicky  time.  "Twice  then  has  the 
just  man  overthrown  the  unjust;  and  now  comes  the  third  trial, 


J 


FIRST  BPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  859 

which,  after  Olympic  fashion,  is  sacred  to  Zeus  the  savioury 
.  .  .  and  sorely  this  will  prove  the  greatest  and  most  de- 
cisive of  falls  "  (Plato,  ^^  Republic,"  583).  Hence  the  proverb, 
TO  rplrov  r^  awrnjpi^  lit,  the  third  to  the  9€mour  /  i.e.,  the  third 
or  lucky  time.  The  name  was  also  given  later  to  princes  or 
public  benefactors.  The  kindred  noun  a^smipia  aahxUionj  does 
not  occur  in  John's  Epistles,  and  appears  only  once  in  the  Gospel 
(iv.  22).  It  is  found  thrice  in  the  Apocalypse  (vii.  10 ;  xii.  10 ; 
xix.  1).  XiiJitiv  to  acuoe  occurs  six  times  in  John's  Gtospel,  and 
once  in  the  Apocalypse  (xxL  24).  It  does  not  appear  in  the 
Epistles. 

15.  Whosoever  (69  iiai).    Lit,  who  if  there  he  mny. 
Shall  confess.    See  on  L  9. 

Son  of  God.    See  on  1. 7. 

16.  The  love  which  God  hath.  On  this  use  of  ixtof  to 
have,  see  on  John  xvi.  22.    Compare  John  xiiL  35. 

To  us  {(h  ^fuy).  Bev.,  in  us.  Compare  God  abideth  in 
Sim. 

Dwelleth  in  love,  etc    See  John  xv.  9, 10.    Bev.,  abideth. 

17.  Herein  {iv  rovr^).  To  what  does  this  refer?  Two  ex- 
planations are  given.  (1.)  To  the  following  that  we  may  have 
boldness.  So  Uuther,  who  argues  thus  on  the  ground  that 
ver.  18  shows  that  the  drift  of  the  writer's  thought  is  toward 
the  fearlessness  of  love.  According  to  this,  therefore,  love  has 
its  fulfilment  in  freeing  us  from  fear,  and  inspiring  us  with 
boldness  even  in  view  of  the  final  judgment.  (2.)  To  what 
precedes,  viz.,  our  d/wetlvag  in  Ood  and  He  in  us.  So  West- 
cott :  "  The  fellowship  of  God  with  man  and  of  man  with  God, 
carries  with  it  the  consummation  of  love."  I  prefer  the  latter, 
principally  on  the  ground  that  in  such  phrases  as  iv  rovup  in 
t/iisj  Slit  TovTo  on  this  account^  therefore^  the  pronoun  usually 
refers  to  something  preceding,  though  more  fully  developed  in 


what  foDows.     See  John  v.  16,  18 ;  vi.  65 ;  viii.  47 ;  x.  17 ; 
xii.  18  ;  xvL  15. 

Our  love  (4  arfami  fuS  ^i*Av).  The  A.  V.  conBtrnee  fieS 
i}fi£>y  vntA  u»,  with  love,  making  wtM  vt  equivalent  to  our.  In 
that  case  it  might  mean  either  the  love  tokich  i>  between  Christ- 
iana, or  the  love  which  is  betmen  God  and  Ckrigtians.  The 
Kev.  constraes  with  us  with  the  verb :  love  is  made  jrerfect 
wil/i  us.  Tlie  latter  is  preferable.  I  do  not  think  it  would  be 
easy  to  point  out  a  parallel  in  the  New  Testament  to  the  ex- 
pression arfdwi)  imS'  ^fiwv  love  that  is  with  us  =  our  love.  The 
true  idea  is  that  love  is  perfected  in  fellowehip.  The  love  of 
God  is  perfected  vnth  us,  in  commnnton  with  ns,  throngh  onr 
abiding  in  Ilim  and  He  in  us.  "  Love  is  not  simply  perfected 
in  man,  but  in  fulfilling  this  issue  God  works  vnth  man" 
(Westcott).  Compare  2  John  3,  "  grace  shall  he  with  us  "  (true 
reading);  and  Acts  xv.  4,  "what  things  God  had  done  with 
them."  See  also  Matt.  i.  23  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  24 ;  Gal.  vi.  18. 
Merd  vnth,  is  used  constantly  in  the  New  Testament  of  ethical 
relations.  See  Matt.  xx.  2;  ii.  3  ;  Luke  xxiil.  12 ;  Acts  vii.  9 ; 
Bom.  xii.  15  ;  1  John  i.  6. 

Boldness  (irappiialav).     See  on  ii.  28. 

The  day  of  judgment  (t^  ^/i^'pa  t^  x/jw-ews).  Lit.,  the  day 
of  the  jud/jifieTit.  The  exact  phrase  occurs  here  only.  'HfUpa 
KpUreto^  day  of  jiidgment,  without  the  articles,  is  found  Matt. 
X.  15  ;  xi.  22,  24 ;  xii.  36 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  iii.  1.  The  day  is 
called  tlie  greai  day  of  their  wrath  (Apoc.  vi.  17) ;  the  day  of 
lorath  atid  of  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God(lKova. 
ii.  5) ;  the  day  of  visitation  (1  Pet.  ii.  12) ;  the  last  day  (John 
vi.  39,  40,  44,  64) ;  that  day  (Matt.  vii.  22 ;  Luke  vi.  23 ;  x. 
12).  Tlie  judgment  is  found  Matt  xii.  41,  42  ;  Lake  x.  14 ; 
xi.  31.  32. 

Because.    Likeness  to  Christ  is  the  groand  of  boldness. 

As  (neodoK).  Not  absolutely,  but  according  to  oar  measure, 
as  men  in  this  world. 


1 


FIRBT  EPIBTLB  OF  JOHN.  S61 

He  is.  The  present  tense  is  very  significant  Compare  iii. 
7,  '^  is  righteous  even  as  He  is  righteons."  The  essence  of  our 
being  as  He  is  lies  in  perfected  love ;  and  Christ  is  eternally 
love.  '*  Ue  that  abideth  in  love  abideth  in  God  and  God  in 
him."    Compare  iii.  2. 

In  this  world.  This  present  economy,  physical  and  moral. 
The  phrase  limits  the  conception  of  likeness. 

18.  There  is  no  fear  in  love  (^i9o9  ovtc  iarw  i»  t%  irfiirg). 
JAt^fear  is  not.  It  has  no  existence.  The  fear  is  that  spoken 
of  in  1  Pet.  i.  17 ;  Heb.  xii.  28  ;  godly  fear ;  JUial  reverence : 
not  damsh  fear,  as  Rom.  viii.  15.  In  love^  lit.,  ths  love,  that 
perfected  love  of  which  John  has  been  speaking. 

Perfect  (rtXela).  Not  perfected,  as  ver.  17,  but  perfect  as 
the  result  of  having  been  perfected.  Compare  Heb.  v.  14 ; 
Jas.  i.  4 ;  iii.  2. 

Casteth  out  (l{a>  /8c£\X6i).  A  strong  expression :  tumeik 
ovl  of  doors.  Fear  is  cast  out  of  the  sphere  of  the  fellowship 
of  love.  See  the  phrase  in  John  vi  37 ;  ix.  34,  85  ;  xii.  31 ; 
XV.  6. 

Hath  torment  {koKmtw  ^et).  Tormemt  is  a  faulty  transla- 
tion. The  word  means  punishment,  penalty.  It  occurs  in  the 
New  Testament  only  here  and  Matt.  xxv.  46.  The  kindred 
verb,  KoXd^ofun  to  punish,  is  found  Acts  iv.  21 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  9. 
Note  the  present  tense,  hMh.  The  punishment  i^  present.  Fear 
by  anticipating  punishment  has  it  even  now.  The  phrase  hMh 
punishment  (see  on  John  xvi.  22)  indicates  that  the  punish- 
ment is  inherent  in  the  fear.  Fear  carries  its  own  punish- 
ment. Augustine,  commenting  on  the  expulsion  of  fear  by 
love,  says :  ^'  As  in  sewing,  we  see  the  thread  passed  through 
by  the  needle.  The  needle  is  first  pushed  in,  but  the  thread 
cannot  be  introduced  until  the  needle  is  brought  out.  So  fear 
first  occupies  the  mind,  but  does  not  remain  permanently,  be- 
cause it  entered  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  love."  The 
words  because  fear  hath  punishment  are  parentheticaL 


S62  WORD   STODIBB  IN  THE  KEW  TBBTAUENT. 

He  that  feareth.  The  A.  V.  omits  and  (Se),  winch  Is  im- 
portant as  closely  euniieetiiig  thU  claiiee  withiAetv  is  no  fear  in 
love,  etc.  That  ia  an  abstract  etatement ;  tliia  is  persojial ;  two 
modes  of  stating  the  aaiue  trutii.     Rev.  "aW  he  that  fearetli,'* 

Is  not  made  perfect.  "  Men's  condition  is  varied  ;  witlioat 
fear  and  love ;  with  fear  without  love ;  with  fear  and  love ; 
without  fear  with  love  "  (Bengel). 

19.  We  love  Him  (vf^X<!  drfOTrmfiep  ainov).  The  best  texts 
omit  J/im.  Some  render  /«(  us  love,  as  ver.  7.  The  statement 
is  general,  relating  to  the  entire  operation  of  the  principle  of 
love.  All  human  love  is  preceded  and  generated  by  the  love 
of  God. 

20.  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother,  etc.  Note  the  strik- 
ing inversion  of  the  clauses :  Jle  l/mt  loveth  not  Aia  hrotSer 
whom  lie  hath  seeti,  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  cannot  love. 

How.  The  best  texts  omit,  and  give  the  direct  statement 
cannot  love.     So  Rev. 

21.  That  (Xva).  Not  defining  the  contents  of  the  command- 
ment, but  expressing  its  intent.  Compare  John  xiii.  3'!,  and  see 
on  John  sv.  13. 

His  brother.  "  To  the  persecutor  Saul,  Christ  said,  '  Saul, 
Sanl,  why  peraecotest  thou  Me  ?  I  have  ascended  into  heaven, 
yet  still  I  lie  upon  earth.  Here  I  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father ;  there  I  still  hunger,  thirst,  and  am  a  stranger ' " 
(Augustine). 


CHAPTER  V. 

1.  Whosoever  believeth  (ira^  a  wurrevaai).  Lit.,  every  ons 
that  believeth.  For  the  characteriatic  form  of  expression  see 
on  iii.  3. 

The  Christ.     See  on  Matt.  i.  1,  and  1  John  i.  7. 


FIRST  BPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  363 

2.  By  this  {hrovr^).  Not  by  this  or  from  this,  as  an  infer- 
ence  (see  on  iv.  6)^  but  in  the  very  exercise  of  the  sentiment 
toward  Ood,  wej^eroeive. 

When  (irrav).  More  strictly,  whenever.  Oar  perception  of 
the  existence  of  love  to  oar  brethren  is  developed  on  every  o<y 
caeion  when  we  exercise  love  and  obedience  toward  Gk>d. 

Keep  {Tfip&fi€if).  Bead  iroi&fiev  do.  So  Bev.  See  on  John 
iii.  21 ;  1  John  iii  4.  The  exact  phrase  ttouIp  t^9  ivroXM  to  do 
the  commandments,  occars  only  here.    See  on  Apoc.  xxii.  14. 

3.  Grievous  {fiapelai).  Lit.,  heavy.  The  word  occars  six 
times  in  the  New  Testament.  Acts  xx.  29,  violent,  rapacious; 
**  grievous  wolves "  :  2  Cor.  x.  10,  weighty ,  impreeeive,  of 
Paul's  letters :  Matt,  xxiii.  23 ;  Acts  xxv.  7,  importanty  eerioue; 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law ;  serums  charges  against  PaaL 

4.  Overcometh  {vucf).    See  on  iL  18. 

The  victory  {^  vlsai).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testament 

That  overcometh  (A  vne^aaa'a).  The  aorist  tense,  overcame. 
On  the  cumalative  form  of  expression,  the  victoryj  that  which 
overcame^  see  on  iv.  9.  The  aorist  is  to  be  held  here  to  its 
strict  sense.  The  victory  over  the  world  was^  potentially, 
won  when  we  believed  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 
We  overcome  the  world  by  being  brought  into  union  with 
Christ.  On  becoming  as  He  is  (iii.  17)  we  become  partakers 
of  His  victory  (John  xvi.  33).  "  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  you 
than  He  that  is  in  the  world  "  (iv.  4). 

Our  faith  (tf/otk  fjfA&v).  IlUrrt^/aithy  only  here  in  John's 
Epistles  and  not  in  the  Gospel.  Our  faith  is  embraced  in  the 
confession  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  Qod.  On  the 
question  of  the  subjective  and  objective  use  of  the/aith^  see  on 

Acts  vi.  7. 


3(t4  WORD  STTTDIBH  Df  TBB  HEW  TBffTAHKNT. 

5.  He  that  overcometh  (o  vumv).  The  article  with  the 
participle  denoting  what  is  habitual;  one  who  leads  a  life  of 
rietory  over  the  world, 

6.  This.     JeeDB. 

He  that  came  (o  cX^oti').  Referring  to  the  historic  fact. 
See  Matt.  xi.  3  ;  Lnke  vii.  19 ;  John  L  15,  27.  Compare,  for 
the  form  of  expression,  John  i.  33  ;  iii.  13. 

By  water  and  blood  (&'  liSaTo;  koX  aiiuam).  Aia  by,  must 
be  taken  with  o  i\Si>v  He  that  came.  It  has  not  merely  the 
sense  of  accomjjanimerU,  but  also  of  instrumentality,  i.e.,  hy^ 
through,  by  means  of.  Water  and  blood  are  thns  the  media 
through  which  Jesas  the  Mediator  wrought,  and  which  espe- 
cially characterized  the  coming.  See  especially  lieb.  ix.  12: 
"  Christ  being  come  .  .  .  neither  by  the  blood  {Bi  aJ/iOTo?) 
of  goats  and  calves,  but  bi/  His  own  blood  (2(a  Se  toS  iZiou 
oXfiaTot ").  Compare  "  we  walk  by  faith  not  by  sight  {hiit 
iriWew?  ov  htit  cBoi;?,"  2  Cor.  v.  7) :  we  wait  -with  (lit.,  thraughy 
patience  (Si'  virofioini^"  Kom.  viii.  25). 

Water  refers  to  Christ's  baptism  at  the  beginning  of  Hia 
Messianic  work,  throngh  which  He  declared  Ills  pnrpose  to 
fnlfil  all  righteonsness  (Matt,  iii.  15).  Blood  refers  to  Hia 
bloody  de.itli  upon  the  cross  for  the  sin  of  the  world. 

Other  explanations  are  substituted  for  this  or  combined  with 
it.  Some  refer  the  words  water  and  blood  to  the  incident  in 
John  xix.  Si.  To  this  it  is  justly  objected  that  these  words  are 
evidently  chosen  to  describe  something  characteristic  of  Christ's 
Messianic  office,  which  conld  not  be  said  of  the  incident  in 
question.  Nevertheless,  as  Alford  justly  remarks,  "to  deny 
nil  snch  aUuaion  seems  against  probability.  The  apostle  could 
hardly,  both  here  and  in  that  place,  lay  such  evident  stress  on 
the  water  and  tlie  blood  together,  witliont  having  in  his  mind 
some  link  connecting  this  place  and  that."  The  readers  of  the 
Epistle  must  have  been  familiar  with  the  incident,  from  oral  or 
from  written  teaching. 

Others  refer  the  words  to  the  Oiristian  sacraments.     The 


I 


FIRST  BPKTLE  OF  JOHN.  3fl5 

iiowever,  aa  Hutlier  obBcrves,  are  on]y  the  means  for  the  apjiro- 
priaiion  of  Chrisfs  atonemenl  y  whereas  the  subject  here  is  the 
accompliahmeiU  ofil^  atonement  itself.  Alfui  blood,  standing  by 
itself,  never  signifies  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the  New  TeetanienL 

The  true  principle  o£  interpretation  appears  to  be  laid  down 
in  the  two  canons  of  Diisterdieck,  (1.)  Water  and  blood  must 
point  both  to  aoma  purely  historical  facta  in  the  life  of  our 
Lord  on  earth,  and  to  some  still  present  witnesses  for  Christ. 
(2.)  They  must  not  be  interpreted  symbolically,  but  undei-stood 
of  something  so  real  and  powerful,  aa  that  by  them  God's  testi- 
mony is  given  to  believers,  and  eternal  life  assured  to  them. 
Thus  the  sacramental  reference,  though  secondary,  need  not  be 
excluded.  Canon  Westcott  finds  "  an  extension  of  tlie  mean- 
ing" of  water  and  blood  in  the  following  wui-ds:  "Not  in  the 
water  only,  but  in  the  water  and  in  the  blood,"  followed  by  the 
reference  to  thepreseni  witness  of  the  Spirit.  lie  argnes  that 
the  change  of  the  prepositions  (c'v  in,  for  Sid  by),  the  nse  of 
the  article  (roi),  and  the  stress  laid  on  actual  experience  (it  is  the 
Spirit  that  witnesseth),  these,  together  with  the  fact  that  that 
which  was  spoken  of  in  its  unity  {bi/  water  and  blood)  is  now 
spoken  of  in  its  separate  parts  [in  the  water  and  in  the  blood) — 
"all  show  that  St.  John  is  speaking  of  a  continiuition  of  the  Urst 
coming  under  some  new  but  analogous  form.  The  first  proof 
of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  lay  in  His  complete  historical  ful- 
filment of  Messiah's  work  once  for  all,  in  bringing  purification 
and  salvation  ;  that  proof  is  continued  in  the  experience  of  the 
Church  in  its  two  separate  parts."  Thus  we  are  led  to  the  ideas 
underlying  the  two  sacraments. 

The  subject  opened  by  the  word  hlood  is  too  large  for  discus- 
sion within  these  limits.  The  student  is  referred  to  Dr.  Patrick 
Fairbairn'8"TypoIogy  of  Scripture;"  Andrew  Jukes,  "The  Law 
of  the  Offerings;"  Professor  William  Milligan,  "  The  Resur- 
rection of  our  Lord,"  note,  p.  274  sqtj. ;  Canon  Westcott's  "  Ad- 
ditional Note"  on  1  John  i,  7,  in  his  "Commentary  on  John's 
Epistles;"  and  Henry  Clay  Trumbull,  "The  Blood  Covenant." 

Not  by  water  only  (ovxep  r^  v&iri  /wtov).  Lit.,  not  in  the 
water  «n/y.     Rev,,   %oitA.     The  preposition  iv  in,  marks  the 


For  the  inffirhiiigr  cff  at  am!  2m  mb  3  Cor.  tL  7.  Ik  wordt 
«fe  fwoMbij  diiccted  agSMt  dK  iryhrag  of  Crrinfh»i  See 
M  iL  29L  Xolua  mbsU  dot  Xchb  u  dv  ChnL  end  tktt  He 
byUm/eivcileifa? 


•    0 


And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  bMrerth  witness  (w  to 
i^Tcr  re  ^mftivpmmy  lit^  ««^  <ir  ^irii  u  tkmi  wkitk  u 
img  wiUum.  SiAt  die  prevnt  tesK;.  hear$tk  fciimem.  sad 
psre  rer.  9,  itf<A  fem^  iriiteeK.  Thft  vitnev  »  preKot  sod 
ttmXsnmMU  in  die  Chorefa.  in  die  Mcninents  for  instanee,  in 
wster  end  in  U&od.  WitnfSffing  is  die  pecolisr  ofBat  of  die 
Spirit,  See  John  zir.  26;  xr.  26;  xtL  8  aqq.  See  on  John 
L7- 

Bscause  (Sn),  Some  leoder  iAof,  s«  presendng  die  tuft- 
«<0fMa0  of  die  testimonj,  which  is  sbsord :  the  Spirit  wiUuttetk 
thai  the  Spirit  if  the  inOk.  The  Spirit  is  the  Hol^  Gho&L,  not 
the  tjnriivud  life  in  man. 

The  truth  (7  iOJfiua\  Jost  ss  Christ  is  the  troth  (John 
m.  fS). 

7.  There  are  three  that  bear  record  {rpA  elatw  d  i»afm^ 
po&mf^).     lit,  three  are  the  witnessing  ones. 

The  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  these 
three  are  one.  These  words  are  rejected  by  the  genera]  ver- 
dict of  critical  aathorities.  For  the  details  of  the  memorable 
oontroversj  on  the  passage,  the  stadent  may  consalt  Frederick 
Ilenrj  Scrivener,  "  Introdaction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New 
Testament;"  Samnel  P.  Tregelles,  "  An  Account  of  the  Printed 
Text  of  the  Greek  New  Testament  ;**  John  Selby  Watson,  "The 
Life  of  Richard  Person,  M.A.;''  Prof essor  Ezra  Abbot,  "  Orme's 
Memoir  of  the  Controversy  on  1  John  v.  7;''  Charles  Foster,  "A 
New  Plea  for  the  Authenticity  of  the  Text  of  the  Tliree  Heav- 
enly  Witnesses,"  or  "Person's  Letters  to  Travis  Eclectically 
Examined,"  Cambridge,  1867.  On  the  last-named  work, 
Scrivener  remarks,  "  I  would  fain  call  it  a  success  if  I  could 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  867 

with  truth.  To  rebat  much  of  Porson's  insolent  sophistry  was 
easy,  to  maintain  the  genuineness  of  this  passage  is  simply  im- 
possible." Tregelles  gives  a  list  of  more  than  fifty  volumes, 
pamphlets,  or  critical  notices  on  this  question.  Person,  in  the 
conclusion  of  his  letters  to  Travis,  says:  ^*  In  short,  if  this  verse 
be  really  genuine,  notwithstanding  its  absence  from  all  the 
visible  Greek  manuscripts  except  two  (that  of  Dublin  and  the 
forged  one  found  at  Berlin),  one  of  which  awkwardly  translates 
the  verse  from  the  Latin,  and  the  other  transcribes  it  from  a 
printed  book ;  notwithstanding  its  absence  from  all  the  ver- 
sions except  the  Vulgate,  even  from  many  of  the  best  and 
oldest  manuscripts  of  the  Vulgate ;  notwithstanding  the  deep 
and  dead  silence  of  all  the  Greek  writers  down  to  the  thirteenth^ 
and  of  most  of  the  Latins  down  to  the  middle  of  the  eighth 
century ;  if,  in  spite  of  all  these  objections,  it  be  still  genuine^ 
no  part  of  Scripture  whatsoever  can  be  proved  either  spurious 
or  genuine  ;  and  Satan  has  been  permitted  for  many  centuries 
miraculously  to  banish  the  ^  finest  passage  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment,' as  Martin  calls  it,  from  the  eyes  and  memories  of 
almost  all  the  Christian  authors,  translators,  and  transcribers.'^ 

8.  Agree  in  one  (efe  ri  &  elaw).  Lit,  or^  for  the  one. 
They  converge  upon  the  one  truth,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,  come  in  the  fiesh. 

9.  If  we  receive  (ej  XofAfidvofiev).  The  indicative  mood,  as- 
suming such  reception  as  a  fact.  If  we  receive,  as  toe  do.  On 
the  verb  receive^  see  on  John  iii.  32. 

The  witness  of  God  is  greater.  Supply  mentally,  and 
therefore  we  should  receive  thai. 

For  {oTi).  Not  explaining  why  it  is  greater,  but  why  the 
principle  of  the  superior  greatness  of  divine  testimony  should 
apply  and  be  appealed  to  in  this  case.  Supply  mentally,  and 
this  applies  in  the  case  hefore  uSyfor,  etc. 

This  is  the  witness  of  God  which  (^).  The  best  texts  read 
irvh  thai  or  because.  Bender  that.  This  is  the  witness  of  Ood^ 
even  the  fact  that,  etc. 


368  WORD  STUDIES   IS  THB  SEW  TESTAMKST, 

10.  On  the  Son  of  God.  Faith /n  tlie /«'/■«(>»  of  CLiiet,  not 
merely  in  lliefact  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God. 

God.  AIbo  personal.  To  believe  God,  is  to  bolieve  the  mes- 
sage which  comes  from  Ilim.     See  on  John  i.  12. 

Hath  made  —  hath  believed  (w«ro/i;«ev — ireviirrtvKev). 
Tlie  perfect  tense  marks  the  two  results  expressed  by  the 
verbs  as  connected  with  a  past  act.  The  act  perpetuates  itself 
in  the  present  condition  of  the  unl>eliever. 


Believed  on  the  witness  (TrFn-tWeiMCCT'  elt  tt^v /lOfiTvpiaif). 
The  phrase  occurs  only  here,  Hee  on  John  i.  I'2.  In  one  other 
case  to  li€liew  on  is  used  with  an  object  not  directly  personal, 
irtiTTeiWe  e«  to  ^w?  ;  but  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  per- 
sonal Christ  as  the  Light  of  the  World  (John  viii.  12). 

11.  Hath  given  {eBrnKev).  The  aorist  tense,  ffove.  So  Iter. 
The  reference  is  to  the  historic  fact  of  the  gift.  So  1  John  iii. 
23  :  "  Wo  should  love  one  another  as  He  gam  (eSmncev)  us  com- 
mandment." Ver,  24:  "We  know  that  lie  abideth  in  us  by 
the  Spirit  which  He  gave  (eBtuKep)  us."  On  the  other  hand,  1 
John  iii.  1 :  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  Aat/i  bfi- 
stowed  (Se&kHcev)  upon  us."  The  gift  of  love  abides  in  the  fact 
that  we  are  now  children  of  God  (ver.  2). 

Eternal  life  {^aifv  awviov).  Compare  the  phrase  r^v  ^aiijp 
T^n  aiioviov  the  life,  the  eternal  life  (i.  2),  and  ^  aUovUK  Jiwj  tha 
eteriud  ife  (John  xvii.  3).  For  the  distinction  between  the 
phrases  Ree  on  i.  2.  The  phrase  here,  withont  either  article, 
merely  defines  the  character  of  the  life. 

12.  Hath  life  (^etT^i'fufJi').  More  strictly,  as  Bev.,^  life; 
i.e.,  the  life  which  God  gave  (ver.  11).  See  on  John  xvi,  22, 
Compare  Vhriet  who  is  our  life  (Col.  iii.  4). 

The  Son  of  God.  Uath  the  Son,  hath  not  the  Son  of  Ood, 
pointing  back  to  God  as  the  giver  of  life  in  Hia  Son.  Bengel 
observes :  "  The  verse  has  two  clauses :  in  the  former,  of  God 


1 

I 


FIBST  EPI8TLB  OF  JOHir.  869 

is  not  added,  because  belieTers  know  tAe  San;  in  the  other  it 
is  added,  that  unbelievers  may  know  at  length  how  serioos  it  is 
not  to  have  Him." 

Hath  not  lifeo  Note  the  inversion  ^^  He  that  hath  the  Son 
hath  t/ie  life.  He  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  Gk>d,  the  Ufe  hcUh 
henotP 

13.  Have  I  written  (Sypa^).  Lit,  I  wrote.  John  speaks 
as  looking  back  over  his  Epistle  and  recalling  the  aim  with 
which  he  wrote.     See  on  ii.  13. 

May  know  (elSfJTe).  Not  percevoe  {yipwrxeip^  bnt  know 
with  settled  and  absolute  knowledge.     See  on  John  iL  24. 

Ye  have  eternal  life  {&offP  hc^^  aUnnov).  The  Greek  order 
is  pecaliar,  ^*  ye  may  know  that  Ufe  ye  home  etemoL^  The  ad- 
jective eternal  is  added  as  an  af  ter-thonght.  So  Westcott :  ^^  that 
ye  have  life — yes,  eternal  life." 

Unto  you  that  believe.  In  the  A.  Y.,  these  words  follow 
Aow  /  written.  The  Rev.  follows  the  Greek  order.  The  words, 
like  eternal^  above,  are  added  as  an  af  ter-thonght,  defining  the 
character  of  the  persons  addressed. 

On  the  name  (ew  rh  Spofiay    See  on  John  ii.  23 ;  L 12. 

14.  Confidence  {irapfnfa-ia).  Rev.,  hddness.  See  on  ii.  28 ; 
John  vii.  13.     On  hcuoe  boldness^  see  on  John  xvi.  22. 

We  ask  (a/rci/ieSa).  With  a  possible  reference  in  the  middle 
voice  to  asking  far  av/redvea. 

According  to  His  will  {tcarh  rh  IMXa/ffia  airrov).  For  the 
phrase  compare  1  Pet.  iv.  19 ;  Gal.  L  4;  Eph.  i.  5,  11. 

He  heareth  us  {a/eovei,  fjiJL&v).    Compare  John  ix.  31 ;  xi41, 
42.     Hear  is  used  in  this  sense  by  John  only. 
Vol.  IL— 24 


370  WOBD  VrUDOR  IB  THB  STKW  TBTAXEST. 

15.  Whatso^v^r  w«  ask.  The  whole  phrase  is  goTemed  hj 
HhtrethAear.    If  we  know  that  He  heaielh  our  ererj  petition. 

16.  K  any  man  aee  {iUw  tk  %).    A  nippoaed  caae. 

His  brother.    ChristiaD  brother. 

Sin  a  sin  {ofu^d^atrra  ofiapriam),  lit^  a«  Ber^  mmimg  a 
gin.  There  h  no  exact  parallel  to  the  phrase  in  the  New  Test- 
ament.    Compare  thejpromise  which  HefTom,i»edj  iL  S5. 

Not  unto  death  0*^  w/m  Somitof).  Describing  the  natore 
of  the  sin.  The  preposition  unlo^  signifies  temiency  iawardj  not 
necessarily  involving  death.    See  on  ver.  17. 

He  shall  aak  {oMjati).  In  prayer.  The  fntnre  tense  ex- 
presses not  mere] J  jpermisnon  (it  shall  be  permitted  him  to  ask), 
bnt  the  certainty  that,  as  a  Christian  brother,  he  will  ask.  An 
inunction  to  that  eflFect  is  implied. 

He  shall  give.  He  may  refer  either  to  God  or  to  the 
jpetitioner^  as  being  the  means  of  bestowing  life  through  his 
intercession,  as  in  Jas.  ▼.  20.  The  former  explanation  is  the 
more  natural.     So  Rev. 

Him  {avr^).     The  brother  for  whom  intercession  is  made. 

For  them  that  sin  {roh  a§jMprdvowrw).  In  apposition  with 
ain^  to  him,  God  shall  give  life  unto  him  (the  erring  brother), 
even  tmto  them  that  sin.  The  plural  generalizes  the  particular 
tase  described  by  apLaprrd;uovTa  ofiofyrlav  sinning  a  sin. 

There  is  a  sin  {Itmv  afuzprla).  Rev.,  margin,  better,  ^. 
A  sin  would  express  a  specific  act  as  such.  Sin  describes  the 
character  of  a  class  of  acts. 

Unto  death.  The  difficulty  of  the  passage  lies  in  the  explan- 
ation of  these  words.     It  is  impossible  to  determine  their  exact 


FIRST  EPISTLK  OF  JOHN.  371 

me&uing  with  certainty.  Some  of  the  many  explanations  are  as 
ful]?WB  :  Such  ein  as  God  ptinisliea  with  deadly  sickness  or  sud- 
den death.  All  those  eins  punished  with  excoimruinication  (so 
the  older  Catholic  theologians).  An  mirepented  sin.  Envy.  A 
sinful  state  or  condition.  The  sin  by  which  tlie  Christian  falls 
back  from  Christian  life  into  death.  The  an  ti- Christian  denial 
that  Jesus  is  tlie  Christ. 

The  phrase  XaySeti'  afioprlav  ^infro^pov  to  incur  a  deaili- 
bearing  sin  (A.  V,.  hear  sin  an^l  die),  occurs  Num.  xviii.  22, 
Sept.,  and  the  distinction  between  sins  nnto  death  and  Bins 
not  unto  deatli  is  coniinon  in  Ilabbinic  writings.  However 
John's  expression  may  have  been  suggested  by  these,  it  cannot 
be  assumed  that  they  determine  the  sense  in  which  he  uses  it. 

Life  and  deaifi  in  the  passage  must  correspond.  Bodily 
death  and  spiritual  life  cannot  be  meant.  The  passage  must 
be  interpreted  iu  the  light  of  John's  utterances  elsewhere  con- 
cerning life  and  death.  In  ver.  12,  he  says :  He  that  hoik  tht 
Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hith  not 
life.  In  iii.  14,  15,  he  says  tliat  he  that  loveth  not  ahideth  in 
death  :  that  he  that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  ma/ndayer,  and  that 
no  manslayer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him.  These  caDona 
of  interpretation  point  to  the  explanation,  in  which  some  of  the 
best  authorities  agree,  that  the  sin  unto  death  does  not  refer  to 
a  specific  act,  but  to  a  class  or  species  of  sins,  the  tendency  of 
which  is  to  cut  the  bond  of  fellowship  witU  Christ.  Hence  the 
passage  is  in  the  key-note  of  fellowship  which  pervades  the 
Epistle.  Whatever  breaks  the  fellowship  between  the  soul 
and  Christ,  and,  by  consequence,  between  the  individual  and  the 
body  of  believers,  is  unto  death,  for  there  is  no  life  apart  from 
Christ.  It  is  indeed  true  that  this  tendency  inheres  in  aU  sin. 
Sin  is  essentially  death.  But  a  distinction  is  to  be  made,  a< 
Canon  Westoott  observes,  between  sins  which  flow  from  human 
imperfection  and  inflrmity,  and  sins  which  are  open  manifesta- 
tions of  a  character  alien  from  God.  ''All  unrighteousness  is 
sin,  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death."  It  must  be  carefully 
borne  in  mind  in  the  study  of  the  passage,  that  John  is  speak- 
ing of  sinful  acts  as  reoelaiioits  of  character,  and  not  simply  in 
themselves.     So  Iluther:  "Sucli  sinning  as  is  characterized, 


H 


372  WORD  STDDIES  IN  THK  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

not  by  the  object  with  which  it  ia  connected,  but  by  the  dispo- 
Bition  from  which  it  proceeda."  * 

I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  pray  for  it  (oi  irepl  exetw?*  Xeyot 
iva  e/wmjffTj).  Lit.,  noi  concerning  this  do  I  aay  that  ke  shavld 
make  request.  So  Rev.  Prayer  even  for  this  sin  unto  death  ia 
no\.  forbidden,  but  Jolm  says  that  be  does  not  enjoin  it.  Note 
the  abarp  dietinctness  with  which  that  terrible  sin  ia  thrown 
out  by  the  pronoun  of  remote  reference  and  ita  emphatic  posi- 
tion in  the  sentence.  Note  also  the  words  make  request  {ipm- 
Tijcrp),  and  compare  ainjerci  he  shall  ask.  On  the  distinction, 
see  on  Luke  xi.  9.  Alrim  to  ask,  is  used  of  tlie  petition  of  an 
inferior,  and  is  never  used  of  Cbriat's  own  requests  to  God. 
Hence  it  is  properly  used  here  of  the  humble  and  affectionate 
petition  of  a  Christian  to  God  on  behalf  of  a  sinning  brother. 
'EpfoToat  is  uaed  of  the  request  of  an  equal,  or  of  one  who  aska 
on  ef^iial  terms.  Hence  it  may  mark  a  request  based  upon  fel- 
lowship with  God  through  Christ,  or  it  may  liiiit  at  an  element  of 
presumption  in  a  prayer  for  a  sin  unto  death.  Weatcott  citea 
a  very  early  iuacription  in  the  Homan  Catacomba  as  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  use  of  iparav  in  the  sense  of  Christian  prayer  for 
Christiana:  epatra  (nrep  T}fia>v  pray  for  us. 

17.  Unrighteousness  {oZikIo,).  Thia  is  the  character  of 
evory  offence  against  that  which  is  right.  Every  breach  of 
duty  is  a  manifestation  of  sin.  Compare  iii.  1,  where  sin  is  de- 
fined as  opofiia  lawlessness,  and  lawlessneas  aa  sin.  See  Rom. 
vi.  13. 


18.  We  know  (otSap^). 
■dge  in  two  forms :  loe  ki 
mow  (ii.  20  ;  iii.  5,  15). 


■Tobn  uses  tbie  appeal  to  knowl- 
yw  (iii.  2,  14;  v.  18,  19.  20);  y« 


He  that  is  begotten  of  God  (o  yeiwj^ei?  eV  rav  Seov). 
Lit.,  was  begotten.    This  exact  phrase  does  not  occur  elsewhere. 


'  An  intersBtlng ptper  on  "The  Sin  nnt 
D.D.,  maj  bs  found  In  "  Tbu  Eipoaitor 
tiolda  to  Beugel's  riaw  of  a  sinful  MUite  or  a 


>  Desth,"  bj  the  Bst.  Samuel  Cox, 
■  2d  aeriei,  voL  i,  p.  418,     ~ 

iicUlioa. 


J 


FIRST  BPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  373 

Some  refer  it  to  ihe  mam  who  is  bom  of  Ood,  making  it  paral* 
lel  with  o  yeyewfffjkipo^  etc  rav  Oeov,  he  that  is  hegoUen  of  6o<L 
Others  to  Chridty  the  onlj-begotten  of  Oo<L  The  latter  ia  pref« 
erable. 

That  wicked  one  (o  irovffpoi).  See  on  iL  13.  Bev.,  the 
evil  one. 

Toucheth  (iirreroA).  See  on  John  xx.  17,  the  only  other 
passage  in  John's  writings  where  the  verb  occurs.  Both  this 
verb  and  ^vffcoH^  (Ool.  ii.  21 ;  Heb.  xi.  28 ;  xiL  20)  express  a 
tonch  which  exerts  a  modifying  inflaence  upon  the  object,  though 
Sirffdiw  indicates  rather  a  superficial  touch.  On  ^Xo^cmo 
(Acts  xviL  27 ;  Heb.  xii.  18 ;  1  John  i.  1),  see  on  Luke  xxIt. 
39.  Compare  OoL  iL  21.  The  idea  here  is  layeth  not  hold  qf 
him. 

19.  We  are  of  God  {i/c  rov  Beov  itrfihi).  For  the  phrase 
ehnu  iK  to  he  fram^  see  on  John  L  46.  For  iaiih  we  are^  see 
on  iii.  1.  John  expresses  the  relation  of  believers  to  God  by 
the  following  phrases :  To  he  horn  or  hegotten  of  Ood^  Tcm^ 
hrj[iHu  im  rot)  OeoO  (v.  1 ;  ii.  29 ;  iv.  7) :  denoting  the  initial 
communication  of  the  new  life.  To  he  of  Ood^  ehtu  ix  toO 
&€av  (John  viii.  47 ;  1  John  iiL  10 ;  iv.  6) :  denoting  the  es- 
sential connection  in  virtue  of  the  new  life.  Child  of  Oodj 
rixvov  &€ov  (John  i.  12  ;  1  John  iii.  1, 10) :  denoting  the  rela- 
tion established  by  the  new  life. 

World  {ic6a'fio^\    See  on  John  L  9. 

Lieth  {tcelrai).  The  word  is  stronger  than  iar^  m,  indicating 
the  passive,  unprogressive  state  in  the  sphere  of  Satan's  influ- 
ence. "  While  we  are  from  Qod^  implying  a  birth  and  a  pro- 
ceeding forth,  and  a  change  of  state,  the  fcdcfio^  the  worlds  all 
the  rest  of  mankind,  remains  in  the  hand  of  the  evil  one " 
(Alford). 

In  wickedness  {iv  rf  irovffp^).  Bev.,  better,  in  the  evil  one. 
The  expression  to  lie  in  has  a  parallel  in  Sophocles'  **  Anti- 
gone : " 


8T4  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMBST. 

If  i/ur  -jAfi  ii  6tf 

•*  Wretched  we  lis  id  joq  u  in  ■  god  "  (247). 

20.  An  understanding  (Btdvoiav).  Only  here  in  Jolin't 
writiugs.  The  faculty  of  unileretuiiding.  See  on  Luke  i.  51, 
Weateott  remarks  tliat  uouua  wliicli  ex[)resa  intellectual  powera 
are  rare  iu  tlio  writings  of  Jolio. 


Wo  may  know  (yLwoaieoftev).  Apprehend  progreBsively. 
Compare  John  xvn.  3. 

Him  that  is  true  {tov  akijStvov).  Compare  Apoc.  lii.  7,  14 ; 
vi.  10.  On  iruf,  see  on  John  L  9.  "  God  very  strangely  con- 
doBcenda  indeed  in  making  things  plain  to  me,  actually  aasnm* 
ing  for  the  time  the  form  of  a  man,  tiiat  I  at  my  poor  level  may 
better  see  Ilitn.  This  is  my  opportunity  to  know  Him.  This 
incarnation  is  Qod  making  Himself  accessible  to  human  thought 
— God  opening  to  man  the  possibility  of  correspondence  through 
Jesus  Christ.  And  this  correspondence  and  this  environ- 
rae[it  are  those  I  seek.  Ho  Kiin^lf  assures  me,  '  This  is  life 
eternal,  that  tbey  might  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent'  Do  I  not  now  discern 
the  deeper  meaning  in  Jesvs  Christ  whom  Th<m  hast  sent  f  Do 
I  not  better  understand  witli  what  vision  and  rapture  the  pro- 
foundest  of  the  disciples  exclaims,  'The  Son  of  God  is  come, 
and  hath  given  us  au  understanding,  that  we  might  know  Him 
that  is  true?'"  (Drummond,  "  Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual 
World  "), 

This.  (3od  the  Father.  Many,  however,  refer  it  to  the 
Son. 


Eternal  life.     See  o 


•  The  rtudan 
this  phmse,  "C 


"AdditioDftI  Nola  " 

).  204  sqq. 


i 


FIRST  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  875 

21.  Keep  yourselves  (f^Xdfare  taurh).  The  exact  phrase 
is  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  See  2  Pet 
ill.  17.    Bev.y  rightly,  gtuxrd.    See  on  1  Pet  i.  4. 

Idols  {elSaiKuv).  Strictly,  images.  The  command,  however, 
has  apparently  the  wider  Pauline  sense,  to  goard  against  erery- 
thing  which  occupies  the  place  due  to  CKmL 


CRrriOAL  NOTE  ON  1  JOHN  HI.  19-28. 

The  second  great  division  of  John's  First  Epistle  treats  of 
the  conflict  of  truth  and  falsehood.  This  section  extends  from 
ch.  ii.  18.  to  ch.  iv.  6,  and  is  subdivided  under  the  foUowing 
topics: 

1.  The  revdatian  of  falsehood  a/nd  truth  (ii.  18-29). . 

2.  The  children  (f  God  and  the  children  of  the  devil  (iiL 
1-12). 

3.  Brotherhood  in  Christ  and  the  hatred  of  the  world  (iii. 
13-24). 

4.  The  Riml  Spia%ts  of  ThUh  a^  Mrar  {i^^ 

This  passage  lies  within  the  third  of  these  subdivisions ;  but 
the  line  of  thought  runs  up  into  the  second  subdivision,  which 
b^ns  with  this  chapter, — the  children  of  Ood  and  the  children 
of  the  Devil. 

Let  us  first  briefly  review  the  contents  of  this  chapter  down 
to  the  point  of  our  text. 

Ood  shows  His  wonderful  love  in  calling  us  children  of  Gk>d 
{rixpa) ;  as  expressing  oommtmity  of  naturCy  rather  than  vUU 
{sons) J  which  expresses  theposition  ofprvvHege. 

The  world,  therefore,  does  not  know  us,  even  as  it  did  not 
know  Him. 

We  a/re  children  of  God ;  and  in  this  fact  lies  enfolded  our 
future,  the  essence  of  which  will  be  likeness  to  Ood,  coming 
through  unveiled  and  transfiguring  vision. 

The  result  of  such  a  relation  and  hope  is  persistent  effori 
after  moral  parity.     '*  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in  Hii 
purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure." 


876 


WORD  STDDTES  IH  THB  HEW  TBSTAMBNT. 


This  attempt  to  purify  corresponds  with  the  fiilfilmeut  of 
our  true  destiny  which  Christ  has  made  possible.  Sin  is  jn-e- 
concilable  with  a  right  relation  to  God,  for  Christiauity  em- 
phasizes the  law  of  God,  and  "  sin  is  lawlessness."  The  object 
of  Christ's  mauifeatalion  was  to  "  talte  away  siu ; "  therefore, 
"everyone  that  abidetli  in  Ilim  sinueth  not."  "  lie  that  doetli 
righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as  lie  is  rigliteons."  "He  that 
corauiitteth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;"  but  the  Son  of  God  was  mani- 
fested in  order  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  The  divine 
seed — the  divine  principle  of  growth — the  germ  of  the  new  life 
is  in  the  true  believer;  and  the  ideas  of  divine  souship  and  sin 
are  nintually  exclusive. 

The  being  a  child  of  God  will  manifest  itself  not  only  in  do- 
ing righteousness,  but  in  lone — the  love  to  God,  taking  shape 
in  love  and  ministry  to  the  brethren.  This  is  the  highest  ex- 
pression of  righteousness.  The  whole  aim  of  the  Gospel  is  the 
creation  and  strengthening  of  love  ;  and  the  type  of  life  iu  God 
through  Christ  is  therefore  the  direct  opposite  of  Cain,  who 
being  of  the  evil  one,  slew  his  brother. 

Over  against  this  love  is  the  world's  hatred.  This  is  bound 
np,  as  love  is,  with  the  question  of  origin.  God's  children  share 
God's  nature,  which  is  love.  The  children  of  the  world  are  the 
children  of  the  evil  one,  whose  natui'e  is  lawlessness  and  hatred. 
Love  is  the  outgrowth  of  life ;  hatred,  of  death.  He  that  loveth 
not,  abideth  in  death.  For  ourselves,  children  of  God,  we  know 
that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life  because  we  love  the 
brethi-en. 

Christ  is  the  perfect  type  and  revelation  of  love,  since  He 
gave  His  life  for  us.  We,  likewise,  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives 
for  the  brethren.  The  practical  test  of  our  brotherly  love  is 
ministry.  The  love  of  God  does  not  dwell  in  us  if  we  refuse 
to  relieve  our  brother's  need. 

The  fruit  of  love  is  confidence.  "  In  tfiis^^ — the  conscions- 
ness  of  active  and  sincere  love  to  the  brethren  resting  upon  and 
moulded  by  the  love  of  Christ^in  lhi-8,  we  perceive  that  we  are 
of  the  truth ;  and,  perceiving  this,  we  shall  assure  our  hearts 
in  the  presence  of  God,  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have 
our  being.     It  is  of  the  very  essence  of  Christian  life  that  it  ia 


i 


FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  377 

lived  And  tested  before  God.  !No  assurance  or  confidence  is 
possible  except  from  being  in  right  relation  to  God. 

Through  the  consciousness  of  love,  then,  which  is  of  God, 
and  wliich  marks  the  children  of  God,  we  perceive  that  we  are 
children  of  God — of  the  truth  ;  and  in  this  knowledge  we  find 
assurance  and  confidence  before  the  very  highest  tribunal.  ^^  We 
shall  assure  our  heart  before  Him." 

Tliis  brings  us  to  the  heart  of  our  passage.  What  is  iJie 
specific  chofta^cter  and  direction  of  our  assurance  ?  Of  what  are 
we  confident  ?  Here  we  strike  the  differences  in  the  exposition 
of  the  passage.     The  questions  resolve  themselves  into  three : 

1.  What  is  the  meaning  of  Trelaofiev  {we  shall  assure  or  per^ 
sv>ade)% 

2.  How  are  the  two  irM  {that  or  heca/use)  to  be  explained  f 

3.  What  is  the  meaning  of  fieO^v  {greater)  ? 

These  questions  are  interlinked  so  that  it  will  not  be  always 
possible  to  separate  their  discussion  sharply. 

nelaofiev  may  be  taken  either  according  to  its  primitive 
mesLuingj  persiMdey  induce^  prevail  upon  (Acts  xix.  26  ;  xviii 
4 ;  2  Cor.  v.  11),  or  in  its  secondary  and  consequent  sense,  to 
assure^  quiet,  appease  (Matt,  xxviii.  14). 

1.  If  we  TenAer  jpersuadsj  two  courses  are  possible. 

(a.)  Either  we  may  use  it  absolutely,  and  mentally  sup- 
ply something  as  the  substance  of  the  persuasion.    ^^  Here* 
by  know  we  that  we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  persuade 
our  hearts  before  Him."    The  mind  might  then  supply : 
We  shaU  persuade  our  heart  to  he  confident  in  ash- 
ing ant/thing  from   God.     Objection.      This  would 
anticipate  ver.  21.     ^^  If  our  heart  condemn  us  not, 
then  have  we  boldness  toward  God,  and  whatsoever 
we  ask  of  Him  we  receive,"  etc. ;  or. 

We  shall  persuade  our  heart  to  show  love  in  life  and 
€Lct.  Objection.  This  does  not  suit  the  connection ; 
for  we  recognize  ourselves  by  our  love  as  children  of 
faith,  and  do  not  need  first  to  move  our  hearts  to  love 
which  already  dwells  there ;  or, 

We  shall  persuade  our  heart  thai  we  are  of  the 
truth.     Objection.     This  is  tautological.    We  know 


878 


woud  studik  in  thb  new  testamknt. 


or  perceive  that  we  are  of  the  trutb,  by  the  fact  of 
our  love.     We  tlierefore   reject   the   absolute  use  of 

(&.)  Still  readering  jtersuade,  we  may  attempt  to  find 
the  eubetanco  of  the  persuasion  in  the  following  clauses. 
Here  we  run  into  the  second  of  our  three  questions,  the 
double  oTi,  for  ort  becomes  the  sign  of  deiinitiou  of  irei- 
<rofi€v.  The  different  combinations  aod  translations  pro- 
posed centre  in  two  possible  renderings  for  on :  because  or 
that. 

If  we  render  because,  it  leaves  us  with  the  absolute 
irei(TOfi£v  which  we  have  rejected.  We  have  then  to 
render — "Hereby  perceive  we  that  we  are  of  the 
truth,  and  shall  persuade  our  heart  before  Uim:  be- 
cause, if  our  heart  condemn  us,  because,  I  say  (second 
Sti),  Qvd  is  greater  than  our  lieart,"  etc. 

All  the  other  renderings,  like  this,  involve  what  is 
called  the  epanal^tic  use  uf  ori :  the  second  taking 
np  and  carrying  forward  the  sense  of  the  first.  This 
ie  very  objectionable  here,  because 

1.  There  is  no  reason  for  it.  This  use  of  or*  or 
similar  words  is  appropriate  only  in  passages  where 
the  course  of  thought  is  broken  by  a  long,  inter- 
jected sentence  or  parenthesis,  and  where  the  con- 
junction takes  up  again  the  thread  of  discourse.  It 
IB  entirely  out  of  place  here  after  the  interjection 
of  only  a  few  words. 

3.  There  is  no  parallel  to  it  in  the  writings  of 

John,  nor  elsewhere  in  tlie  New  Testament,  so  far 

as  I  know  (but  see  1  John  v.  9). 

riie  case  is  no  better  if  we  translate  ort  thai.     Here  indeed 

we  get  rid  of  the  absolute  ireiaofiev,  but  we  are  compelled  to 

hold  by  the  resumptive  ori.     For  instance. 

"  We  shall  persuade  ourselves  that,  if  our  heart  condemn 
us,  tiMt,  I  say,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart." 
Moreover,  some  of  these  explanations  at  least,  commit  the 
apostle  to  misstatement.   Suppose,  for  example,  we  read :  "  We 
shall  persuade  our  heart  that  God  is  greater  than  our  heart 


i 


FIRST  KPI8TLB  OF  JOHN.  379 

we  make  the  apostle  say  that  the  consciousuess  of  brotherly  love, 
and  of  our  cousequent  being  ^^of  the  trath/'  is  the  basis  of  our 
conviction  of  the  sovereign  greatness  of  Gkxl.  Thus :  ^^  Herein 
(in  our  brotherly  love)  do  we  perceive  tliat  we  are  of  the  truth, 
and  herein  we  shall  persuade  ourselves  that  Gkxl  is  greater  than 
our  hearty  and  knoweth  all  things." 

The  case  is  not  improved  if  we  render  the  first  iri  as  pro- 
nominal, and  read  as  follows:  ^^We  shall  persuade  ourselves 
in  whatever  our  heart  condemn  us,  ttuU  Ood  is  greater  than  our 
heart."  The  object  of  persuasion,  then,  is  the  greatness  of  God. 
The  sense  of  condemnation  is  the  occasion  of  our  persuading 
ourselves :  the  foundation  of  our  persuasion  of  Ood's  greatness 
is  our  consciousness  of  being  of  the  truth. 

We  conclude  therefore, 

1.  That  we  must  reject  all  renderings  founded  on  the 
absolute  use  of  ireiaofiev. 

(a.)  Because  it  leaves  the  mind  to  supply  something 
which  the  text  leads  us  to  expect  that  it  will  supply. 

(b.)  Because  the  conception  of  persuasion  or  assur* 
ance  takes  its  character  from  the  idea  of  condemning 
or  accusing  {KaTatfivol>a/c^)j  and  becomes  vague  if  we 
separate  it  from  that 

2.  We  must  reject  explanations  founded  on  the  epana- 
leptic  use  of  Srt  for  the  reasons  already  given. 

We  turn  now  to  the  rendering  adopted  by  the  New  Testa- 
ment Revisers. 

This  rendering  takes  the  first  Sri  with  iiuf  as  rdatwe  jpnh 
nominal^  and  the  second  as  ccmaal;  and  is  as  follows: 

"  Herein  do  we  know  (or,  more  properly,  perceive)  that  we 
are  of  the  truth ;  and  shall  assure  (or  quiet)  our  heart  before 
Him  in  whatsoever  our  heart  may  condemn  (or  accuse)  us ;  he- 
cause  God  is  greater  than  our  heart  and  knoweth  all  things." 

The  only  grammatical  objection  to  this  rendering,  which  is 
'entitled  to  any  weight,  is  that  the  exact  pronominal  phrase  Jt* 
Olv  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament ;  but  this 
is  little  better  than  a  quibble,  since  we  have  really  the  same 
^combination  under  another  form,  viz..  Gal.  v.  10,  Sort?  Olv  (so 
Lach.,  West,  and  H.,  Tisch.,  Lightfoot),  and  possibly  in  Acts 


880 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAMBKT. 


iji.  23,  where  Tisch.  reads  ^«  eiv.  la  Col.  iii.  17,  West,  and 
11.,  Liybtfoot,  aud  Ellicott,  read  otl  ehv  ("  w/uitsoever  ye  do  in 
word  or  deed  ").  Moreover,  it  ie  borne  out  hj  the  frequent  use 
of  iav  for  dv  after  relatives  (Matt.  v.  19  ;  viii.  19 ;  x.  42  ;  jti.  27 ; 
John  XV.  7).     See  Moultou'a  "  "Wiuer,"  2d  ed.,  p.  390. 

Tills  rendering  introduces  the  third  qnestiuu :  What  is  Ote 
tneaniTig  of  fiei^av  f  Sliall  we  lake  it  as  indicating  Judgment 
or  eompasnion  on  the  part  of  God  ?  i.e. ; 

let.  Sliall  we  allay  the  accusation  of  our  heart  by  saying: 
"  God  is  greater  than  our  heart.  His  judgment  is  therefore 
stricter  than  otirs  ;  and  so,  apart  from  fellowship  with  Him  we 
can  have  no  hope ; "  or,  as  Meyer  puts  it, 

"Only  in  conscious  brotherly  love  shall  we  calm  our 
hearts,  for,  if  we  do  not  love,  our  heart  condemns  us,  and 
God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  there  is  no  peace  for 
the  accusing  conscience :  "  or,  again,  as  it  is  popularly  in- 
terpreted : 

"  If  our  heart  condemn  us,  then  God,  who  is  greater 
than  our  hearts,  and  knows  all  things,  must  not  only  en- 
dorse, but  emphasize  our  self-accusation."     If  our  heart 
condemn,  how  much  more  God! 
Or,  2d.  Shall  we  take  ftel^cav  as  the  expreeeion  of   GodU 
wnipaaeionaie  love,  and  say,  "  when  our  heart  condemns  ns, 
we  shall  quiet  it  with  the  assurance  that  we  are  the  proved 
children  of  God,  and  therefore,  in  fellowship  with  a  God  who 
is  greater  than  our  heart,  greater  in  love  and  conipassion  oo 
less  than  in  knowledge  ? 

The  choice  between  these  must  be  largely  determined  by  the 
drift  of  the  whole  discussion,  and  here,  therefore,  we  leave  the 
textual  and  grammatical  side  of  the  question,  and  proceed  to 
the  homiletical  aspect  of  the  passage. 

Generally,  we  may  observe  that  the  whole  drift  of  the  chap- 
ter is  consolatory  and  assuring.  The  chapter  is  introduced  with 
a  burst  of  aEFectionate  enthusiasm.  "  Behold  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  has  bestowed  npon  ns  that  we  should  be  called 
the  children  of  God,  and  such  we  are."  The  darker  shades — the 
origin  and  nature  of  sin  ;  the  truth  that  sinners  are  of  the  evii 
one ;  the  hatred  of  the  world,  springing  ont  of  this  radical  op- 


J 


FIRST  BPISTLS  OP  JOHN.  3gl 

position  between  the  origin  and  motive  of  children  of  God  and 
ciiildren  of  the  evil  one — are  thrown  in  to  heighten  and  em- 
phasize the  position  and  privilege  of  God's  children.  Thej  are 
to  be  left  in  no  doubt  ae  to  their  relation  to  God.  They  are 
thrown  for  decisive  testimony  upon  the  supreme  fact  of  love. 
If  God  the  Father  is  love,  and  they  are  Hia  children,  they  must 
share  Ilis  nature ;  and  they  prove  that  they  do  by  loving  Him 
and  His  children.  Heuce,  John  elsewhere  says  (iv.  7  eq.), 
*■  Beloved,  let  us  love  one  another ;  for  love  is  of  God,  and 
every  one  that  ioveth  hath  been  born  of  God  (or  begotten) 
and  knoweth  God.  He  that  Ioveth  not,  knew  not  God,  for  God 
is  love.  .  .  .  If  we  love  one  another,  God  abideth  in  us,  and 
His  love  is  perfected  in  us.  In  this  we  perceive  that  we  abide 
in  Him  and  He  in  us,  because  He  hath  given  us  of  His  Spirit. 
,  .  .  We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath 
to  US.  God  is  love,  and  he  that  abideth  in  love,  abideth  in 
God,  and  God  in  him." 

And  again,  in  this  chapter,  "  We  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren." 

This  testimony  of  love  all  tends  to  the  assurance  of  the 
heart  All  comes  to  a  head  in  this  19th  verse.  "  Herein," — in 
the  fact  and  consciousness  of  love, — "'  herein,  perceive  we  that 
we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  heart  before  Him,  in 
whatsoever  our  heart  condemn  us."  In  striking  parallelism  with 
this  is  the  fourth  chapter  of  this  Epistle  just  alluded  to,  espe- 
cially the  way  in  which,  as  in  this  chapter,  the  evidence  of  love 
makes  for  asaurarice.  Look  at  the  verses  from  the  7th  to  the 
16th — the  burden  of  which  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  love  is 
the  evidence  of  onr  dwelling  in  God  ;  and  then  note  how  this 
evidence  runs  into  assurance  in  the  17th  and  18th  verses. 
"  Herein  is  our  love  in,ide  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness 
(compare  'shall  assure  onr  heart')  in  the  day  of  judgment 
(compare  'before  Him'),  because  as  He  is  eo  are  we  in  this 
■world  (like  Christ).  There  is  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love 
casteth  out  fear,  because  fear  hath  torment." 

Now  there  was  a  very  good  and  obvious  reason  for  emphasiz- 
ing this  thought  of  assurance.  John  knew  the  misgivings  of 
the  Christian  heart ;  and  he  knew,  moreover,  how  they  would 


383  WOBD  8TUD1BB  IN  THH  NEW  TBSTAMBST. 

be  awakened  by  the  high  standard  of  ChriBtian  character  which 
lie  Bet  up  in  this  chapter.  IxK)k  at  these  etatements  :  "  Every 
one  that  Iiath  this  hope  in  Him,  piirifieth  himself,  even  as  He 
is  pure."  "  Every  one  tliat  abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not. 
Every  one  that  einnetli  hath  not  even  eeen  Him  nor  known 
Him."  "  He  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil."  "  He  that 
is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin."  It  is  not  dilSciiIt  to  con- 
ceive the  effect  of  such  statements  upon  a  sensitive  conscience. 
Let  us  bring  ourselves  to  these  teats.  Shall  we  not  need  to  aa- 
Bure  our  hearts?  In  the  consciousness  of  infirmity,  with  the 
remembrance  of  error,  under  the  pressure  and  thrust  of  daily 
temptation,  is  it  strange  if  the  heart  accuses  ?  Is  it  strange  if 
tlie  question  is  raised,  "  Am  I  indeed  a  child  of  God  I  Do  not 
these  errors  and  lapses  prove  me  to  be  a  child  of  the  devil ! " 

Now  I  think  we  should  all  be  led  to  anticipate,  in  view  of 
this  fact,  and  as  the  natural  sequence  of  tlie  former  part  of  the 
chapter,  a  thought,  not  of  severe  criticism  and  judgment,  based 
upon  God's  infinite  knowledge,  but  of  fatherly  compassion  and 
assurance  dealing  with  our  self -accusations,  and  quieting  our 
misgivings. 

The  Christian  coneciousneas  exercises  a  judicial  ofiBce  in  us, 
accusing  or  approving.  Our  lieart  passes  judgment.  But  what 
we  especially  need  to  remember,  and  what,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
is  the  very  core  of  the  teaching  of  this  passage,  is  t/iat  the  de- 
crees of  the  heart  are  notjinal,  but  must  be  catted  up  to  a  higher 
tribunal  for  ratification.  Even  our  renewed  heart  is  ignorant 
and  blind.  God  is  greater  than  our  heart  and  knoweth  all 
things.  Whatever  power  of  discernment  conscience  has,  it  re- 
ceives from  God.  Ueuce,  in  the  interpretation  of  the  passage 
more  stress  should  be  laid  tlian  is  commonly  done  upon  the 
words  "  before  Him."  "  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the 
witness  of  God  ia greater"  (1  John  v.  14.  Compare  Heb.  iv.  16), 
It  is,  as  already  hinted,  essential  to  the  idea  of  Christian  life 
that  it  ia  lived  in  the  very  sight  of  God.  The  true  child  of 
Gwi  sets  the  Lord  always  before  his  face.  The  prime  regulator 
of  his  life  ia  the  sense  of  God's  presence.  God's  manifestation 
in  Christ's  perfect  obedience  is  his  pattern:  God's  law  imparts 
to  his  conscience  its  tone  of  rebuke  or  of  commendation.    This 


d 


FIRST  EPISTLB  OF  JOHK.  883 

is  a  natural  and  neoessarj  reenlt  of  the  relation  assumed  in  the 
passage — children  of  God.  As  children  of  Qodj  in  our  Father's 
house,  life  is  regulated  by  the  perpetual  consciousness  of  our 
Father's  presence  and  scrutiny.  Ko  assurance  or  confidence  is 
possible  which  does  not  grow  out  of  a  right  relation  to  Him. 

John,  then,  does  not  mean  to  say  that  a  child  of  Qod  is  sinless 
by  virtue  of  his  relation  as  a  child ;  and  that  his  self -accusation 
is  quieted  by  being  pronounced  groundless. 

He  does  not  mean  to  say  tliat  the  heart  may  not  accuse  him 
justly.    Gkxi's  judgment  may  confirm  that  of  the  heart 

He  does  mean  to  say  that  the  heart  is  not  the  supreme  and 
final  arbiter. 

The  ordinary  interpretation  presents  a  radical  defect  in 
this; — that  it  assumes  the  infallibility  of  the  heart,  and  brings 
in  God  to  confirm  and  emphasize  its  decision.  If  your  heart 
condemn  yon,  then  God,  who  is  greater  than  your  Iieart,  con- 
demns you  more  severely,  because  He  sees  your  sin  in  the  light 
of  His  omniscience.  Further,  it  makes  our  confidence  toward 
God  depend  primarily  on  the  testimony  of  our  hearts.  If  our 
heart  condemn  ns  not,  then  we  may  go  before  God  with  confi- 
dence and  ask  what  we  will,  because  God,  being  greater  than 
our  heart,  confirms  its  testimony.  The  voice  of  the  heart,  in 
short,  on  this  construction,  is  the  voice  of  God.  As  I  read  it, 
John's  teaching  is  the  direct  opposite  of  this.  It  is  only  God 
who  knoweth  all  things.  No  assurance,  no  accusation  is  to  be 
received  as  final  until  it  has  passed  before  Him.  We  must  look 
outside  of  self  for  tlie  highest  tests  of  self.  It  is  not  before 
ourselves  that  we  are  either  to  assure  or  to  condemn  ourselves. 
Self-condemnation  will  not  be  allayed  by  self-communion.  We 
need,  not  to  be  aelf-assured^  but  to  be  assured  by  Him. 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say,  but  it  should  be  kept  in  mind, 
that  these  words  are  addressed  to  Christians ;  and  this  opens 
another  and  interesting  question, — that  of  sin  in  Christians. 
The  heart  sometimes  condemns  unjustly,  or  unduly.  The  con- 
science is  sometimes  diseased  and  morbidly  exacting,  and  the 
heart  is  distressed  with  accusations  which  are  as  fanciful  as 
they  are  painful.  But  the  heart's  condemnation  is,  as  has 
been  already  said,  often  just.    This,  however,  as  well  as  the 


884  WORD  STUDIBB  m  THH  HSW  TKBTAMBNT. 

Other  cases,  is  covered  by  the  apostle's  words :  "  We  shall  assure 
oar  heart  before  Him,  whereinsoever  our  heart  condemn  us." 
It  may  well  be  asked  then,  how,  when  God  eadorses  tlie  con- 
victioa  of  the  heart,  we  are  to  assure  our  heart  before  Ilim ! 
What,  when  the  apostle  himself  has  juet  told  us  that  "  whoso- 
ever is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin } — that  he  cannot  sin, 
because  he  is  born  of  God  i— that  whosoever  ainneth  liath  not 
seen  or  known  God?  These  utterances,  by  themselves,  are  ter- 
rible. They  destroy  all  hope  of  assurance.  They  make  sin- 
lesBness  tlie  test  of  being  in  Christ.  How  shall  we  assure  our 
heart? 

Here  we  must  be  particular  to  note  that  all  through  this 
chapter,  and  it  might  be  said,  throughout  the  Epistle,  Jolin  is 
dealing  with  something  broader  than  epecitic  errors  or  good 
deeds.  lie  ie  dealing  witb  the  question  of  a  Christian's  rela- 
tion to  God.  Note  the  sharp  and  broad  classifications  of  this 
chapter  to  this  effect,  indicating  the  order  or  economy  to  which 
the  man  belongs  ratber  than  his  specific  acts. 

He  thai,  doeth  righteousness. 

He  thai  doeth  sin ;  where  sin  as  a  whole  answers  to  right- 
eousneas  as  a  whole. 

Ile  is  righteous  even  as  Be  is  righteous.  He  is  of  the  deoU  : 
where,  in  each  case,  the  man's  character  is  shown  to  be  a  reflec- 
tion of  his  spiritual  master. 

So,  too,  the  phrases,  "children  of  God;"  "of  the  truth;" 
"passed  from  death  unto  life."  And  in  chapter  i.,  "in  dark- 
ness;" "in  the  light."  Again,  in  chapter  iv.,  "dwelleth  in 
God ; "  "  of  the  world  ; "  "  of  God."  And,  once  more,  tlie  fact 
that  the  entire  Epistle  turns  on  a  question  of  relation  betweea 
man  and  God.  Its  key-note  ia  yellowshijt^"  That  which  we 
have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you  also,  that  ye  also  may 
have  fellowship  with  us;  yea,  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father  and  with  His  Sou  Jesua  Clirist." 

Tbis  being  true,  the  tests  applied  are  directed  at  this  relation. 
"  Hereby  we  perceive  that  we  are  of  the  truth : "  that  is  our 
sphere,  our  genesis,  our  economy.  And  accordingly  specific 
acts  are  treated  in  the  light  of  this  general  relation.  No  man 
goes  sinless  before  God.     This  is  treated  in  the  first  chap- 


J 


FIRST  EPISTLE   OP  JOHN. 


ter  wiiii  reference  to  certain  actual  delusions  in  tliis  matter. 
Those  who  maintain  that  ein  ie  an  accident  and  iiot  a  principle, 
a  transient  phenomenon  which  leaves  no  abiding  issiiee,  are  met 
with  •'  if  we  say  that  we  have  no  ein  {d/iofyriap  oine  t-)(Ofi£v),  we 
lead  ourselves  astray  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  Those  who 
deny  that,  personally,  they  have  sinned,  are  met  with  "if  we 
say  that  we  have  not  sinned  (ov;^  ^fiopnjicafiev),  we  make  of 
Uirn  a  liar,  and  Hia  word  is  not  in  us."  So  that,  I  repeat,  the 
test  here  contemplated  is  a  test  of  relation  and  not  of  specific 
act.  As  Weatcott  truthfully  says :  "  As  long  as  the  relationship 
with  God  is  real"  (if  a  man  is  truly  born  of  God)  "sinful  acts 
are  but  accidents.  They  do  not  touch  the  essence  of  the  man's 
being."  (Compare  also  Westcott  on  1  John  v.  16.)  Conse- 
queutly,  when  our  heart  condemns  us  of  sin,  and  we  appear 
before  God,  our  assurance  or  quieting  of  heart  comes  through 
God's  throwing  us  back  upon  this  relation  to  Uim,  and  its  ac- 
companying proof,  love  for  the  brethren.  God  teaches  the 
heart  to  meet  its  self-accusation  with  the  fact  and  evidence  of 
Bonship.     Hereby  we  shall  assure  our  heart  before  Ilim. 

It  is  noteworthy  how  John  exalts  and  emphasizes  the  suffic- 
iency and  decisiveness  of  this  test.  "He  that  abideth  in  love 
abidoth  in  God,  and  God  in  him."  "We  know  that  we  have 
passed  from  death  unto  life  because  we  love  the  brethren." 
And  in  the  fourtli  chapter  he  is  even  more  emphatic;  assert- 
ing (ver.  12)  that  love  to  the  brethren  is  the  only  possible 
proof  of  love  to  God ;  for  "  God  hath  no  man  ever  beheld.  If 
we  love  one  another,  God  abideth  in  ua,  and  Hia  love  is  per. 
fected  in  us." 

So,  then,  the  man  takes  his  jastly  accusing  heart  before  Him, 
and  God  says,  "  It  is  true,  you  have  sinned.  But  you  are  my 
child,  proven  to  be  such  by  your  love.  Shall  not  I,  your  Father, 
forgive  your  sin  f  Do  you  fear  to  bring  it  tome?  'If  any 
man  sin,  he  hath  an  advocate  with  me,  Jesus  Christ  the  right- 
eous, and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  his  sins.'  If  you  confess 
your  sin,  I  am  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  you  your  sin  and  to 
cleanse  you  from  all  unrighteousness." 

If  he  goes  under  the  accusation  of  imperfect  love,  he  is  met 
with  the  assurance  that  his  relation  to  God  is  not  determined 
Vol..  IL— 35 


k 


d 


S86 


WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TB8TAMEXT. 


nor  perpetuated  by  the  Bcant  measure  of  the  purest  human 
love,  "  Herein  is  love ;  not  that  we  have  loved  (^air^KUfitv) 
God, but  that  He  loved  us  (■^dirrjirtv,  associating  His  love  with  a 
definite  act)and  sent  His  Son  to  he  the  propitiation  for  our  Bine." 

If  the  self -accusation  is  morbid  and  unfounded,  a  freak  of  a 
diseased  religious  fancy,  rather  than  a  truthful  verdict  of  a 
healthy  conscience,  the  complex  and  confused  witness  of  our 
ignorant  heart  is  resolved  into  the  simple  testimony  of  love,  I 
am  God's  child.  At  my  Father^s  hand  I  shall  meet  with  no 
encouragement  to  continue  in  sin,  but  with  pardon  for  my  sin  ; 
with  tonics  for  my  morbid  conditions  ;  with  allowance  for  my 
infirmity.  Only  by  that  perfect  wisdom  will  the  error  be 
duly  weighed ;  only  by  that  perfect  love  will  it  be  forgiven ; 
only  by  that  perfect  strength  will  the  soul  be  energized  to 
renew  the  life-long  fight  with  sin.  If  we  are  trembling  lest 
the  things  of  which  our  heart  accuses  us  be  the  warrant  for 
disinheriting  us  of  our  position  and  privilege,  we  are  pointed 
past  our  individual  lapses  and  errors  to  the  great,  dominant 
sentiment  of  our  relation  to  God.  We  love  Him,  we  love  the 
brethren,  therefore  we  are  His  children;  erring  children  no 
doubt,  but  still  His.     Will  He  disinherit  His  child  ! 

Observe  again,  how  John  finds  comfort  in  the  fact  of  omni- 
science. We  shall  assure  onr  heart  because  God  knowetk  aU 
ihitigs.  The  natural  instinct  of  imperfection  is  to  evade  the 
contact  and  scrutiny  of  perfection.  But  that  instinct  is  false  and 
misleading.  The  Gospel  creates  a  contrary  instinct,  in  creating 
a  tilial  consciousness.  If  God's  holiness  shames  our  sinfuluees, 
and  God's  perfect  wisdom  dwarfs  our  folly,  nevertheless,  per- 
fection is  the  only  safe  refuge  for  the  imperfect.  No  man 
wants  to  be  tried  before  an  ignorant  or  a  cornipt  judge.  If 
that  omniscient  knowledge  sees  deeper  into  onr  sin  than  we  do, 
it  also  sees  deeper  into  our  weakness,  If  it  weighs  the  act  in 
more  nicely-poised  scales,  it  weighs  the  circnmetances  in  the 
same  scales.  If  it  knows  onr  secret  faults,  it  knows  likewise 
our  frame  and  our  frailty.  If  it  discerns  aggravations,  it 
efjually  discerns  palliations.  If  infinite  knowledge  compasses 
the  sin,  so  does  infinite  love.  Tliere  mercy  and  truth  meet  to- 
gether, and  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other. 


FIB8T  SPISTLB  OP  JOHX.  387 

So  we  shall  wBBore  our  hemrt  before  Him  in  whatsoeTer  our 
heart  ooodcDm  na.  Not  with  the  conceited  aaanrance  of  self* 
ri^teoQsiieBB;  not  with  a  drugged  and  doUed  perception  of  the 
Tilenesa  of  sin ;  not  with  an  elixir  which  shall  relax  oor  spirit- 
ual fibre  and  moderate  oor  enthusiasm  for  spiritual  victorj; 
but  with  the  thou^t  that  we  are  God^s  children,  loving,  though 
erring,  in  our  Father's  hands ;  with  our  elder  brother  Christ  in- 
terceding for  us;  with  the  knowledge  that  the  judicial  element 
in  our  Christian  experience  is  transferred  from  our  own  heart  to 
Qod ;  with  the  knowledge  that,  being  Hjs,  **  neither  death,  nor 
life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  pres- 
ent, nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Gkxi, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  As  I  read  this  passage  I 
wonder  if  John,  as  he  penned  it,  had  not  in  mind  that  inter* 
view  of  Christ  and  Peter  at  the  lake  after  the  resurrection. 
There  was  Peter  with  a  heart  stung  with  self-accusation,  as 
well  it  might  be:  Peter  who  had  denied  and  forsaken  his  Lord: 
and  jet  Christ  meets  all  this  self-accusation  with  the  words 
"  Lovest  thou  Me ! "  And  Peter's  reply  is  in  the  very  vein  of 
our  passage.  ^^  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all 
things : "  ^'  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest  that  I 
love  Thee." 

On  this  interpretation,  the  remainder  of  the  passage  follows 
simply  and  naturally.  Once  assured  that  we  are  children  of 
God,  we  have  boldness  toward  God.  That  assurance,  carrying 
with  it  the  assurance  of  pardon  and  sympathy,  is  the  only  means 
by  which  the  heart's  condemnation  is  legitimately  allayed.  If, 
under  that  assurance,  our  heart  ceases  to  condemn  us,  ^^  then 
have  we  confidence  toward  God."  It  is  noteworthy  how  the 
line  of  thought  coincides  with  that  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
fourth  of  Hebrews.  There  too  we  see  the  Divine  omniscience 
emphasized — the  discernment  of  the  living  word,  "  quick  and 
powerful,  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,  a  discemer  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Neither  is  there  any  crea- 
ture that  is  not  manifest  in  His  sight,  but  all  things  are  naked 
and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 
Then  comes  the  priesthood  and  the  sympathy  of  Jesus,  the 


388  WORD  BTDDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Great  High-Prieat,  "touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirm- 
itiea ; "  aud  then  the  same  conclusion  :  "  Let  ua  therefore  come 
boldly  unto  tlie  throne  of  grace," 

This  latter  part  of  the  passage  raiiat  therefore  be  interpreted 
by  the  former.  That  the  heart  feels  no  sense  of  condemnation 
is  not,  of  itself,  a  legitimate  nor  a  safe  ground  of  boldness  toward 
Qod.  There  is  a  boldness  which  is  born  of  presumption,  of 
spiritual  obtnsenesa,  of  ignorance  of  the  character  and  claime  of 
God,  of  false  and  superficial  conceptions  of  sin.  A  valid  ab- 
sence of  condemnation  must  have  a  definite  and  valid  fact,  a 
substantial  evidence  behind  it ;  and  that  it  has,  according  to 
the  interpretation  we  have  given :  "  We  shall  assure  our  heart 
before  Ilim  in  whatsoever  our  heart  condemn  us,  by  this; 
namely,  that  the  all-knowing  God  is  our  forgiving  Father,  that 
Christ  is  our  Propitiator  and  Saviour,  and  that  tlie  Spirit  of  love 
in  our  hearts,  and  the  loving  ministry  of  our  lives  testify  that 
we  are  children  of  God.  Note  at  this  point  how  John  answers 
to  Paul.  Look  first  at  the  fourth  chapter  of  this  Epistle.  "  If 
we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  Jiis  love  is  per- 
fected in  us.  Hereby  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  Him  and  He 
in  us,  because  He  hath  given  ua  of  His  Spirit."  Now  turn  to 
the  eighth  chapter  of  Homans.  "There  is  therefore  now  no 
condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  the  law 
of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  made  me  free  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death.  Ye  are  not  in  the  tlcsh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if 
so  he  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you.  For  as  many  as 
are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  tliese  are  sons  of  God.  For  ye 
received  not  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  unto  fear,  but  ye  re- 
ceived the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry  Abba,  Father. 
The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  unto  our  spirit  that  we  are 
children  of  God;  and  if  children,  then  heirs;  lieirs  of  God  and 
joint  heirs  with  Christ."  And,  in  like  manner,  "the  Spirit 
also  hetpeth  our  infirmity ;  the  Spirit  Himself  maketh  interces- 
sion for  lis  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered  ;  and  He 
that  searcheth  the  hearts  (being  greater  than  our  heart  and 
knowing  all  things)  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit, 
because  He  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints  according  to  the 
will  of  God  " — for  the  saints  that  love  God,  foreordained,  called, 


1 


FIBST  EPISTLE    OF  JOHN.  889 

jastified,  glorified.  '^  What  then  shall  we  say  to  these  things  f 
If  God  is  for  us,  who  is  against  ns !  He  that  spared  not  His 
own  Son,  bat  delivered  Him  up  for  as  all,  how  shall  He  not  also 
with  Him  freely  give  us  all  things  !  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  Ood's  elect  1  It  is  God  tliat  justifieth,  who  is  he 
that  shall  condemn  !  It  is  Christ  Jesus  that  died,  yea  rather, 
that  was  raised  from  the  dead,  who  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us.  Who  shall  separate  us 
from  the  love  of  Christ !  Shall  tribulation,  or  anguish,  or  per- 
secution, or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  t  Even  as 
it  is  written, 

^  For  Thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long ; 
We  were  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.' 

Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
Him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death, 
nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  things  present,  nor 
things  to  come,  nor  powers,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Grod 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

Finally,  the  whole  passage  carries  a  protest  and  an  antidote 
against  an  introverted,  morbidly  subjective  and  self-scrutiniz- 
ing type  of  piety,  which  habitually  studies  self  for  the  evidence 
of  right  spiritual  relation  and  condition:  which  tests  growth 
in  grace  by  tension  of  feeling,  and  reckons  spiritual  latitude 
and  longitude  by  spiritual  moods.  Feeling,  religious  sensibility, 
has  its  place,  and  a  high  and  sacred  place  it  is  ;  but  its  place  is 
not  the  judgment-seat ;  and  right  feeling  in  Christian  experi- 
ence is  always  based  upon  right  relation  to  the  facts  of  the  plan 
of  redemption.  The  Christian  consciousness  gives  no  valid 
testimony,  save  as  it  reflects  the  great  objective  verities  of  the 
Christian  faith.  U  our  spirit  witnesses  vnth  the  Spirit,  the 
Spirit  must  first  bear  witness  to  our  spirit  that  we  are  children 
of  God. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


1.  The  elder  (o  irpea-PvTepo^).  The  word  is  used  originally 
of  senioritj  in  aye.  So  Lake  zv.  25.  Afterward  as  a  term  of 
rank  or  office.  Applied  to  members  of  the  Sanhedrim  (Matt, 
xvi.  21 ;  Acts  vi.  12).  Those  who  presided  over  the  Christian 
assemblies  or  churches  (Acts  xi.  30 ;  1  Tim.  v.  17,  19).  The 
twentj-foor  members  of  the  heavenly  court  in  John's  vision 
(Apoc.  iv.  4, 10, ;  v.  5,  6,  8, 11, 14).  Here,  with  reference  to 
official  position,  coupled,  presumably,  with  age. 

Unto  the  elect  lady  (ecXc/rr^  ^^P^)-  An  expression  which 
baffies  all  the  commentators.  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  the 
title  describes  aj>er9an,  by  others,  a  society.  The  views  of  the 
former  class  as  to  the  person  designated,  are  (1.)  That  the  letter 
was  addressed  to  a  certain  Babylonian  named  Electa.  (2.)  To 
a  person  named  Kyria.  (3.)  To  Electa  KyriOj  a  compound 
proper  name.  Those  who  r^ard  the  phrase  as  describing  a 
society^  divide  on  the  question  whether  aparticvlar  Chrietian 
society  or  the  whole  Church  is  intended.  It  is  impossible  to 
settle  the  question  satisfactorily. 

Children  {rhcvoi^).  May  be  taken  either  in  a  literal  or  in  a 
spiritual  sense.  For  the  latter,  see  1  Tim.  1,  2;  Oal.  iv.  25 ;  3 
John  4.  Compare  also  w.  4,  13.  The  explanation  turns  on 
the  meaning  of  ixXeKT^  tcvpla.  If  it  mean  the  Churchy  children 
will  have  the  spiritual  sense.    If  it  be  a  proper  name,  the  literal. 

Whom  (o^).  Comprehensive,  embracing  the  mother  and 
the  children  of  both  sexes. 

I  love  (oyoirS).     See  on  John  v.  20, 


892  WORD  STDDIBS  IN  THB  HHW  TBBTAMENT. 

In  the  truth  (ec  akriSfia.  Omit  the.  Ttie  expresBioD  in 
truth  marks  the  atmosphere  or  eletneDt  of  truth  in  which  some- 
thing 18  said,  or  felt,  or  done.  See  John  xvii.  17.  In  truth  is 
equivalent  to  truly,  really.     Compare  Col.  i.  6;  John  xvii.  19. 

That  have  known  (ot  eyvtaKOTe^).  Either  have  cotne  to 
know,  or  as  Rev.,  know.  The  perfect  tense  of  yti'WTKm,  to 
learn  to  know,  is  rendered  as  a  present :  /  htwe  learned  to 
know.,  therefore  /  know.     See  on  1  John  ii.  3. 

2.  Which  dwelleth  (r^f  ithmwrav).  Kev.,  ahideth.  En- 
larging on  the  idea  of  the  truth :  tJiat  which  ahideth.  See  on 
1  John  iv.  9,  on  the  phrase  to  abide  in,  see  on  1  John  ii.  6. 

Shall  be  with  ub  {fteSf  ^fi.S>v  Iotoi).  With  us  has  the  em- 
phatic position  in  the  sentence :  aW  with  us  ii  shall  be.  Note 
the  cliange  from  abideth  in  to  shall  be  with,  and  see  on  John 
xiv.  16,  17. 

3.  Grace  be  with  you,  mercy  and  peace  {(Forot  ^*  i}/tap 
X^K  eKeo<t  etp^vrf).  The  vei'b  is  in  the  future  tense :  thaU  be. 
In  the  Fanline  Epistles  the  salutations  contain  no  verb.  In  1 
and  2  Peter  and  Jude,  TrXtjSwiSetij  be  multiplied,  is  used.  Omoe 
(X'^k)  18  of  rare  occurrence  in  Jolm's  writings  (John  i.  14,  16, 
17 ;  Apoc.  i.  4 ;  xxii.  21) ;  and  the  kindred  ■^(apl^ofuu  to  Jcnfor, 
be  kind,  forgive,  and  ^a^^r/ia  gift,  are  not  found  at  all.  See  on 
Luke  i.  30.  Mercy  (eXeos),  only  liere  in  John.  See  on  Lnke  L 
50.  The  pre-Christian  definitions  of  the  word  include  the  ele- 
ment of  grief  experienced  on  account  of  the  unwort/iy  suffer- 
ing of  another.  So  Aristotle.  The  Latin  misericordia  (miser 
"  wretched,"  cor  "  the  heart ")  carries  the  same  idea.  So  Cicero 
defines  it,  the  sorrow  arising  from  the  wretchedness  ofaTiotlter 
suffering  wrongfully.  Strictly  speaking,  the  word  as  applied 
to  God,  cannot  include  either  of  these  elements,  since  grief  am- 
not  be  ascribed  to  Him,  and  suffering  is  the  legitimate  result  of 
ain.  The  sentiment  in  God  assumes  the  character  of  ^>t<y»ny 
love.  Mercy  is  kindness  and  good-will  toward  the  miserable 
and  afflicted,  joined  with  a  desire  to  relieve  them.  Trench  ob- 
serves ;  "  In  the  Divine  mind,  and  in  the  order  of  our  salvation 


J 


SB009D  EPISTLB  OP  JOHH.  S9S 

BB  oonoeiyed  therein,  the  mercy  precedes  tlie  yrace.  God  so 
loved  the  world  with  a  pitying  love  (herein  was  the  merry), 
that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son  (herein  the  gr(Ki$\  that 
the  world  throngh  Him  might  be  saved.  Bat  in  the  order 
of  the  manifestation  of  Gk>d's  pnrpoees  of  salvation,  the 
grace  most  go  before  the  mercy  and  make  way  for  it.  It 
is  tme  that  the  same  persons  are  the  subjects  of  both,  being 
at  once  the  guilty  and  the  miserable ;  yet  the  righteousness 
of  God,  which  it  is  quite  as  necessary  should  be  maintained 
as  His  love,  demands  that  the  guilt  should  be  done  away 
before  the  misery  can  be  assuaged ;  only  the  forgiven  may 
be  blessed.  He  must  pardon  before  He  can  heal.  .  .  . 
From  this  it  follows  that  in  each  of  the  apostolic  salutations 
where  these  words  occur,  grace  precedes  mercy  "  (^^  Synonyms 
of  the  New  Testament  ^. 

With  you.    The  best  texts  read  with  us. 

From  God — from  Jesus  Christ  (wof)^  ScoS — mupk  *Iiyao0 
Xpurrov).  Note  the  repeated  preposition,  bringing  out  the 
twofold  relation  to  the  Father  and  Son.  In  the  Pauline  salu- 
tations  airo  fro^n^  is  invariably  used  with  Gk)d,  and  never  re- 
peated with  Jemis  ChrUt.  On  the  use  of  mipd  frcftn^  see  on 
John  vi.  46 ;  1  John  i.  5. 

God  the  Father.  The  more  common  expression  is  ^^  Gk>d 
our  Father." 

The  Son  of  the  Father.  The  phrase  occurs  nowhere  else. 
Compare  John  i.  18  ;  1  John  ii.  22,  23  ;  1  John  i.  3. 

In  truth  and  in  love.  The  combination  is  not  found  else- 
where.    Tlie  words  indicate  the  contents  of  the  whole  Epistle. 

4.  I  rejoiced.  Expressions  of  thankful  joy  are  common  in 
the  Pauline  salutations.  See  Rom.,  1  Cor.,  Eph.,  Philip.,  Col., 
1  Thess.,  2  Thess.,  Philem. 

Greatly  (XAu/).  The  word  is  found  in  John's  writings  only 
here  and  3  John  3. 


894  WORD  STUDIEB  DT  THH  ITBW  TBSTAMEKT. 

I  found  {evptjKa'j.     See  on  John  i.  41.     Rev.,  /  have  fmtnd. 

Of  thy  children  (e«  tAi*  rkKwov).  The  rendering  is  obscure. 
Eev.,  rightly,  Buppliee  certain.     Compare  John  xvi.  17. 

In  truth  (cf  dXiiStia).  Compare  3  John  3.  See  on  1  John 
i.  8. 

5.  New  (icatv7)v).     See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29. 

We  had  (er^^a/iec).  The  apostle  identifies  himeelf  with  bis 
readers. 

6.  Love  (v  ar/d-m]).     The  love  just  mentioned  in  the  verb 

we  love. 

That  {"va).    See  on  John  xv.  13. 

After  His  commandments  (kbt^  t^v  ivrdh^t  avrov).  For 
waUc,  with  Kara,  after,  according  to,  see  Mark  vii.  5 ;  Rom. 
viii.  4  ;  xiv.  15  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  3  ;  2  Cor.  \.  2.  Very  often  with  n* 
in.  See  John  viii.  12  ;  si.  9, 10  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2  ;  1  John  i.  7, 11. 
Both  constructions  are  found  2  Cor.  x.  9,  3. 

From  the  beginning  {atf  apyrit).    See  on  John  i.  1. 

In  it  (ev  auT^).     In  love :  not  the  commandment. 

1.  Deceivers  (7^XaI/o^).  See  on  we  deceive  ouradvet,  1  John 
i.  8. 

Are  entered  into  (e'fqXSon  e»V).  Rev.,  are  gone  forth  into. 
The  A,  V.  follows  tiie  reading  eiurj\^v  entered  iiUo.  The 
tense  is  the  aorist,  strictly  rendered,  werU  forth.  It  may  indi- 
cate a  particular  crisis,  at  which  they  went  forth  from  the 

Cliristian  society. 

Who  confess  not  (ol  /i^  ofioKarfovvTe^).   The  article  with  the 
participle  describes  the  character  of  this  class  of  deceivers,  and  , 
does  not  merely  assert  a  definite  fact  concerning  them.     Com- 1 
pare  Mark  xv.  41,  "  other  women  which  came  up  with  Him  " 
(at  avvavaSaffaCj.      Confeas.     See  on  Matt.  vii.  23  ; 


SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHB.  895 

Is  come  {ipxofi^f^p)'  Wrong.  The  verb  is  in  the  present 
participle,  oommg^  which  describes  the  manhood  of  Christ  as 
8tiU  being  manifested.  See  on  1  John  iii.  5.  In  1  John  iv.  2 
we  have  the  manifestation  treated  as  a  past  fact  by  the  perfect 
tense,  iKfjKiAiTa  has  come.  Rev.,  that  Jeeua  Christ  com^eth. 
So  in  1  Thess.  i.  10,  r^  oprfyi  r^  ^PXop^Pfi^  is  the  torath  which 
is  coming;  which  has  already  b^un  its  movement  and  is  ad< 
vancing :  not  merely,  as  A.  Y.,  the  wraith  to  comCf  which  makes 
it  wholly  a  future  event.     See  on  lingerethj  2  Pet.  iL  3. 

An  antichrist  (o  avrlxpurra^).  Rev.,  rendering  the  definite 
article,  the  antichrist.    See  on  1  John  ii.  18. 

8.  Look  to  yourselves  that  (fiXhrere  iavrov^  Xva).  "Iva  in 
order  thatj  marks  the  intent  of  the  caution.  See  on  John  zv. 
13. 

We  lose  {hmXitr^fiep).  The  best  texts  read  inroXhrfT€,  ye 
lose.  So  Rev.,  with  destroy  in  margin.  For  the  meanings  of 
the  verb  see  on  Luke  ix.  25. 

We  receive  {airoXdfimfiep}.  The  best  texts  read  inroXd/Sfyre, 
ye  receive.  The  compounded  preposition  airdg  has  the  force  of 
back  :  receive  back  from  God. 

Reward  (jautSov).  See  on  2  Pet  ii.  13,  and  compare  Matt 
V.  12  ;  John  iv.  36  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  8  ;  Apoc.  xi.  18  ;  xxii.  12. 

9.  Whosoever  transgresseth  {ir&ii  6  irapafialimv).  The 
best  texts  read  irpoarfmv  goeth  onward.  So  Rev.,  with  taketh 
the  lead  in  margin.  The  meaning  is,  whosoever  advances  beyond 
the  limits  of  Christian  doctrine.  Others  explain  of  those  who 
would  set  themselves  up  as  teachers,  or  take  the  lead.  Such 
false  progress  is  contrasted  with  abiding  in  the  teaching.  On 
the  construction,  ira^  every  onCy  with  the  article  and  participle, 
see  on  1  John  iii.  3. 

Abideth — in  {jjyhwv  iv).    See  on  1  John  ii.  6. 
Doctrine  (SiSa;^).    Better,  as  Rev.,  teaching. 


396 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  HBW  TESTAMENT. 


Of  Christ.  Not  tlie  teacbjng  concerning  Cliriet,  bat  tho 
teaching  of  Christ  Himself  and  uf  His  apostles.  See  Ileb.  ii. 
3.  So  according  to  New  Testament  usage.  See  Jolm  xviiL 
19  ;  Acts  ii.  42  ;  Apoc.  ii.  14,  15. 

In  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  Omit  of  Chritt.  JiBaxJ  teach- 
ing, is  used  thus  abBolutelj,  Rom,  xvi.  17  ;  Tit.  i.  9. 

10.  If  there  come  any  («'  tk  epxcrtu).  Better,  Kev.,  if 
anyone  oOTneth.  The  indicative  mood  assumes  tiie  fact :  if  any 
one  coinea,  as  there  are  tlioee  thnt  come.  Cometh  is  used  in  an 
ofEcial  sense  as  of  a  teacher.     See  on  1  John  iii.  5. 

Bring  (<t>ipft).  For  the  use  of  the  verb  see  John  xTJii  29  ; 
Acts  XXV.  18  ;  2  PeL  ii.  11 ;  i.  17,  18  ;  1  Pet.  i.  13. 

Neither  bid  him  God  speed  (koI  xaCpew  ain^  fil)  X^yere). 
Lit.,  and  aay  not  unto  him  "  greetiny  !  "  Xaiptw  rejoice,  haUy 
was  the  customary  form  of  salutation.  It  was  also  used  in 
bidding  farewell ;  but  in  the  New  Testament  always  of  greet- 
ing (Acts  XV.  23 ;  xxiii.  26 ;  Jas,  i.  1).*  "  Now  whoever 
Cometh  and  teacheth  you  all  these  things,  before  spoken,  receive 
him  ;  but  if  the  teacher  himself  turn  aside  and  teach  anotlier 
teaching,  so  as  to  overthrow  tliie,  do  not  hear  liim  "  ("Teach- 
ing of  tlie  Twelve  Apostles,"  ch.  xi.     See  on  Matt,  x,  10). 

11-  Is  partaker  {KoivtovcT).  The  verb  occurs  nowhere  else  in 
John^B  writings.  The  kindred  noun  Koitxavia  yeUowship,  is 
pocniiar  to  the  First  Epistle,  See  on  1  John  i.  3  ;  also  on 
partTiera  {Lnke  v.  10) ;  feilowthip  (Acts  ii.  42) ;  paHaker  (1 
Pet.  V.  1). 


12.  I  would  not  {oiiK  i^avX^v).     See  on  Matt.  ; 


19. 


Paper  {■)(apTov).    Only  here  in  tlie  New  Testament,     The 
Egyptian  papyrus  or  by bl us,  Cyj>erue  papyrus,  a-nciGoiXy  very 


■  LlghtfiMt  rendera  x^ipfr*  farmM  tn  Philip,  lil.  1  ;  and  describes  It  al 
parting  benediction  )n  iv.  4  ;  bat,  io  bnth  cas«s.  cava  tliat  it  iuolude*  an  «x- 

kortaliuD  to  ifjoia:.     Tha /are^etU  U  uvvdlein  in  I 


SBOOND  BPISTLB  OF  JOHN.  S97 

common,  bnt  not  now  found  within  the  limits  of  tlie  couutrv. 
It  is  a  tally  smooth  flag  or  reed,  with  a  large  triangular  stalk, 
containing  the  pith  which  furnished  the  paper.  The  paper 
was  manufactured  by  cutting  the  pith  into  8tri|)s^  arranging 
them  horizontally,  and  then  placing  across  them  another  layer 
of  strips,  uniting  the  two  layers  by  a  paste,  and  subjecting  the 
whole  to  a  heavy  pressure.  The  upper  and  middle  {portions  of 
the  reed  were  used  for  this  purpose.  The  fact  that  the  plant 
is  no  longer  found  is  significant  in  connection  with  Isaiah's 
prophecy  that  ^^  the  jlag%  (Heb.  «tf^A,  papyrus)  shall  waste 
away  "  (Isa.  xix.  6).  The  plant  grew  in  shallow  water  or  in 
marshes,  and  is  accordingly  represented  on  the  monuments  as  at 
the  side  of  a  stream  or  in  irrigated  lands.*  The  Jews  wrote  on 
various  materials,  such  as  the  leaves  of  the  olive  and  palm,  the 
rind  of  the  pomegranate,  and  the  skins  of  animals.  The  tablet 
{wivoKiSiov,  Luke  i.  63)  was  in  very  common  use.  It  consisted 
of  thin  pieces  of  wood,  strung  together,  and  either  plain,  or 
covered  with  papyrus  or  with  wax. 

Ink  (jMiKavo^).  Lit,  that  which  is  UacJc.  The  word  occurs 
only  once  outside  of  John's  Epistles  (2  Cor.  iii.  8),  and  only 
three  times  in  all  (2  John  12 ;  3  John  13).  Ink  was  prepared 
of  soot  or  of  vegetable  or  mineral  substances.  Oum  and  vitriol 
were  also  used.  Colored  inks,  red  and  gold,  were  also  em- 
ployed.f 

To  come  unto  you  {yevtaBcu  wp^  v/a^).  Or,  to  be  present 
with  you.    For  the  phrase,  see  1  Cor.  ii.  3 ;  xvL  10. 

Face  to  face  (<mifta  irpo^  anSfta).  Lit,  motUh  to  mouth. 
Compare  irpoccrrrov  irpo^  irpwrwrovtfaoe  tofaoe^  1  Cor.  xiii.  12. 

Full  {TreirXfipmfUpff).    Kev.,  rightly j  fulfilled. 

^  For  fuller  deUils,  see  ftrtiole  Pupifrus  Id  **  Eno/elopedl*  nrltsnnlsa,* 
9th  edition.  toI.  xtIII. 

t  See  Edenheim, «« life  and  Timei  of  Jasuf  Um  MMriah,'' IL,  270. 


THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN. 


1.  The  elder.    See  on  S  John  1. 

Gaius.  The  name  oocnra  several  times  in  the  New  Testa* 
ment,  as  Acts  xix.  29 ;  xz.  4 ;  Rom.  xvi.  SS ;  1  Cor.  i«  14.  The 
T)er8on  addressed  here  cannot  be  identified. 

1  ne  well-beloved.  Rev.,  the  bdaved.  In  the  Greek  order 
the  name  comes  first.     Gaius  the  beloveds 

In  the  truth  {ipak^Belf).  Rev.,  properly,  omitting  the  art* 
icle,  in  truth.     See  on  2  John  4. 

2.  Beloved.  Compare  the  plaral,  1  John  iii.  2,  21 ;  iv,  1, 
7,11. 

I  wish  above  all  things  (irepl  wAinwp  ei^/ioi).  Wrong. 
This  sense  of  irepl  is  contrary  to  New  Testament  usage.  The 
preposition  means  concerning.  So  Rev.  *^  I  pray  that  in  aM 
things  tbon  mayst  prosper.^'  EiypfM^  I  J>ray  or  wish^  occurs 
only  here  in  John's  writings,  and  not  often  elsewhere.  See 
Acts  XX vi.  29 ;  Rom.  ix.  3 ;  Jas.  v.  16. 

Mayst  prosper  {evo&owrBiu).  Lit,  Aot^e  aprosj)en>us  Jour' 
neg.  From  ev  weU^  and  oho^  a  way.  In  this  original  sense, 
Rom.  i.  10.  The  word  occurs  only  three  times  in  the  New 
Testament.     See  1  Cor.  xvi.  2. 

Be  in  health  {irfuUveiv).  Used  in  the  New  Testament  both 
in  a  physical  and  moral  sense.  The  former  is  found  only  hero 
and  in  Luke's  Gospel.  See  Luke  v.  31  ;  vii.  10 ;  xv.  27.  Piuil 
uses  it  of  soundness  in  faith  or  doctrine.     See  1  Tim.  i.  10 ;  vi. 


400  WOHD  STUDIES  IN  THIi  SKW  TESTAMENT. 

3 ;  2  Tim.  i.  13  ;  Titus  ii.  2.     Here  of  Gaiue'  hodily  health,  as 

is  shown  by  aoul  in  the  next  clause. 

Soul  {^'^vx^).  See  on  Mark  xii.  30;  Luke  !.  46.  Tha  smil 
{"^^X^)  '^  ^'"^  principle  of  individuality,  the  seat  of  personal 
irapreaeions.  It  Las  a  side  iu  contact  with  both  the  material 
and  the  epiritiial  element  of  humanity,  and  is  thus  the  medi- 
ating organ  between  body  and  spirit.  Its  meaning,  therefore, 
constantly  rises  above  life  or  the  living  irtdividual,  and  takea 
color  from  its  relation  to  either  the  emotional  or  the  spiritual 
side  of  life,  from  the  fact  of  its  being  tiie  seat  of  the  feelings, 
desires,  affectiona,  aversions,  and  the  hearer  and  manifester  of 
the  divine  life-principle  {Trveviia,).  Consequently  ^w)fij  is  often 
used  in  our  sense  of  Iieart  (Luke  i.  46;  ii.  35;  John  x.  24; 
Acts  xiv.  2) ;  and  the  meanings  of  "^vyfy  soul,  and  irv^fM 
spirit,  occasionally  approach  each  other  very  closely.  Compare 
John  xii.  27,  and  xi.  33 ;  Matt.  xi.  29,  and  1  Cor.  xvi.  18.  Also 
both  words  in  Luke  i.  47.  In  this  passage  "^v^  soul,  expresses 
the  soul  regarded  as  a  moral  being  designed  for  everlasting  life. 
See  Heb.  vi.  19;  x.  39;  xiii.  17;  1  Pet.  ii.  11;  iv.  19.  John 
commonly  uses  the  word  to  denote  the  principle  of  the  natural 
life.  See  John  X.  11,  15;  xiii.  37;  xv.  13;  lJohniiL16j 
Apoc.  viii.  9;  xii.  11;  xvi.  3. 

3.  Rejoiced  greatly.    See  on  2  John  4. 

Brethren  came  {ipxof^vt»f  aBt\<^v).  Lit.,  coming.  The 
present  participle  denotes  coming  from,  time  to  time,  and  not 
coming  on  a  single  occasion,  which  would  require  the  aoriat. 
On  brethren,  see  on  1  John  ii,  9. 


Thou  walkest  in  truth.   See  on  1  John  i.  S.    For  the  pfaraaa  { 
walk  in,  see  on  2  John  6.     Thou  is  emphatic,  suggesting  a  coa* 
trast  with  lees  faithful  ones,  as  Diotrephes,  ver.  9. 

4.  ^Q-j  {xapkv).  The  texts  vary ;  some  reading  ;^ii^ii'  grac6 
or  fa/vor  from  God,  on  which  see  2  John  3.  Note  the  Greek 
order:  great-jrjo'j  than  this  have  I  not. 


THIRD  EPISTLB  OF  JOHV.  401 

My  children  (r^  ^/aA  riitva).    lit,  mine  own  ekUdrtn. 

Walk  (Trep^TraToSinYi).  Rev.,  rightly,  waUkinff.  The  partici- 
ple expresses  something  habitual 

5.  Thou  doest  faithfully  {irurrhp  irouS^).  Key.,  thou  doesi 
a  faithful  work.  A  third  interpretation  is  thou  gi/oest  aj>ledge 
or  guaranty^  and  a  fourth,  akin  to  this,  tJurn  makest  sure. 
The  Rev.  is  best.  There  is  no  parallel  to  justify  the  third  and 
fourth.*  / 

Thou  doest  {ipyiarf).  Or  lit.,  according  to  the  etymology^ 
workeet  {Ipyov  toork).  See  on  Jas.  ii.  9.  The  distinction  be- 
tween this  verb  and  others  signifying  to  doj  such  as  irotehf, 
Trpdaaeiv,  Spav,  which  last  does  not  occur  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, is  not  sharply  maintained  in  Attic  Greek.  In  certain 
connections  the  difference  between  them  is  great,  in  others,  it  is 
hardly  perceptible.  On  iroiehf  and  wpdaatw^  see  on  John  iii.  21. 
'Epyd^ofuu,  like  Tr/M^o-ciy^contemplates  the  process  rather  than 
the  end  of  action,  carrying  the  ideas  of  continuity  and  repetition. 
It  means  to  labor,  to  be  aotvoe,  to  perform,  with  the  idea  of  con- 
tinued exertion,  and  therefore  is  used  of  servants,  or  of  those 
who  have  an  assigned  business  or  office.  See  Matt.  xxi.  28 ; 
XXV.  26 ;  Luke  xiii.  14 ;  John  v.  17 ;  vi.  27 ;  ix.  4 ;  1  Thess.  ii. 
9.  For  the  phrase  ip^darf  €k  thou  doest  toward  (Rev.),  see 
Matt  xxvi.  10. 

And  to  strangers  {iccX  ek  roi^  ^hwvs)  The  best  texts  read, 
instead  of  ek  roi^  to  the  (strangers),  rwrot  thai ;  so  that  the 
sentence  is,  literally,  '^to  them  that  are  brethren,  and  that 
strangers."  For  the  phrase  and  thatj  compare  1  Cor.  vi.  6 ; 
Philip,  i.  28 ;  Eph.  ii.  8. 

6.  The  Church  {hc9c\nalai).    See  on  Matt  xvL  18. 


*  Canon  Westoott  wkjt  *'no  pftimllel  is  quoted  for**  the  Ber.  rendering,  bal 
Apoo.  xxL  5,  can  luurdlj  be  esteemed  a  pvallel  to  Aw  rendering  *'  thou  mukoet 


sare." 


Vol.  1L— 26 


403 


WORD  BTUDIB8  m  THE  HBW  TESTAHBNT. 


If  thou  bring  forward  on  their  journey  (TrpOTrc/i-^ro?).  LiU 
kavhig  sevi  forward.  The  aoriBt  tense  represents  the  act  as 
scGompIiBhed.  Compare  Acts  xt.  3;  Tit.  iii.  13.  Kev.,  set 
forward. 

After  a  godly  sort  (df/ojs  tou  Sew).  Lit.,  ■worthily  of  God. 
So  Rev.     Compare  1  These,  ii.  12;  Col.  i.  10. 

Thou  shatt  do  well  (xaX^  iroi^aeK).  For  the  pliraee,  see 
Acts  X.  33  ;  Pliilip.  iv.  14 ;  Jaa.  ii.  8,  19 ;  2  Pet.  i.  19.  Rev., 
renders  the  whole  :  whom  thou  wilt  do  well  to  set  forward  on 
their  Joum^  worthily  of  God. 

1.  For  His  Name's  sake  (vrrep  tou  ovofunot).  His  is  sup- 
plied by  the  A.  V.  It  is  not  in  the  text.  Rev.,  correctly,  for 
the  sake  of  the  Name.  TTte  Name  {Jesns  Christ)  is  used  tlins 
absolutely  in  Acts  v.  41 ;  compare  Jas.  ii.  7.  For  a  similar 
absolute  use  of  the  way,  see  on  Acts  ix.  2.     See  on  1  John  i.  7. 

Taking  nothing  of  {fi/y]Biv  Xafi^avovret  atro).  For  the 
phrase  taking  of,  or  from,  see  on  1  John  i.  5. 

The  Gentiles  (eSviKotp).  This  word  occurs  elsewhere  only 
in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  The  more  common  word  is  eSp*), 
which  is  the  reading  of  the  Tex.  Rec.  here :  iSviiv.  See  on 
Luke  ii.  32. 

8.  Ought  {o^t>Mfi£v).    See  on  1  John  ii.  6. 

To  recaive  {a-n-oXaft^dveiv).  The  best  texts  read  {nroXanffav- 
etv  to  support;  i.e.,  to  welcome  with  the  provision  of  hospitality. 
Rev.,  loelamie.  The  verb  means,  originally,  io  take  underneath 
in  order  to  raise.  Ilenee,  to  support.  Figuratively,  to  take 
vpon  the  mind,  to  sttpjiosey  as  Luke  vii.  43 ;  Acts  ii.  15 :  to  take 
vp  or  follow  in  speech  /  hence  to  answer,  as  Luke  x.  30. 


Fellowhetpers  to  the  truth  (trvptpyol  ry  aXrfSeia).  Lit., 
fellow-workerx.  The  expression  ia  explained  in  two  ways: 
either  fellow- workers  with  the  teachers  (rotouTov?  such)  in  sup- 


THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  403 

port  of  the  truth ;  or  feUmo^uiorkera  vntA  l/ie  irutA,    Adopt  the 
latter,  as  Kev.* 

9.  I  wrote  unto  the  Church.  The  best  texts  insert  ri 
somewhat,  which  indicates  that  the  apostle  did  not  regard  the 
communication  as  specially  important. 

Diotraphes  {Atorpeiff^).  The  name  is  from  Alot  of  Zeua 
(Jove),  and  rpi^  to  nourish,  and  means  Jove-nursed. 

Who  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence  (6  ^iKovpartviav). 
From  the  adjective  ^iXoTrptaro':  Jhjid  of  bein^  Jirst.  The  word 
occurs  here  only. 

10.  Prating  {^^Xvap&v).  From  ^Xvto  to  luhble  up  or  boil 
over.  Hence  of  talk  which  is  both  Jhieni  and  empty.  Com- 
pare the  kindred  adjective  t^Xvapot  tattlers,  1  Tim.  v.  13. 

Them  that  would.  Those  who  were  disposed  to  receive 
the  strangers. 

Casteth  them  out.  By  excommnnication,  which,  through 
his  in^uence,  he  had  power  to  bring  abont. 

11.  Follow  fjufiov).  More  correctly,  as  Tiev., imitate.  Else- 
where only  2  Thess.  iii.  7,  9 ;  Heb.  xiii.  7.  The  kindred  word 
fUftitiT^'i  imitator,  uniformly  rendered  Jblloioer  in  A.  V.,  occnra 
1  Cor.  iv.  16;  xi.  1  ;  Epb.  v.  1,  Hence  our  word  mimic;  also 
pantomiW.     Mlfum  means  both  an  actor  and  a  kind  of  prose 

*  The  ordinarj  muga  of  ovnpTiliwith  Ihe  ^nlllve  of  the  penoD  eo-operalad 
irith  (Rom.  xti.  21  ;  1  Cor.  lit  9)  teems  against  (he  tecond  eiplanation  ;  bat 
•giliiBt  the  fornier  ie  the  fact  that  the  thing  for  vhieh,  or  en  behalf  of  ahiek, 
one  Is  a  fellow,  worker,  is  also  need  in  the  genitire  (2  Cor.  i.  24)  or  with  tis 
unfu  (CoL  It.  11  ;  S  Cor.  vlii.  23).  There  is  no  instanoe  of  the  datitnu  ram- 
modi  (eo  Alford,  Hnther).  datirt  of  Ttferrnef.  On  the  other  hand,  the  kindred 
verb  mirtfrjfiii  occurs  with  the  datire  of  the  thing  oo-operated  with  in  Jai.  il, 
22:  i  irlcmi  avrlin*'  '"''  fpf""!  ft^iUt  tonrnghl  leiifl  ^it  iforkji  (Me  Hulher'i 
note).  I  agree  with  CanoD  Westeott  that  this  constrnatiou  Is  sufficient  to  snp- 
port  the  Rer.  reudering.  Hntliar,  Altord,  and  Ebrwd  •!!  adopt  the  othar 
explanation. 


i 


4«j4  word  sttdieb  is  thb  sew  tebtamksttl 

drama,  intended  as  a  familiar  repreaentation  of  life  and  char- 
acter, and  without  anj  distinct  plot. 


That  which  is  evil — that  which  is  good  {ih  aum — to 
ajaSim).    Compare  t^  ajaSi  goody  r^  ^avKa  erilj  John  ▼.  29. 

12.  Demetrius  hath  good  report  {^fufrpi^  fi€fuiprvp9rrail 
Lit.,  urUo  Demetrius  minem  hath  been  home.    See  John  iiL  ^& 

13.  i  had  (elxop)'  The  imperfect  tense:  IvHuhavingj  when 
I  b^an  to  write. 

Pen  {luOsAiAm).  Lit,  reed.  See  Matt  xi.  7.  The  etaff  or 
eceptre  placed  in  mockery  in  Jesns'  hand.  Matt  zxyiL  29.  A. 
measurinff-reedj  Apoc.  xL  1. 

14.  Face  to  face.    See  on  2  John  13. 


THE  REVELATION  OF  JOHN. 


CHAPTER  L 


L  The  Revelation  (atro/oiXt/^t^).  The  Greek  word  is  trans* 
cribed  in  Apocalypse.  The  word  occurs  only  once  in  the  Gos- 
pels, Luke  ii.  32,  where  to  lighten  should  be  rendered  for  reve- 
lation. It  is  used  there  of  our  Lord,  as  a  light  to  dispel  the 
darkness  under  which  the  heathen  were  veiled.  It  occurs 
thirteen  times  in  Paul's  writings,  and  three  times  in  first  Peter. 

It  is  used  in  the  following  senses  : 

(a.)  TTie  tmveiling  of  something  hidden^  which  gives  light 
and  knowledge  to  those  who  behold  it.  See  Luke  iL  32  (above). 
Christianity  itself  is  the  revelation  of  a  mystery  (Rom.  xvL  25). 
The  participation  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  privileges  of  the  new 
covenant  was  made  known  by  revelation  (Eph.  iii.  3).  Paul 
received  the  Gk>spel  which  he  preached  by  revelation  (Gal.  i. 
12),  and  went  up  to  Jerusalem  by  revelation  (Gal.  ii.  2). 

(b.)  Christian  insight  into  spiritual  truth.  Paul  asks  for 
Christians  the  spirit  of  revelation  (Eph.  L  17).  Peculiar  mani- 
festations of  the  general  gift  of  revelation  are  given  in  Christ- 
ian assemblies  (1  Cor.  xiv.  6,  26).  Special  revelations  are 
granted  to  Paul  (2  Cor.  xii.  1,  7). 

(fi,)  The  second  coming  of  the  Lord  (1  Pet  i.  7,  13 ;  2  Thess. 
i.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  7)  in  which  His  glory  shall  be  revealed  (1  Pet 
iv.  13),  His  righteous  judgment  made  known  (Rom.  ii.  5),  and 
His  children  revealed  in  full  majesty  (Rom.  viii.  19). 

The  kindred  verb  airoKaXvirTa}  is  used  in  similar  connectiona 
Following  the  catesrories  given  above, 

{a.)  Gal.  i.  16 ;  iii.  23 ;  Eph.  iii.  5  ;  1  Pet  i.  12. 


406  WOED  8TUDIB8  IN  THB  NEW  TSSTAMKNT. 

(6.)  Matt.  XL  25,  27  ;  xvi.  IT  ;  Lake  x.  21,  32  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10; 
xiv.  30;  Philip,  iii.  15. 

(c.)  Matt.  X.  26  ;  Luke  ii.  35  ;  xii.  2 ;  xvii.  30 ;  Kom.  i.  17, 
18  ;  viii.  IS  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  13  ;  2  Theaa.  ii.  3,  6,  8  ;  1  Pet.  L  6  ; 
V.  1. 

The  word  is  compounded  with  otto  from,,  and  KoXmrrat  to 
cover.  Hence,  to  remove  the  cover  from  anything ;  to  unveiL 
So  of  Balaam,  "  the  Lord  opened  or  unveiled  his  eyes  {aireiM- 
\v^€v  ToiK  ocjt^Xfioixt :  Num.  xxii.  31,  Sept.).  So  Boaz  to 
Naomi's  kiasman :  "  I  thought  to  advertise  thee  :  "  Rev.,  "  dts- 
close  it  unto  tliee  "  {wTroKaXtn^  to  o5<t  aov:  Ruth  \y.  4,  Sept.). 
Lit.,  /  will  unmver  thine  ear. 

The  Douii  a-TTOKokvy^K  revelation,  occurs  only  once  in  the 
Septuagint  (1  Sam.  xx.  30),  In  the  plijeical  sense  of  uncovering. 
Tlie  verb  is  found  in  the  Septuagint  in  Dan.  ii.  19,  22,  38. 

In  classical  Greek,  the  verb  is  used  hy  ilerodotus  {i.,  lift)  of 
uncovering  the  head;  and  by  Plato:  thus,  '* reveal  (owokoX- 
if^ro?)  to  me  the  power  of  Bhetorie  "  ("  Gorgias,"  460) :  "  Un- 
cover your  chest  and  back  "  ("  Protagoras,"  352).  Both  the  verb 
and  the  nonn  occur  in  Plutarch;  the  latter  of  uncovering  the 
body,  of  waters,  and  of  an  error.  The  religious  sense,  how- 
ever, is  unknown  to  heathenism. 

The  following  words  should  be  compared  with  this :  '(hrnur- 
(a  a  vision  (Luke  i.  22 ;  Acts  xxvi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1).  "Opufta 
a  vision  (Matt,  xvii,  9  ;  Acta  ix.  10  ;  xvi,  9).  "OptuTK  a  vision 
(Acts  ii.  17  ;  Apoc.  ix.  17.  Of  visible  form,  Apoc.  iv.  3). 
These  three  cannot  be  accurately  distinguished.  They  all  de- 
note the  thing  seen  or  shown,  without  anything  to  show  whether 
it  is  understood  or  not. 

As  distinguished  from  these,  airoK£Ku^K  includes,  along 
with  the  thing  shown  or  seen,  its  interpretation  or  unveiling, 

'Etri^aveia  appearing  (hence  our  epiphginy),  is  used  in  pro- 
fane Greek  of  the  appearance  of  a  higher  power  in  order  to 
aid  men.  In  the  New  Testament  by  Paul  only,  and  always  of 
the  second  appearing  of  Christ  in  glory,  except  in  2  Tim.  i.  10, 
where  it  signifies  Ilia  first  appearing  in  the  flesh.  See  2  These, 
ii.  8  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  Tit.  ii.  13.  Aa  distinguished  from  tliis, 
airoKoKv^K  is  the  more  comprehensive  word.     An  apocalypse 


REVELATION   OP  JOHN, 

maj  include  Beveral  eirnftdvtuu  appearings.  The  appearings 
are  the  media  of  the  reoealinffs. 

iavipoMrtt  manifestation;  otAj  twice  ia  the  New  Testaiueot; 
1  Cor-  xii.  7  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2.  The  kindred  verb  ^vepixo  to  make 
manifest,  ia  of  frequent  occurrence.  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  It  ia 
not  easy,  if  poBsible,  to  show  that  this  word  liae  a  lese  dignified 
sense  than  airoicaKv^K.  The  verb  ^Mvepda  is  used  of  both  the 
first  and  the  second  appearing  of  our  Lord  (1  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  1 
John  i.  2  ;  1  Pet.  i.  20 ;  Col.  iii.  4  ;  1  Pet.  v.  i).  See  also  John 
ii.  II  ;  xxi.  I. 

Some  distingaiali  between  t^avepwa-K  as  an  external  manifesta' 
tion,  to  the  senses,  but  single  and  isolated;  while  airoKoKv^it 
is  an  inward  and  abiding  disclosure.  According  to  these,  the 
Apocalypse  or  unveiliug,  precedes  and  produces  the  ^Mvifxnatt 
or  jnanifosiation.  The  Apocalypse  contemplates  the  thing  re- 
vealed ;  the  manifestation,  the  persons  to  whom  it  is  revealed. 

The  Revelation  here  is  the  unveiling  of  the  divine  mysteries. 

Of  J«sus  Chfiat.  Not  the  manifestation  or  disclosure  of 
Jesus  Christ,  but  the  revelation  given  by  Uim. 

To  shew  {Ze'i^a^).  Frequent  in  the  Apocalypse  (iv.  1 ;  xvii. 
1  ;  xxi.  9 ;  xxii.  1).  Construe  with  IScaxef  gave:  gave  him  to 
ahffto.  Compare  "  I  will  give  him  to  sit "  (ch.  iii.  21) :  "  It  was 
given  to  hurt "  (ch.  vii.  2)  :  "  It  was  given  him  to  do  "  {A.  V. 
"  had  power  to  do  ;  "  ch.  xiii.  14). 


Servants  (SovXok). 
XX.  26;  Mark  ix.  35. 


Properly,  bond-servaaits.   See  on  Matt. 


Must  (Sel). 
God. 


As  the  decree  of  the  absolute  and  infallible 


Shortly  come  to  pass  (yei/ial^at  ec  rd^et).  For  the  phrase 
4v  Tii^ct  shortly,  see  Luke  xviii.  8,  where  yet  long  delay  is  im- 
plied. Expressions  like  this  must  be  understood,  not  according 
to  human  measurement  of  time,  but  rather  as  in  2  Pet.  iii.  8. 
Tiie  idea  is,  before  long,  as  time  is  computed  by  God-     The 


40S  WORD  STDDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

aorist  infinitive  feviaStu  is  not  begin  to  come  to  pass,  but  de- 
notes a  oom/pUte  fulfilment :  must  sbortlj  come  to  pase  in  their 
miirety. 

He  sent  {a,-jro<rreCKa^).     See  on  Matt.  x.  2,  16. 

Signified  {itr^navev).  From  <r^/ia  a  sign.  Hence,  literallj, 
gk<e  a  sign  or  token.  The  verb  occurs  outside  of  John's  writingB 
only  in  Acts  xi.  28  ;  xxv.  27.  Bee  John  xii.  33 ;  xviii.  32;  xxi. 
19.  This  is  its  only  occarrence  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  word 
is  appropriate  to  the  symbolic  character  of  the  revelation,  and 
so  in  John  xii.  33,  where  Christ  predicts  the  mode  of  His  death 
in  a  figure.     Compare  sign,  Apoc.  xii.  1. 

Angel  {ayyetiov).  Strictly,  a  messenger.  See  Matt.  xi.  10  ; 
Luke  vii.  2i;  ix.  52.  Compare  the  mediating  angel  in  the  vis- 
ions of  Daniel  and  Zechariah  {Dan.  viii.  15,  16 ;  ix.  21 ;  x.  10 ; 
Zech.  i.  19).     See  on  John  i.  51. 

Servant.  Designating  the  prophetic  office.  See  Isa.  xlix. 
5 ;  Amos  iii.  7 ;  compare  Apoc.  xix.  10 ;  xxii,  9. 

John.  John  does  not  name  himself  in  the  Gospel  or  in  the 
Epistles.  Here  "we  are  dealing  with  prophecy,  and  prophecy 
requires  the  guarantee  of  the  individual  who  is  inspired  to  utter 
it"  (Milligan).     Compare  Dan.  viii,  1 ;  ix.  2. 

2.  Bare  record  {ifjMpTvpi}<T€v).  See  on  John  i.  7.  Rev.,  hear 
witness.  The  reference  ie  to  the  present  book  and  not  to  the 
Gospel.  The  aorist  tense  is  the  epistolary  aorist.  See  on  I 
John  ii.  13,  and  compare  tlie  introdnction  to  Thncydides'  "  His- 
tory;" "  Thncydides,  an  Athenian,  if/-pte  (fiwypa^)  the  his- 
tory of  the  war,"  etc.;  placing  himself  at  the  reader's  stand- 
point, who  will  regard  the  writing  as  occurring  in  the  past. 

Word  of  God.  Not  the  personal  Word,  bat  the  prophetic 
contents  of  this  book.     See  xxii.  6. 

Testimony  (jj^prvpiav).  For  the  phrase  to  witness  a  witness 
flee  John  v.  32.     For  the  peculiar  emphasis  on  the  idea  of  wU- 


i  of  iOtt-         ^^^M 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  409 

ne88  in  John,  see  on  John  i.  7.    The  words  and  the  idea  are 
characteristic  of  the  Apocalypse  as  of  the  Gospel  and  Epistles. 

And  (re).  Omit  The  clause  all  things  t/uU  he  saw  is  in 
apposition  with  the  Word  of  Ood  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
Christy  marking  these  as  seen  by  him.     Bev.  adds  even. 

All  things  that  he  saw  (Saa  eZSey).  Lit,  as  many  things 
as  he  saw.  In  the  Gospel  John  uses  the  word  elBey  saWy  only 
twice  of  his  own  eye-witness  (i.  40 ;  xx.  8).  In  the  Apocalypse 
it  is  constantly  used  of  the  seeing  of  visions.  Compare  i.  19. 
For  the  verb  as  denoting  the  immediate  intuition  of  the  seer^ 
see  on  John  ii.  24. 

3.  Blessed  (/uucdpio^).    See  on  Matt.  v.  3. 

He  that  readeth  (6  avoffivdxricwv).  See  on  Luke  iv.  16.  The 
Header  in  the  Church.  See  2  Cor.  iii.  14.  They  that  hearj  the 
congregation.  The  words  imply  a  jptMic,  official  reading,  in 
full  religious  assembly  for  worship.  The  passage  is  of  some 
weight  in  determining  the  date  of  this  book.  The  stated  read- 
ing of  the  Apostolical  writings  did  not  exist  as  a  received  form 
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  a.d.  70. 

And  keep  {xaX  rffpovvresi).  The  absence  of  the  article  from 
TffpovvTe;  keeping  (compare  ol  oKovovre^  they  that  hear)j  shows 
that  the  hearers  and  the  keepers  form  one  class.  Trfpeip  to 
keepy  is  a  peculiarly  Johannine  word,  and  is  characteristic  of  the 
Apocalypse  as  of  the  other  writings  in  its  own  peculiar  sense  of 
^'  keeping  "  in  the  exercise  of  active  and  strenuous  care,  rather 
than  of  watching  over  to  preserve.     See  on  reservedj  1  Pet  L  4* 

Prophecy.    See  on  jm>phetj  Luke  vii.  26. 

Which  are  written  (rit  yeypofi^a).  Perfect  participle, 
ha/ve  been  written^  and  therefore  stand  written* 

The  time  (o  KOAphs).    See  on  Matt.  xii.  1. 

At  hand  {irf^^)-     I-^^j  near.    See  on  shortly ,  ver.  1. 


410  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THK  NEW  TKBTAMKNT. 

i.  John.     Note  the  absence  of  all  official  titles,  such  as  are 
found  in  Paul ;  sliowiDg  that  John  writes  as  oae  whose  position 


Seven.  Among  every  snciont  people,  especially  in  the  East, 
a  religious  significance  attaches  to  numbers.  This  grows  out  of 
the  instinctive  appreciation  that  number  and  proportion  are 
necessary  attributes  of  the  created  universe,  Tliia  sentiment 
passes  over  from  heathenism  into  the  Old  Testament.  The 
number  seven  was  regarded  by  tlie  Hebrews  as  a  sacred  num- 
ber, and  it  is  throughout  Scripture  the  covenant  number,  the 
sign  of  God's  covenant  relation  to  mankind,  and  especially  to 
the  Chui-ch.  The  evidences  of  this  are  met  in  the  hallowing  of 
the  seventh  day  ;  in  the  accomplishment  of  circumcision,  which 
is  the  sign  of  a  covenant,  after  seven  days ;  in  the  part  played 
by  the  number  in  marriage  covenants  and  treaties  of  peace.  It 
is  the  number  of  purification  and  consecration  {Lev.  iv.  6,  17 ; 
viii.  11,  33  ;  Num.  xix.  12).  "  Seven  is  the  number  of  every 
grace  and  benefit  bestowed  upon  Israel ;  which  is  thus  marked 
as  flowing  out  of  the  covenant,  and  a  consequence  of  it.  The 
priests  compass  Jericho  seven  days,  and  on  the  seventh  day 
seven  times,  that  all  Israel  may  know  that  the  city  is  given 
into  their  hands  by  God,  and  that  its  conquest  is  a  direct  and 
immediate  result  of  their  covenant  relation  to  Him,  Naaman 
is  to  dip  in  Jordan  seven  times,  that  he  may  acknowledge  the 
God  of  Israel  as  the  author  of  his  cure.  It  is  the  number  of  re- 
ward to  those  who  are  faithful  in  the  covenant  (Dent,  xxviii,  7 ; 
1  Sam.  ii.  5) ;  of  punishment  to  those  who  are  froward  in  the 
covenant  (Lev.  xxvi.  21,  24,  28  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  25),  or  to  those 
who  injure  the  people  in  it  {G«n.  iv.  15,  24;  Exod.  vii.  25  ;  P8. 
Ixxix.  12).  All  the  feasts  are  ordered  by  seven,  or  else  by 
seven  nmltiplied  into  seven,  and  thus  made  intenser  still.  Thaa 
it  is  with  the  Sabbath,  the  Passover,  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  of 
Tabernacles,  the  Sabbath-year,  and  the  Jubilee." 

Similarly  the  number  appears  in  God's  dealing  with  nations 
outside  the  covenant,  showing  that  He  is  working  for  Israel's 
sake  and  with  respect  to  His  covenant.  It  is  the  number  of  the 
years  of  plenty  and  of  famine,  in  sign  that  these  are  for  Israel's 


for  Israel's  ■ 


REVBULTIOK  OP  JOBS. 

8ake  ratlier  than  for  Egypt's.  Seven  times  paas  over  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, that  he  may  learn  that  the  God  of  his  Jewish  cap- 
tives la  kiEig  over  all  the  earth  (partly  quoted  and  partly  con- 
densed from  Trench's  "  Epistles  tu  the  Seven  Chnrclies"). 

Seven  also  occurs  as  a  sacred  number  in  the  ^ew  Testament. 
There  are  seven  beatitudes,  seven  petitions  in  the  Lord's 
Prayer ;  seven  parables  in  Matt.  xiii. ;  seven  loaves,  seven 
words  from  the  cross,  seven  deacons,  seven  graces  (Rom.  xii. 
ti-8).  seven  characteristics  of  wisdom  (Jas.  iii.  17).  In  the 
Apocalypse  the  prominence  of  the  number  is  marked.  To  a 
remarkable  extent  the  structure  of  that  book  is  moulded  by 
the  use  of  numbers,  especially  of  the  numbers  seven,  four, 
and  three.  There  are  seven  spirits  before  the  throne;  seven 
churches ;  seven  golden  candlesticks ;  seven  stars  in  the  right 
hand  of  Ilim  who  is  like  unto  a  son  of  man ;  seven  lamps  of 
fire  burning  before  the  throne  ;  seven  horna  and  seven  eyes  of 
the  Lamb ;  seven  seals  of  the  book ;  and  the  thunders,  the 
heads  of  the  great  dragon  and  of  tlie  beast  from  the  sea,  tlie 
angels  with  the  trumpets,  the  plagues,  and  the  mountains  which 
are  the  seat  of  the  mystic  Babylon, — are  all  seven  in  num- 
ber. 

So  there  are  four  living  creatures  round  abont  the  throne, 
four  angels  at  the  four  comers  of  the  earth,  holding  the  four 
winds;  the  New  Jerusalem  is  foursquare.  Authority  is  given 
to  Death  to  kill  over  the  fourth  part  of  the  earth,  and  he  em- 
ploys four  agents. 

Again  the  use  of  the  number  three  is,  as  Professor  Mtlligan 
remarks,  "bo  remarkable  and  continuous  that  it  would  require 
an  analysis  of  the  whole  book  for  its  perfect  illuBtratiou." 
There  ace  three  woes,  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs,  three  di- 
visions of  Babylon,  and  three  gates  on  each  side  of  the  heav- 
enly city.  The  THaagion,  or  "  thrice  holy,"  is  sung  to  God  the 
Almighty,  to  whom  are  ascribed  three  attributes  of  glory. 

Seven  Churches.  Not  all  the  churches  in  Asia  are  meant, 
since  the  list  of  those  addressed  in  the  Apocalypse  does  not  in- 
clude Colossse,  Miletus,  Ilierapolis,  or  Magnesia.  The  seven 
named  are  chosen  to  symbolize  the  whole  Church.     Compare 


412  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ch.  ii.  7.    Seven  being  the  number  of  the  covenant,  we  have  in 
theeo  seven  a  repreeentatioD  of  the  Church  universal. 

In  Asia.    See  on  Acte  ii.  9, 

Grace — peace.     For  grace  (^apw),  eee  on  Luke  i.  30.    Both 

words  are  need  by  Paul  in  the  salutations  of  all  his  Epistles,  ex- 
cept the  three  Pastorals. 

From  Him  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to 
come  (ano  tdO  6  Siv  KoX  6  ^v  KoX  o  ifr)(6fi€vo<{).  The  whole 
salutation  is  given  in  the  name  of  tiie  lloiy  Trinity:  the  Father 
(Him  which  is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come),  the  Spirit  (the  seven 
spirita),  the  Son  (Jesus  Christ).  See  further  below.  This  por- 
tion of  the  salutation  lias  uo  parallel  in  Paul,  and  is  distinct- 
ively characteristic  of  the  autlior  of  the  Apocalypse.  It  is  one 
of  the  solecisms  in  grammatical  construction  which  distinguishes 
this  book  froTn  the  other  writings  of  John.  Tlie  Greek  ettident 
will  note  that  the  prononn  whick  (o)  is  not  construed  with  the 
preposition  from  {diro),  which  would  require  the  genitive  case, 
but  stands  in  the  nominative  case. 

Each  of  these  three  appellations  is  treated  ss  a  proper  name. 
The  Father  is  Him  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to 
come.  This  is  a  paraphrase  of  the  unspeakable  name  of  God 
(Exod.  iii.  14),  the  absolute  and  unchangeable.  'O  &v,  the  One 
who  is,  is  the  Septnagint  translation  of  Exod.  iii.  14,  "I  am 
the  o  o>v{Iam):"  "o  we  (/am),  hath  sent  me  unto  you."  The 
One  w/io  was  (o  ^v).  The  Greek  has  no  imperfect  participle, 
60  that  the  finite  verb  is  used.  Which  is  and  which  was  form 
one  clause,  to  be  balanced  against  which  is  to  come.  Com- 
pare xi.l7;  xvi.5;  and  "wjoa  (^v)  in  the  beginning  with  God" 
(John  i.  2),  Which  is  to  come  (o  ip\o[ieiiQ^).  Lit.,  the  One  who 
ia  coming.  This  is  not  equivalent  to  who  s/iaU  be;  i.e.,  the 
author  is  not  intending  to  describe  the  abstract  existence  of 
God  as  covering  the  future  no  less  than  the  past  and  the  pres- 
ent. If  this  had  been  his  meaning,  he  would  have  written 
o  iaofifvoi,  which  shaU  he.  The  phrase  which  is  to  come  would 
not  express  the  future  eternity  of  the  Divine  Being.  The 
dominant  conception  in  the  title  Is  rather  that  of  immutdbiliiy. 


mutdbUOy.    ^^^H 


Further,  the  name  does  not  emphasize  ao  much  Qod'fl  abstract 
existence,  as  it  does  llis  permanent  covenant  relation  to  Hia 
people.  Hence  the  phraee  which  U  to  cmiie,  is  to  be  explained 
iu  accordance  with  tlie  key-note  of  the  book,  which  is  the  sec- 
ond coming  of  the  Son  (cli.  i.  7  ;  xsii.  20). 

The  phrase  which  m  to  come,  is  often  applied  to  the  Son  (see 
on  1  John  iii.  5),  and  so  thronghout  this  book.  Here  it  is  pre- 
dicated of  the  Father,  apart  from  whom  the  Son  does  nothing. 
"The  Son  is  never  alono,  even  as  Redeemer  "(Milh'gan).  Com- 
pai-e  "  We  will  come  unto  him,"  John  xiv.  23.  Origen  qnotes 
our  passage  witli  the  words:  "  But  that  you  may  perceive  that 
the  omnipotence  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  is  one  and  the 
same,  hear  John  speaking  after  this  manner  in  the  Apocalypse, 
'  Who  is,  etc'  "  Dean  Pluraptre  compares  the  inscription  over 
tiie  temple  of  Isie  at  Sais  in  Egypt:  "  I  am  all  that  has  come 
into  heing,  and  that  which  is,  and  that  which  shall  be,  and 
no  man  hath  lifted  my  veil." 

The  Spirit  is  designated  by 

The  seven  Spirits  {rStv  etrrii  ■nvevfiaTOJv).  Paul  nowhere 
joins  the  Spirit  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  his  opening 
salutations.  The  nearest  approach  is  2  Cor,  xiii.  13.  The  ref- 
erence is  not  to  the  seven  principal  angels  {ch.  viii.  2).  These 
could  not  be  properly  spoken  of  as  the  source  of  grace  and 
peace ;  nor  be  associated  with  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  nor 
take  precedence  of  the  Son,  as  is  the  case  here.  Besides,  angels 
are  never  called  tjnrits  in  this  book.  With  the  expression  com- 
pare ch.  iv.  .5,  the  seven  lamps  of  flre,  "which  are  the  seven 
Spirits  of  God : "  eh.  iii.  1,  where  Jesus  ia  eaid  to  have  "  the 
seven  Spirits  of  God."  Thus  the  seven  Spirits  belong  to  the 
Son  as  well  as  to  the  Father  (see  John  xv.  26).  The  prototype 
of  John's  expression  is  found  in  the  vision  of  Zechariah,  where 
the  Messiah  is  prefigured  as  a  stone  with  seven  eyes,  "  the  eyes 
of  the  Lord,  which  run  to  and  fro  through  the  whole  earth  " 
(Zeeh.  iii.  9  ;  iv.  10).  Compare  also  the  same  prophet's  viaion 
of  the  seven- branched  caudleatick  (iv.  2). 

Hence  the  Holy  Spirit  is  called  the  Seven  Spvrita  ;  the  per- 
fect, mystical  number  seven  indicating  unity  through  diversity 


414 


WORD  BTCDIHB  ra  THH  KBW  TEBTAMRNT. 


(1  Cor.  xii.  4).  Not  the  sevenfold  gifts  of  tlie  Spirit  are  meant, 
but  tlie  divine  Personality  who  imparts  tlieni ;  the  one  Spirit 
under  the  diverse  manifeBtations.  Richard  of  St.  Victor  (cited 
by  Ti-eocli,  "  Seven  Churches  ")  says :  "  And  from  the  seven 
Spirits,  that  is,  from  the  sevenfold  Spirit,  which  indeed  is 
simple  in  nature,  sevenfold  in  grace." 

5.  Jesus  Christ.  The  Son.  Placed  after  the  Spirit  be- 
cause what  is  to  follow  in  vv.  5-S  relates  to  Him.  Tliis  is  ac- 
cording to  John's  manner  of  arranging  bis  thoughts  so  that  a 
new  sentence  shall  spring  out  of  the  final  thonght  of  the  pre- 
ceding sentence.  Compare  the  Prologue  of  the  Gospel,  and. 
vv.  1,  2,  of  this  chapter. 

The  faithful  witness  (o  fidprw  o  vurrbii).  For  the  pliraee- 
ology  see  on  1  John  iv.  9.  For  witness,  see  on  John  i.  7 ;  1 
Pet.  V.  1.  As  applied  to  the  Messiah,  see  Ps.  Ixxxix.  37 ;  Isa. 
Iv.  4.  The  construction  again  departs  from  the  grammatical 
rule.  The  words  wiineas,  J£rst-bi>m,  tider^  are  in  the  nomina- 
tive case,  instead  of  being  in  the  genitive,  in  apposition  with 
Jesm  Christ.  This  construction,  though  irregnlar,  nevertheless 
gives  dignity  and  emphasis  to  these  titles  of  the  Ix>rd.  See  on 
ver.  4.  The  word  ■mtrvK,  faithfid  is  used  (1),  of  one  who 
shows  Hi/mself  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  a  duty  or  the  ad- 
ministration of  a  trust  (Matt.  xxiv.  45 ;  Luke  xii.  42).  Ilence, 
trustworthy  (1  Cor.  vii,  25  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2).  Of  things  that  can 
be  relied  upon  (1  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11).  (2),  Confiding; 
trusting ;  a  believer  (Gal.  iii.  9 ;  Acts  xvi,  1 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  15  ;  1 
Tim.  V.  16).  See  on  1  John  i.  9.  The  word  is  combined  with 
aKT}div6<;,  true,  genuine  in  ch.  iii.  14;  xix.  11 ;  xxi.  5  ;  xxii. 
6.  Kichard  of  St.  Victor  (cit.  by  Trench)  says :  "  A  faithful 
witness,  because  lie  gave  faithful  testimony  concerning  all 
things  which  were  to  be  testified  to  by  Ilim  in  the  world.  A 
faithful  witness,  because  whatever  lie  heard  from  the  Father, 
He  faithfully  made  known  to  His  disciples.  A  faithful  wit- 
ness, because  He  taught  the  way  of  God  in  truth,  neither  did 
He  care  for  any  one  nor  regard  the  person  of  men.  A  faithful 
witness,  because  He  announced  condemnation  to  the  reprobate 


J 


RBVBLATIOIT  Of  JOSS. 

ftnd  ealvation  to  the  elect.  A  faithful  witness,  because  lie  con- 
firmed hy  miracles  the  tnitli  which  ile  taught  in  words.  A 
faithful  witnese,  because  He  denied  not,  even  in  death,  the  Fa- 
tlier's  testimony  to  Himself.  A  faithful  witness,  because  He 
will  give  testinioi);  in  the  day  of  judgment  concerning  the 
works  of  the  good  and  of  the  evil." 

The  first* begotten  of  the  dead  (o  ttputotoko^  iK  t&v  vck- 
pSiv).  Rev.,  the  Jirst-hom.  The  best  texts  omit  sk  from. 
Compare  Col.  i.  18.  The  risen  Christ  regarded  iu  Hie  relation 
to  the  dead  in  Christ.  He  was  not  the  first  who  rose  from  the 
dead,  but  the  first  who  so  rose  that  death  was  thencefoith  im- 
possible for  Him  (Rom.  vi.  9) ;  rose  with  that  resurrection-life 
in  which  He  will  finally  bring  with  Him  those  who  sleep  in 
Him  (1  ThesB.  iv.  14).  Some  interpreters,  lenAGT'mgfiret-hot'n, 
find  in  the  phrase  the  metaphor  of  death  as  the  womb  which 
bare  Ilim  (see  on  Acts  ii.  24).  Others,  holding  by  the  render- 
ing ^rii-JcyoWen,  connect  the  passage  with  Ps.  ii.  7,  which  by 
Paul  is  connected  with  the  resurrection  of  Christ  (Acts  xiii.  32, 
33).  Paul  also  says  that  Jesus  '*  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  with  power  by  the  i-esnrrection  from  the  dead  "  (Rom.  i. 
4).  The  verb  twttw  which  is  one  of  the  components  of  Tr/xurrf- 
TOKOt  JirstrbegoUen  or  horn,  is  everywhere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment used  in  the  sense  of  to  bear  or  to  bring  forth,  and  has  no- 
where the  meaning  beget,  unless  Jas.  i.  15  be  an  exception,  on 
which  see  note.  In  classical  Greek  the  meaning  beget  is  com- 
mon. 

The  Ruler  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  (o  ap\av  rStv  fiatriK- 
iatv  Tffi  TTs).  Tlirougli  resurrection  He  passes  to  glory  and 
dominion  (Philip,  ii.  9).  The  comparison  with  the  kings  of 
the  earth  ia  suggested  by  Ps.  ii.  2.  Compare  Pb.  Ixxxlx.  37 ; 
Isa.  lii.  15  ;  1  Tim.  vL  16  ;  and  see  Apoc.  vi.  15  ;  xriL  4 ;  lix. 
16. 

Unto  Him  that  loved  (t^  afa-rr^travri).  The  true  reading  is 
a'^anrCivTt  that  loveth.  So  Rev.  Christ's  love  is  ever  present. 
See  John  xiii.  1. 


I 


416 


VOBD  STUDIES  IN  THB  HTHW  TEBTAKBNT. 


Washed  {XoCa-aim).  Read  Xviravn  loosed.  Trench  remarks 
on  the  variation  of  readings  as  having  grown  out  of  a  ptaj  on 
tlie  words  \oirrp6v,  a  batlurig,  and  \vTpov  a  ranaom,  both  of 
which  express  the  central  benefits  which  redound  to  us  through 
tlie  sacrifice  and  doalii  of  Christ.  Ke  refers  to  this  play  upon 
words  as  involved  in  the  etymology  of  the  name  Apollo  as 
given  by  Plato  ;  viz.,  the  washer  [a  airoKoviav)  and  the  absolver 
(6  aiToXutoi')  from  all  impurities.  Either  reading  falls  in  with 
a  beautiful  circle  of  imagery.  If  washed,  compare  Ps.  li.  2 ; 
Isa.  i.  16,  18;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25;  Acts  xxii.  16;  Eph.  v.  26; 
Tit.  iii.  5.  If  loosed,  compare  Matt.  xx.  2d ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  1 
Pet.  i.  18 ;  Heb.  ix.  12 ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  iv.  5  ;  Apoc.  v.  9 ;  xiv. 
3,4. 

6,  Kings  (/3a<r(Xct9),  The  correct  reading  is  ^aaikelav  a 
kingdom.  The  term  Kinij  is  never  applied  in  the  New  Test- 
ament to  individual  Christians.  The  reigning  of  the  saints 
is  emphasized  in  this  book.  See  ch.  v.  10 ;  xx.  4,  6  ;  xxii.  5, 
Compare  Dan.  vii.  18,  22, 

Priests  {iepek).  Kingdom  deacribee  the  body  of  the  re- 
deemed coUectkietg.  Priests  indicates  their  individxtal  position. 
Peter  observes  the  same  distinction  (1  Pet.  ii,  5)  in  the  phrases 
ImUig  stories  (individuals)  and  a  spiritual  house  (the  body  col- 
lectively), and  combines  both  kings  and  priests  in  another  collect- 
ive term,  royal  priest/tood  (ver  9).  The  priesthood  of  believers 
grows  out  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ  (Ps.  ex.  4  ;  Zeeh.  vi.  13; 
Ileb.  vii.-x.).  This  dignity  was  promised  to  Israel  on  the  condit- 
ion of  obedience  and  fidelity  to  God.  "  Ye  shall  be  a  kingdom 
of  priests  and  a  holy  nation"  (Exod.  xix.  6).  In  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  each  individual  is  a  priest.  The  priest's  work  is  not 
limited  to  any  order  of  the  ministry.  All  may  offer  the  sacri- 
fice of  praise  and  thanksgiving:  all  have  direct  access  to  the 
holiest  through  the  blood  of  Jesus :  all  Christians,  as  priests, 
are  to  minister  to  one  another  and  to  plead  for  one  another. 
The  consummation  of  this  ideal  appears  in  Apoc.  xxi,  22,  where 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem  is  represented  as  without  temple.  It 
is  aU  temple.     "  It  is  the  abolition  of  the  distinction  I 


ition  between  I 


RBVELATIOK  OK  JOHN.  417 

holy  and  profane  (Zecli.  xiv.  20,  21) — nearer  and  more  remote 
from  God  —  tlirough  all  being  henceforth  holy,  all  being 
brought  to  the  nearest  whereof  it  is  capable,  to  Him  "  (Trench). 

Unto  God  and  His  Father  (t^  8ew  ko*  Trarpl  airrov). 
Lit.,  to  the  Ood  and  Father  of  Him.  Hence  Rev.,  correctly, 
Hia  Ood  and  Father.  For  the  phrase  compare  Rom.  xv.  6  ;  2 
Cor.  i.  3 ;  Eph.  i.  3. 

Glory  and  dominion  (^  Zo^a  muU  to  Kpdrot).  Rev,,  correct- 
ly, rendering  the  two  articles,  "  Mrf  glory  and  iA<?  dominion." 
The  articles  express  universality :  all  glory  ;  that  whicli  every- 
where and  under  every  form  represents  glory  and  dominion. 
The  verb  be  (the  glory)  is  not  in  the  text.  We  may  render 
either  as  an  ascription,  he,  or  as  a  confession,  ia.  The  glory  is 
His.  Ao^a  glory  means  originally  opinion  orfudgmeTit.  In  this 
sense  it  is  not  used  in  Scripture.  In  the  sacred  writers  always 
of  a  good  or  favorable  opinion,  and  hence  praise,  honor,  glory 
(Luke  xiv.  10  ;  Ueb,  iii.  3  ;  1  Pet.  v.  4).  Applied  to  physical 
ohjects,  as  light,  the  heavenly  bodies  (Acts  xxii.  11  ;  1  Cor.  sv. 
40).  The  visihle  brightness  in  manifestations  of  God  (Luke  ii. 
9 ;  Acts  vii.  55 ;  Lnke  ix.  32 ;  2  Cor.  iii,  7),  Magn\ficenae, 
dignity  (Matt,  iv,  8  ;  Luke  iv.  6).  Divins  rrbojeaty  or  perfeiA 
excdlence,  especially  in  doxologies,  either  of  God  or  Christ 
(1  Pet.  iv.  11;  Jude  25;  Apoc  iv.  9,  11 ;  Matt.  xvi.  27; 
Mark  x.  37  ;  viii.  38  ;  Luke  ix.  26  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18  ;  iv.  4).  The 
glory  or  majesty  of  divine  grace  (Eph.  i.  6,  12,  14,  18  ;  1  Tim. 
i.  11).  The  majesty  of  angels  (Lnke  ix.  36 ;  Jude  8  ;  2  Pet.  ii. 
10),  T/te  glorious  condition  of  Christ  after  accomplishing  His 
earthly  work,  and  of  the  redeemed  who  share  His  eternal  glory 
(Luke  xsiv.  26  ;  John  svii.  5  ;  Philip,  iii.  21 ;  I  Tim.  iii.  16  ; 
Rom.  viii.  18,  21 ;  ix.  23  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17  ;  Col.  i.  27). 

Trench  remarks  upon  the  prominence  of  the  doxological  ele- 
ment in  the  highest  worship  of  the  Church  as  contrasted  with 
the  very  subordinate  place  which  it  often  occupies  in  ours. 
"  We  can  perhaps  make  our  requests  known  unto  God,  and 
this  is  well,  for  it  is  prayer;  bnt  to  give  glory  to  God,  (jnite 
apart  from  anything  to  be  directly  gotten  by  ourselves  in  rfr 
Vol.  IL— 27 


J 


418 


WORD  BTUDIR8  IN  THK  KKW  TBBTAHBNT. 


turn,  this  is  better,  for  it  is  adoration."  Dr.  John  Brown  in 
Ills  Memoir  of  liia  father,  one  of  the  very  finest  biographical 
eketchee  in  English  literature,  records  a  formula  used  by  liiui 
ill  closing  his  prayers  on  specially  solemn  occasions :  "  And 
now  unto  Thee,  O  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  one 
Jehovah  and  our  God,  we  would — as  is  most  meet — with  the 
Church  on  eartli  and  the  Church  iu  heaven,  ascribe  all  honor 
and  glory,  dominion  and  majesty,  as  it  was  in  the  beginning, 
is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world  without  end.  Amen  "  ("  Horse 
Siibsecivaa  ").  Compare  the  doxologies  in  1  Pet.  iv.  11  ;  Gal. 
i.  5  ;  Apoe.  iv.  9,  11 ;  v.  13  ;  vii.  12 ;  Jude  25  ;  1  Chron.  xxix. 
11. 

Forever  and  ever  {eh  to^  aUtva^  rmv  aiatutov).  Lit.,  unto 
Ifie  ages  of  the  ages.  For  the  phrase  compare  Gal.  i.  5 ;  Heb.  xiii. 
21 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11,  It  occurs  twelve  times  in  the  Apocalypse, 
hut  not  in  John's  Gospel  or  Epistles.  It  is  the  formula  of 
eternity. 

Amen  (a/i:^f).  The  English  word  is  a  tranecription  of  the 
Greek  and  of  the  Hebrew.  A  verbal  adjective,  meaning  fina, 
falthftd.  Hence  otip^i/,  tlieAinen,  applied  to  Christ  (Apociii, 
14).  It  passes  into  an  adverbial  sense  by  which  eomething  is 
asserted  or  confirmed.  Thus  often  used  by  Christ,  verily. 
John  alone  uses  the  double  affirmation,  verily,  verily.  See  on 
John  i.  51 ;  x.  1. 

7.  He  Cometh  with  clouds  {ipxeroi  /i^i  t&v  ve^XSw). 
The  clouds  are  frequently  used  in  the  descriptions  of  the  Lord's 
second  coming.  See  Dan.  vii.  13;  Matt.  xxiv.  30;  xxvi.  64; 
Mark  xiv.  62.  Compare  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the 
clouds  at  Sinai,  in  the  cloudy  pillar,  the  Sliekinah,  at  the  trans- 
figuration, and  see  Fe.  xcvii.  3 ;  xviii  11 ;  Nahnm  i.  3 ;  Isa. 
xix.  1. 

Shall  see  {^-^tu).  The  verb  denotes  the  physical  act,  but 
emphasizes  the  mental  discernment  accompanying  it,  and  points 
to  the  result  rather  than  to  the  act  of  vision.    See  on  John  i.  IS. 


RBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  419 

Appropriate  here  as  indicating  the  quickened  spiritaal  discern- 
ment engendered  by  the  Lord's  appearing,  in  those  who  have 
rejected  Uiin,  and  wl^o  now  mourn  for  their  folly  and  sin. 

They  which  (otrive^).  The  compound  relative  describes  a 
class.     See  on  Matt.  xiii.  52 ;  xxi.  41 ;  Mark  xii.  18. 

Pierced  {i^eKhmfcav).  See  on  John  xix.  34,  and  compare 
Zech.  xii.  10 ;  John  xix.  36.  The  expression  hei*e  refers  not  to 
the  Jews  only,  but  to  all  who  reject  the  Son  of  Man ;  those  who 
^^  in  any  age  have  identified  themselves  with  the  Spirit  of  the 
Saviour's  murderers"  (Milligan).  The  passage  is  justly  cited 
as  a  strong  evidence  that  the  author  of  the  Gospel  is  also  the 
author  of  the  Apocalypse. 

Kindreds  (^t/Xol).  More  correctly,  tribes.  The  word  used 
of  the  true  Israel  in  ch.  v.  5 ;  vii.  4-8 ;  xxi.  12.  As  the  tribes 
of  Israel  are  the  figure  by  which  the  people  of  Gk>d,  Jew  or 
Gentile,  are  represented,  so  unbelievers  are  here  represented  as 
tribeSj  '^  the  mocking  counterpart  of  the  true  Israel  of  God." 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  30,  31. 

Shall  wail  because  of  Him  {/cS^vnu  iir  airrov).  Bev., 
better,  shall  mourn  over  Sim.  Lit,  shall  beat  their  breasts. 
See  on  Matt.  xi.  17. 

8.  Alpha  and  Omega  {t6  A  teal  to  fl).  Bev.,  rightly,  gives 
the  article,  ^^  the  Alpha,"  etc.  The  words  are  explained  by  the 
gloss,  properly  omitted  from  the  text,  the  begirmvng  and  the 
ending.  The  Rabbinical  writers  used  the  phrase  from  Aleph 
to  Tam^  to  signify  completdy^from  beginning  to  end.  Thus  one 
says,  ^^  Adam  transgressed  the  whole  law  from  Aleph  even  to 
Tav."     Compare  Isa.  xii.  4 ;  xliii.  10 ;  xliv.  6. 

The  Lord  (o  Kvpios!).  See  on  Matt.  xxi.  3.  The  best  texts 
read  Kvpia^  6  6eo9,  the  Lord  the  God.     Rev.,  the  Lord  Ood. 

Which  is,  etc.  See  on  ver.  4.  '^GKxl,  as  the  old  tradition 
declares,  holding  in  Ilis  hand  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of 
all  that  is"  (Plato,  "Laws,"  715). 


420  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  Almighty  (o  wamoKpaTap).  Used  only  once  outside  of 
the  Apocalypse,  in  9  Cor.  vi.  IS,  where  it  is  a  quotation.  Con- 
etantly  in  the  Septuagint. 

9.  I  John.     Compare  Dan.  vii.  28 ;  iz.  2;  x.  2. 

Who  am  also  your  brother  (o  koI  dBeXiftiK  ii/jAv).  Omit 
leai,  also,  and  render  as  Rev.,  ,/o/in  your  brother. 

Companion  {avyKOivtoi'o'i).  Rev.,  better,  jxirtaker  witA  you. 
See  Pbilip.  i.  7,  and  note  oxi partners,  Luke  v.  10.  Kotvtavo<i,  is 
apa/rtner,  aaaooiate.  Svv  streugthens  the  term :  partner  along 
with.  Compare  John's  favorite  word  in  the  First  Epistle, 
Kouwvia  fellovyahvp,  1  John  i.  3. 

In  the  tribulation,  etc.  Denoting  the  sphere  or  element  in 
which  the  fellowiiliip  subsisted. 

Tribulation  {S-Xl'^i).  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  21.  Persecution 
for  Christ's  sake,  and  illustrated  by  John's  own  banisbiuent. 

Kingdom  {^a^iKeia).  The  present  kingdom.  Trench  ia 
wrong  in  saying  that  "  while  the  tribulation  ia  present  the 
kingdom  is  only  in  hope."  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  assur- 
ance of  being  n/no  within  the  kingdom  of  Christ  —  under 
Christ's  sovereignty,  fighting  the  good  fight  under  His  leader- 
ship— which  gives  hope  and  courage  and  patience.  The  king- 
dom of  God  is  &  present  energy,  and  it  is  a  peculiarity  of  John 
to  treat  the  eternal  life  as  already  present.  See  John  iii,  36; 
v,24;  vi.  47,  54;  1  John  v.  11.  "/n  all  these  things  we  are 
abundantly  the  conquerors  (Rom.  viii,  37  sqq.).  This  may  go  to 
explain  the  peculiar  order  of  the  three  woi-ds;  trihiifation  and 
kingdom,  two  apparently  antithetic  ideas,  being  joined,  with  a 
true  insight  into  their  relation,  and  ptitience  being  added  as  tbe 
element  through  which  the  tribulation  is  translated  into  sover- 
eignty. The  reference  to  the/uture  glorious  consummation  of 
the  kingdom  need  not  be  rejected.  It  is  rather  involved  in  the 
present  kingdom.     Patience,  which  links  tbe  life  of  tribulation 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  421 

with  the  sovereignty  of  Christ  here  npon  earth,  likewise  links 
it  with  the  consummation  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  heaven. 
Throogh  faith  and  patience  the  subjects  of  that  kingdom  in- 
herit the  promises.  ^^  Rightly  he  says  first  Mn  the  tribula- 
tion' and  adds  afterwards  4n  the  kingdom,'  because,  if  we 
suffer  together  we  shall  also  reign  together "  (Richard  of  St. 
Victor,  cit  by  Trench).    Compare  Acts  xiv.  22. 

Patience.    See  on  2  Pet  i.  6 ;  Jas.  v.  7. 

Of  Jesus  Christ  C^ffoxA  Xpurrov).  The  best  texts  omit 
Chrut  and  insert  iv  in;  rendering,  as  Rev.,  '^kingdom  and 
patience  which  are  in  Jesvs.^^ 

Was  (iyevofi/rpi).  Lit.,  I  came  to  pass^  i.e.,  I  found  my^df. 
The  past  tense  seems  to  imply  that  John  was  no  longer  in  Fat- 
mos  when  he  wrote. 

Patmos.  Now  called  Patino  and  PahnoM.  In  the  ./Egean, 
one  of  the  group  of  the  Sporades,  about  twenty-eight  miles 
S.  S.W.  of  Samos.  It  is  about  ten  ndles  long  by  six  in  breadth. 
The  island  is  volcanic,  and  is  bare  and  rocky  throughout ;  the 
hills,  of  which  the  highest  rises  to  nearly  a  thousand  feet,  com- 
manding a  magnificent  view  of  the  neighboring  sea  and  islands. 
The  bay  of  La  Scala,  running  into  the  land  on  the  east,  divides 
the  island  into  two  nearly  equal  parts,  a  northern  and  a  south- 
em.  The  ancient  town,  remains  of  which  are  still  to  be  seen, 
occupied  the  isthmus  which  separates  La  Scala  from  the  bay 
of  Merika  on  the  western  coast.  The  modem  town  is  on  a 
hill  in  the  southem  half  of  the  island,  clustered  at  the  foot  of 
the  monastery  of  St.  John.  A  grotto  is  shown  called  ^'  the 
grotto  of  the  Apocalypse,"  in  which  the  apostle  is  said  to  have 
received  the  vision.  '^  The  stem,  mgged  barrenness  of  its  broken 
promontories  well  suits  the  historical  fact  of  the  relegation  of 
the  condemned  Christian  to  its  shores,  as  of  a  convict  to  his 
prison.  The  view  from  the  topmost  peak,  or,  indeed,  from  any 
lofty  elevation  in  the  islands,  unfolds  an  unusual  sweep,  such  as 
well  became  the  Apocalypse,  the  unveiling  of  the  future  to  the 
eyes  of  the  solitary  seer.    Above,  there  was  always  the  broad 


432  WORD  STtlDUffl  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

heaven  of  a  Greciausky;  eometimes  bright  with  its  'wbita 
cloud '  (Apoc.  xiv,  14),  aometimes  torn  with  '  iiglitniogs  and 
thmiderings,'  and  darkened  by  '  great  hail,'  or  cheered  with  '  a 
rainbow  like  unto  ao  emerald '  {Apoc.  iv.  3  ;  viii,  7 ;  xi.  19 ; 
xvi.  21).  Over  the  high  tops  of  Icaria,  Samoa,  aud  Nazos  rise 
the  luountaine  of  Asia  Minor ;  amongst  which  would  lie,  to  the 
north,  the  circle  of  the  Seven  Churches  to  which  his  addresses 
were  to  be  sent.  Around  him  stood  the  mountains  and  ialauds 
of  the  Archipelago  (Apoc.  vi.  14;  xvi.  20),  When  he  looked 
round,  above  or  below,  '  the  sea '  would  always  occupy  the  fore- 
most place  .  .  .  the  voices  of  heaven  were  like  the  sound 
of  the  waves  beating  on  the  shore,  as  '  the  sound  of  many  wa- 
ters' (Apoc.  xiv.  2  ;  xix.  6) ;  the  millstone  was  'cast  into  the 
sea '  (Apoc.  xviii.  21) ;  the  sea  was  to  '  give  up  the  dead  which 
were  in  it'  (Apoc.  xx.  13) "  (Stanley,  "  Sermons  in  the  East  "). 

For  the  word  of  God  (S(i  tov  \6yov  tot)  8eoO).  I^or  is  be- 
cause of:  on  account  of.  The  expression  is  commonly  explained 
with  reference  to  John's  banishment  as  a  martyr  for  Christian 
truth.  Some,  however,  especially  those  who  desire  to  over- 
throw John's  authorship  of  the  book,  explain  that  he  was  ia 
PatmoB  Jhr  the  sake  of  preaching  the  word-  there,  or  in  order  to 
receive  a  comninnication  of  the  word  of  God,  Apart,  however, 
from  the  general  tone  of  John's  address,  which  implies  a  seasoa 
of  persecution,  the  phrase  for  the  word  of  God  occurs  in  two 
passages  where  the  meaning  cannot  be  doubtful ;  ch.  vi.  9,  and 


Testimony  (jiaprvpiav).     See  on  John  i.  7. 

Of  Jesus  Christ.     Omit  Christ. 

10.  I  was  {eyeiiofi^p).     See  on  ver.  9, 

In  the  Spirit  (ev  irvev/MiTt).  The  phrase  /zeas  in  t\«  Spirit 
occurs  only  here  and  ch.  iv,  2:  in  the  Spirit,  in  ch.  xvii,  3; 
xxi.  10.  The  phrase  denotes  a  state  of  trance  or  spiritual 
ecstasy.  Compare  Acts  x.  10;  2  Cor,  xii,  2,  4,  "Connection 
with  surrounding  objects  through  the  senses  is  suspended,  and 


RBTELATIOH  OP  JOHN.  423 

a  connection  with  the  inneible  world  takes  place"  (Ebrard). 
"  A  divine  release  from  the  ordinary  ways  of  men "  (Plato, 
"Phtedra8,"265). 

"  You  ask,  '  How  can  we  know  the  infinite ) '  I  answer,  not 
by  reason.  It  is  the  office  of  reason  to  distinguish  and  define. 
The  infinite,  therefore,  cannot  be  ranked  among  its  objects. 
You  can  only  apprehend  the  infinite  by  a  faculty  superior  to 
reason;  by  entering  into  a  state  in  which  you  are  your  finite 
self  no  longer;  in  whicli  the  divine  essence  is  communicated  to 
you.  This  is  ecatacy.  It  is  the  liberation  of  your  mind  from 
its  finite  consciousness.  .  .  .  But  this  sublime  condition  is 
not  of  permanent  duration.  It  is  only  now  and  then  that  we 
can  enjoy  this  elevation  (mercifully  made  possible  for  us)  above 
the  limits  of  the  body  and  the  world.  .  .  .  All  that  tends 
to  purify  and  elevate  the  mind  will  assist  you  in  this  attainment, 
and  facilitate  the  approach  and  the  recurrence  of  these  happy 
intervals.  There  are  then  different  roads  by  which  this  end 
may  be  reached.  The  love  of  beauty  which  exalts  the  poet ; 
that  devotion  to  the  Que,  and  that  ascent  of  science  which 
makes  the  ambition  of  the  philosopher ;  and  that  love  and  those 
prayers  by  which  some  devout  and  ardent  soul  tends  in  its 
moral  purity  towards  perfection.  These  are  the  great  highways 
conducting  to  heights  above  the  actual  and  tlie  particular,  where 
we  stand  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  Infinite  who  shines 
out  as  from  the  deeps  of  the  soul"  (Letter  of  Plotiuus,  about 
A.D.  260). 

Richard  of  St.  Victor  (died  1173)  lays  down  six  stages  of 
contemplation :  two  in  the  province  of  the  imagination,  two  in 
the  province  of  reason,  and  two  in  the  province  of  intelligence. 
The  third  heaven  is  open  only  to  the  eye  of  intelligence — that 
eye  whoso  vision  is  clarified  by  divine  grace  and  a  holy  life.  In 
the  highest  degrees  of  contemplation  penitence  avails  more  than 
science ;  sighs  obtain  what  is  impossible  to  reason.  Some  good 
men  have  been  ever  unable  to  attain  the  highest  stage  ;  few  are 
fully  winged  with  all  the  six  pinions  of  contemplation.  In  the 
ecstasy  he  describes,  there  is  supposed  to  be  a  dividing  asunder 
of  the  soul  and  the  spirit  as  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  body  sleeps,  and  the  soul  and  all  the  visible  world  is  shut 


424 

away.     Tlie  spirit  is  joined  to  the  Lord,  and,  one  with  Him, 
transcends  itself  and  all  the  iimitationa  of  human  tiiought 

Siifiem  IB  the  mystical  aflceticism  of  MohammedaniBm.     The 
ecstasy  of  a  Sufi  saint  is  thus  described  : 

"  Hj  tongue  olive  fever-drj,  m;  blood  rvi  Qre, 
M;  iiighU  were  ileepleBS  with  consaming  lore. 
Till  night  uid  da;  Bped  past  — as  flies  a  laooe 
Groilu);  a  buokior's  rim  -.  a  hundred  foilbs 
SeHtued  lliere  as  one  ;  a  bandred  UiQiuand  jeara 
No  longdr  than  a  momaat.     In  that  hour 
All  paet  eternity  uid  all  to  aome 
Waa  gathered  up  in  one  itnpendoui  Nou, — 
Let  understandiiig  marvel  as  it  maj. 
Where  men  see  olonda,  on  the  ninth  heaven  I  gaae, 
And  see  the  throne  of  Qod.     All  heaven  and  bell 
Are  bare  to  me  and  all  man's  deetiuieg, 
The  heavens  and  earth,  the;  vanish  at  mj  glance; 
The  dead  rise  at  my  look.     1  tear  the  veil 
Pram  all  the  world,  and  In  the  ball  of  heaven 
I  Bat  me  central,  radiant  as  the  san." 

Vanghau,  "  Houn  with  the  Hjitioi, 

Beatrice  says  to  Dante: 

"  We  from  the  greatest  bodj 
Bave  Issued  to  the  heaven  that  Is  pare  light; 
Light  intellectual  replete  with  love, 
J  ove  of  true  good  replete  with  eoBtasy, 
Bestasj  that  transoendeth  every  aweetuen." 

Dante  sayB : 

"  I  perceived  myself 
To  be  uplifted  over  my  own  power, 

And  1  with  vision  new  rekindled  me,  I 

Such  that  no  light  whatever  is  bo  pare 
But  that  mine  eyes  were  fortified  against  it." 

■'P»r»dl8o,"iix..  38-60. 

Again,  just  before  the  consummate  beatific  vision,  Daute 
Bays: 

"  And  I,  who  to  the  end  of  all  desires 
Was  now  approaching,  even  as  I  oaght 

The  ardor  uf  desire  within  me  ended. 
Bernard  was  beckoning  unto  me,  and  smiling, 


BEVBLAISON  OF  JOHN.  425 

That  I  should  upward  look  ;  but  I  already 
Was  of  mj  own  aooord  snoh  as  he  wished ; 
Because  mj  sight,  becoming  purified, 
Was  entering  more  and  more  into  the  raj 
Of  the  High  Light  which  of  itself  is  true. 
From  that  time  forward  what  I  saw  was  greater 
Than  our  discourse,  that  to  such  vision  yields, 
And  yields  the  memory  unto  such  excess.'* 

*'  Paradiso,"  zxziiL,  46-1^7. 

On  the  Lord's  day  {<h  tevpuue§  ^fUpqi).  The  phrase  oocurB 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament  The  first  day  of  the  week, 
the  festival  of  the  Lord's  resurrection.  Not,  as  some,  the  day 
of  judgment,  which  in  the  New  Testament  is  expressed  by  1} 
Vf^p^  Tov  Kvplov  the  day  of  the  Lord  (2  Thess.  ii.  2) ;  or  iipipa 
Kvplovthe  day  of  the  Lordy  the  article  being  omitted  (2  Pet  iii. 
10) ;  or  i)iiipa  Xpiarau  the  day  of  Christ  (Philip,  ii.  16).  The 
usual  New  Testament  expression  for  the  first  day  of  the  week 
is  17  fila  T&v  aafffidrmv  (Luke  xxiv.  1 ;  see  on  Acts  xx.  7). 

Behind  me.  The  unexpected,  overpowering  entrance  of  the 
divine  voice.    Compare  Ezek.  iii.  12. 

Of  a  trumpet  {ardKirvffo^).    Properly,  a  war  trumpet. 

11.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last. 

Omit 

Thou  seest  (fiKhreisi).    See  on  John  i.  29. 

Write  (ypdy^p).  The  aorist  imperative,  denoting  instantan- 
eous action.     Write  at  once^  promptly. 

In  a  book  (€^9  fiiffXlov).  Lit.,  itUo.  Commit  in  writing  to 
a  book.  For  hook  see  on  Matt.  xix.  7  ;  Mark  x.  4;  Luke  iv.  17. 
The  command  to  write  is  given  twelve  times  in  the  Apocalypsa 

Seven  churches.    See  on  ver.  4. 
Which  are  in  Asia.    Omit 


426  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  ITBff  TBaTAMKST. 

EphesuSf  etc.  Five  out  of  the  seven  cities  here  attmed 
appear  in  a  passage  in  Tacitus'  "Annals  '"  (iv,,  55),  in  which  is 
described  a  contention  among  eleven  of  the  cities  of  proconsu- 
lar Asia  fur  the  privilege  of  erecting  a  statue  and  a  temple  to 
TibeiiHs.  Laodicea  is  passed  over  as  unequal  in  wealth  and 
dignity  to  the  task.  Philadelphia  and  Thyatira  do  not  appear. 
Pergamuin  is  rejected  as  having  already  a  temple  to  Augustus. 
Ephesus  (with  Miletus)  has  sufficient  employment  for  its  state 
in  the  ceremonies  of  its  own  deity,  Diana.  Thus  the  dispute 
was  confined  to  Sardis  and  Smyrna ;  and  Smyrna  was  preferred 
on  the  ground  of  its  friendly  offices  to  the  Koman  people. 

12.  To  see  the  voice.     The  voice  is  put  for  the  speaker. 

That  spake  (^tw).  The  compound  relative  has  a  qualitative 
force:  ofwfuUsart. 

With  me  {jt^r  i/iou).  The  preposition  implies  conversation 
and  not  mere  address. 

Candlesticks  (Xv^yieK).  See  on  Matt.  v.  15.  We  are  at  once 
reminded  of  the  seven- branched  candlestick  of  the  tabernacle 
(Exod.  XXV.  31 ;  Heb.  ix.  2 ;  compare  Zecli.  iv.  2).  Here  there 
ie  not  one  candlestick  with  seven  branches,  but  seven  candle- 
sticks, representing  the  Cliristian  ChurcJi.  The  Jewish  Church 
was  one,  as  being  the  Church  of  a  single  people.  The  Christian 
Church,  though  essentially  one,  is  a  Church  composed  of  many 
peoples.  It  is  no  longer  outwai^dly  one  or  in  one  place.  Accord- 
ing to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,  lampstand,  the  several 
lauipstands  are  bearers  of  the  light  (Matt.  v.  14,  16),  "holding 
forth  the  word  of  life"  (Philip,  ii.  15, 16). 

The  epithet  golden,  so  common  in  the  Apocalypse,  indicatea 
the  preciousness  of  all  that  pertains  to  the  Chnrch  of  God. 
Trench  observes  that  throughout  the  ancient  East  there  was  a 
sense  of  sacredness  attached  to  this  metal,  which  still,  to  a  great 
extent,  survives.  Tims,  golileii  in  the  Zend  Avesta  is  tlirough- 
out  synonymous  with  heavenly  or  divine.  Even  so  late  as  the 
time  of  D.ivid  gold  was  not   used  as  a  standard  of 


value,  but  J 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  427 

merely  as  a  very  precioas  article  of  commerce,  and  was  weighed. 
In  the  Scriptures  it  is  the  symbol  of  great  valoe,  duration,  in- 
corruptibility, strength  (Isa.  xiii.  12 ;  Lam.  iy.  2 ;  2  Tim.  ii  20 ; 
Job  xxxvi.  19).  It  is  used  metaphorically  of  Christian  character 
( Apoc.  iii  18).  In  the  Earthly  Paradise,  Dante  describes  trees 
like  gold. 

'*  A  little  farther  on,  seven  trees  of  gold 
In  sembUnoe  the  long  space  still  interyening 
Between  ouraelyes  and  them  did  coonterfeit" 

•*  Purgatorio,"  xxix.,  48-45. 

13.  Seven.    Omit 

The  Son  of  Man.  The  article  is  wanting  in  the  OreeL 
Kev.,  ^^  a  son  of  man."  But  the  reference  is  none  the  less  to 
the  Lord,  and  is  not  equivalent  to  a  man.  Compare  John  v.  27 ; 
Apoc.  xiv.  14. 

A  garment  down  to  the  foot  {iroiiipfff).  Ciompare  Dan. 
X.  5.  From  wink,  thefooty  and  Sipvi^  to  fasten  :  hence  that  which 
•connects  head  and  foot.  The  word  is  properly  an  adjective, 
reaching  to  the  footy  with  ^^/rooy  garment^  understood.  Xeno- 
phon  speaks  of  the  heavy-armed  soldiers  of  the  Persians  as 
bearing  wooden  shields  reaching  to  their  feet  (^roSi^/Teo-i  ^\lvai,^ 
aawiaiv )  "  Anabasis,"  i.,  8,  9).  The  word  occurs  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  several  times  in  the  Septuagint ;  as 
Ezek.  ix.  2,  3,  11,  where  the  A.  Y.  gives  merely  linen;  Exod. 
xxviii.  4,  A.  V.,  robe;  of  the  High-Priest's  garment,  Levit.  xvL 
4  ;  of  Aaron's  holy  linen  coat. 

The  long  robe  is  the  garment  of  dignity  and  honor.  It  may 
be  either  royal,  or  priestly,  or  both.     Compare  Isa.  vi.  1. 

Girt  about  the  paps  {wepie^mar/iimv  irpo^  roi^  fuurrok). 
Rev.,  more  correctly,  ^^girt  about  at  {vpo^)  the  breasts."  Com- 
pare ch.  XV.  6.  The  ordinary  girding  was  at  the  loins.  Ac- 
cording to  Josephus,  the  Levitical  priests  were  girded  about  the 
breast 

A  golden  girdle.  The  girdle  is  an  Old  Testament  symbol 
of  power,  righteousness,  truth  (Isa.  xxii.  21 ;  Job  xiL  18 ;  Isa. 


428  WORD  8TDDIE8  IN  THB  NEW  TBBTAMKNT. 

xi.  5).  Compare  Eph.  vi.  1 4,  where  the  girdle  of  ttie  ChriBtian 
panoplj'  is  truth,  which  binds  together  the  whole  array  of  graces 
as  the  girdle  does  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  the  armor.  The 
girdle  suits  equally  Christ's  kingly  and  priestly  office.  The  gir- 
dle of  the  High-Priest  was  not  golden,  but  only  inwrought  with 
gold.  See  Exod.  xxviii.  8 :  "  curious  girdle : "  Rev.,  "  cunningly 
woven  band."    So  Exod.  xxix.  5. 


14.  White  (Xcwwi). 
TiL9. 


See  on  Luke  ix.  29.     Compare  Dan. 


Wool — snow.  This  combination  to  represent  whitenese  oc- 
curs in  Dan.  vii,  9,  and  Isa.  i.  18.     Snow,  in  Ps.  li,  7. 

Flame  of  fire.  Compare  Dan  x.  6,  Fire,  in  Scripture,  is 
the  expression  of  divine  anger.     The  figure  may  include  the 

thought  of  the  clear  and  penetrating  insight  of  the  Son  of  Han ; 
but  it  also  exproeaes  His  indignation  at  the  sin  which  His  divine 
insight  detects.  Compare  xix.  11,  12.  So  Homer,  of  Agamem- 
non in  a  rage:  "His  eyes  were  like  shining  fire"  ("Iliad,"  i., 
104);  also  of  Athene,  when  she  appears  to  Achilles:  "Her 
eyes  appeared  dreadful  to  him"  ("Iliad,"  i.,  200). 

15.  Fine  brass  (xaX«oX*jSai'p).  Rev.,  burnished  brass. 
Only  here  and  ch,  li.  18.  Compare  Dan.  x.  6 ;  Ezek.  i.  7. 
The  meaning  of  the  word  is  uncertain.  Some  explain  el^cCrum, 
an  alloy  of  gold  and  silver:  others,  brass  of  LebariMi  {AiffavtK): 
others,  brass  of  the  color  of /"rankiTuxTue  (Xi/3oco«) :  others 
again,  that  it  is  an  hybrid  compound  of  the  Greek  ;^aXxo; 
brass,  and  the  Hebrew  labdn  to  jivii-a  white.  Dean  Plumptre 
observes :  "  Such  technical  words  were  likely  enough  to  be  cur- 
rent in  a  population  like  that  of  Ephesus,  consisting  iai^ly  of 
workers  in  metal,  some  of  whom  were  no  doubt  Jews  "  ('*  Epia- 
tles  to  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia  "). 


Many  waters.     Compare  Ezek.  i.  24;  xliii.  2  ;  Isa.  x 
see  also  Apoc.  xiv.  2  ;  xix.  6. 


.  12. 


16.  A  sharp,  two-edged  sword  {pofu}>au 
The  Greek  order  is  a  sword,  two-edged,  sharp. 


hurra fiiK  o^cZa). 
For  the  peculiar 


d 


RKVEUATIOS  OP  JOHN.  429 

woid  for  sword  see  on  Luko  ii.  35.  Two-edged  is,  literally,  two- 
inoiithed.  See  on  edge,  Luke  xxi.  24.  Homer  epeaks  of  polaa 
for  aea-fighting,  "  clad  oo  the  tip  {arofta,  mouth)  with  brasB." 

Countenance  i,d^t;).     Used  hy  John  only,  and  oaly  three 
times  :  here,  John  vii.  24  ;  xi.  44.     Not  general  ap^tearemoe. 


Shinath  (^Ki^ce 


See  on  John  i.  5. 


In  his  streng^th.  With  the  full  power  of  the  eastern  son  at 
noonday. 

This  picture  of  the  Son  of  Man  suggests  some  remarks  on 
the  general  character  of  such  symbols  in  the  Apocalypse.  It 
may  be  at  once  said  that  they  are  not  of  a  character  which  tol- 
erates the  sharper  definitions  of  pictorial  ait.  They  must  be 
held  in  the  mind,  not  as  clearly-cut  symbols  which  translate 
themselves  into  appeals  to  the  eye  and  which  have  their  exact 
correspondences  in  visible  facts,  but  rather  in  their  totality,  and 
with  a  dominant  sense  of  their  inner  correspondences  with 
moral  and  spiritual  ideas.  To  translate  them  into  picture  ia 
inevitably  to  run  at  some  point  into  a  groteeqncness  which  im- 
pairs and  degrades  their  solemnity.  This  is  shown  in  Albrecht 
Diirer's  sixteen  wood-cuts  illustrative  of  the  Apocalypse.*  Pro- 
fessor Milligan  goes  too  far  in  saying  that  these  are  only 
grotesque.  One  must  be  always  impressed  with  Diirer's  strong 
individuality,  "lurking"  as  Ix>rd  Lindsay  remarks,  below  a 
mind  "  like  a  lake,  stirred  by  every  breath  of  wind  which  de 
Bcends  on  it  through  tlie  cii-cumjacent  valleys;"  with  the  fer- 
tility of  Ilia  invention,  the  plenitude  of  his  thought,  his  sim- 
plicity and  fearlessness.  But  his  very  truthfulness  to  nature  ia 
hia  enemy  in  his  dealing  with  such  themes  as  the  Apocalyptic 
visions ;  investing  tbem  as  it  does  with  a  realism  which  is 
foreign  to  their  spirit  and  intent.  Take,  for  example,  "the 
four  riders  "  (Apoc.  vi.).  The  power  is  at  once  felt  of  the  od- 
ward  movemeat  of  the  three  horsemen  with  bow,  sword,  and 


WORD  8TDDIBS  IS  THB  NBW  TBSTAHEITT. 

b&l&Dces ;  the  intenBe,  inexorable  purpose  witli  which  the/ 
drive  on  over  tlie  prostrate  forms  at  tlieir  feet ;  but  the  fourth 
rider,  Death  on  the  pale  horse,  followed  by  Hell,  portrayed  as 
the  wide-opened  jawg  of  a  monster  into  which  a  crowned  head 
is  sinking,  degenerates  into  a  ghastly  caricature  of  the  most  of- 
fensive GJerman  type — a  harleqiiiu,  far  surpassing  in  liideous- 
ness  the  traditional  skeleton  with  scythe  and  honr-glasG. 

Similarly,  the  angel  with  his  feet  like  pillars  of  fire,  the  one 
upon  the  sea  and  the  other  upon  the  earth.  If  we  are  solemnly 
impressed  by  the  awful  face  of  the  angel  breaking  forth  from 
the  sun,  the  solemnity  degenerates  into  something  akin  to 
amusement,  at  the  feet  like  solid  columns,  ending  in  fiame  at 
the  knees,  and  at  the  Evangelist  "  who  kneels  on  a  promontory 
with  the  corner  of  the  great  book  presented  by  the  angel  in 
his  mouth,  apparently  in  danger  of  choking." 

In  short,  such  symbols  as  the  Lamb  with  seven  horns  and 
seven  eyes  ;  the  four  living  creatures,  each  with  six  wings,  and 
full  of  eyes  before  and  behind  ;  the  beast  rising  out  of  the  sea, 
having  ten  horns  and  seven  heads,  and  on  the  horns  ten  dia- 
dems,— do  not  lend  themselves  to  the  pencil.  An  illustration 
of  the  sadly  grotesque  effect  of  BUch  an  attempt  may  be  seen  in 
Mr.  Elliott's  "  Hone  Apocalypticte."  where  is  a  picture  of  the 
locust  of  ch.  ix.,  with  a  gold  crown  on  the  head,  hair  like 
women's,  a  breastplate  of  iron,  and  a  tail  like  a  scorpion's. 

Archbishop  Trench  very  aptly  draws  the  comparison  between 
the  modes  in  which  the  Grreek  and  the  Hebrew  mind  respect- 
ively dealt  with  symbolism.  With  the  Greek,  the  (esthetic 
element  is  dominant,  so  that  the  first  necessity  of  the  symbol  is 
that  it  shall  satisfy  the  sense  of  beauty,  form,  and  proportion. 
With  the  Hebrew,  the  first  necessity  is  "  that  the  symbol  should 
set  forth  truly  and  fully  the  religious  idea  of  which  it  is  in- 
tended to  be  the  vehicle.  How  it  would  appear  when  it  clothed 
itself  in  an  outward  form  and  shape ;  whether  it  wonld  find 
favor  and  allowance  at  the  bar  of  taste,  was  quite  a  secondary 
considerntion  ;  may  be  confidently  affirmed  not  to  have  been  a 
consideration  at  all." 

The  imagery  of  the  Apocalypse  is  Hebrew  and  not  Greek. 
It  is  doubtful  if  there  is  any  symbol  taken  from  heatbeniBm', 


RBVBLATIOK  OP  JOBS. 


eo  that  tlie  symbols  of  the  Apocaljpse  are  to  be  read  from  the 
Jewish  and  not  from  the  Heathen  Btand-point. 

But  to  sa^  that  these  symbols  jar  upon  the  esthetic  sense,  is 
not  to  detract  from  their  value  as  symbols,  nor  to  decry  them 
as  violations  of  the  fitneEs  of  things.  It  may  be  fairly  asked  if, 
with  all  their  apparent  incongruity,  and  even  raonstrousness, 
they  may  not,  after  all,  be  true  to  a  higher  canon  of  eoiigruity. 
Certain  it  is  that  the  great  visible  divine  economy,  both  of  nat- 
nre  and  of  man,  distinctly  includes  the  grotesque,  the  mon- 
etroDS,  the  ridiculous  (or  what  we  style  such).  We  recognize 
tltefact  in  the  phrase  "freaks  of  Nature."  But  are  they  freaks } 
Are  they  incongruous  {  Until  we  shall  have  grasped  in  mind 
the  whole  ktmnoa,  it  will  not  be  safe  for  us  to  answer  that 
question  too  positively.  The  apparent  incongruity,  viewed  from 
a  higher  plane,  may  merge  into  beautiful  congruity.  Tested  by 
a  more  subtile  sense ;  brought  into  connection  and  relation  with 
the  whole  region  of  mental  and  Epirilual  phenomena;  regarded 
as  a  factor  of  that  larger  realm  which  embraces  ideas  and  spir- 
itnal  verities  along  with  external  phenomena ;  the  outwardly 
grotesque  may  resolve  itself  into  the  spiritually  beautiful ;  the 
superficial  incongruity  into  essential  and  profound  harmony. 

This  possibility  emerges  into  fact  in  certain  utterances  of  our 
Lord,  notably  in  His  parables.  Long  since,  the  absurdity  has 
been  recognized  of  attempting  to  make  a  parable  "  go  on  all 
fours;"  in  other  words,  to  insist  on  a  hard  and  literal  corre- 
spondence between  the  minutest  details  of  the  symbol  and  the 
thing  symbolized.  Sound  exposition  has  advanced  to  a  broader, 
freer,  yet  deeper  and  more  spiritual  treatment  of  these  utter- 
ances, grasping  below  mere  correspondences  of  detail  to  that 
deeper,  "fundamental  harmony  and  parallelism  between  the 
two  grand  spheres  of  cosmic  being — that  of  Nature  and  that  of 
Spirit;  between  the  three  kingdoms  of  Nature,  History,  and 
Kevelation.  The  selection  of  symbols  and  parables  in  Script- 
ure, therefore,  is  not  arbitrary,  but  is  based  on  an  insight  into 
the  essence  of  things"  (Hilligan). 

Thna  then,  in  this  picture  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  attempt 
to  portray  to  the  eye  the  girded  figure,  with  snow-white  hair, 
flaming  eyes,  and  a  sword  proceeding  out  of  Uis  mouth, — with 


4Ai  WOftD  VtWOA  IS  THB  SKIT 

fett  like  fthining  brniy  and  boldiiig  feren  fUn  in  Ili^  hand, 
would  retolt  m  Mtisfaetorflj  m  the  attempt  to  picture  the 
mjfteriofia  eomlrinatiao  of  ^ea  and  wbeda  and  winga  in  Eza- 
kfefa  rvnan.  If,  on  the  odier  hand,  we  franklj  admit  the 
impOMibilitj  of  thia,  and  relegate  this  ajmbolism  to  a  hi^ier 
region,  a«  a  delineation  (imperfect  through  the  imperfection 
of  hainan  speech  and  the  ineritable  power  of  the  senanona)  of 
deep-lying  spiritual  facta,  prieatlj  and  royal  dignity,  purity, 
dirine  insight,  divine  indignation  at  sin ;  if  we  thua  bring  the 
deeper  sn^estions  of  outward  humanity  and  nature  into  rela- 
tion with  their  true  correspondents  in  the  spiritual  realm — we 
gain  something  more  and  deeper  than  a  pictorial  appeal  to  the 
imagination.  We  grasp  what  we  cannot  formulate ;  neverthe- 
less wo  grasp  it.  Dropping  the  outward  correspondence,  we 
are  the  freer  to  penetrate  to  the  depths  of  the  symbolism,  and 
reach  an  inner  correspondence  no  less  real  and  no  less  appre- 
hensible. 

17.  I  fell.  Compare  Exod.  xxiiL  20 ;  Ezek.  L  28 ;  Dan.  viiL 
17  sqq. ;  x.  7  sqq. ;  Lake  v.  8 ;  Apoc.  xix.  10.  The  condition 
of  the  seer,  in  the  Spirit^  does  not  supersede  existence  in  the 
body.    Compare  Acts  ix.  3-5. 

The  firat  and  the  last.  This  epithet  is  three  times  ascribed 
to  Jehovah  by  Isaiah  (xli.  4;  xliv.  6;  xlviii.  12);  three  times 
in  this  book  (here,  ii.  8 ;  xxii.  13).  Richard  of  St.  Victor  com- 
ments thus:  ''I  am  the  first  and  the  last.  First  through  crea- 
tion, last  through  retribution.  First,  because  before  me  a  God 
was  not  formed  ;  last,  because  after  nie  there  shall  not  be  an- 
othor.  First,  because  all  things  are  from  me ;  last,  because  all 
things  aro  to  mo ;  from  me  the  beginning,  to  me  the  end.  First, 
beoauso  1  am  the  cause  of  origin ;  last,  because  I  am  the  judge 
and  the  end  "  (cit.  by  Trench). 

18.  I  am  He  that  liveth  {tcai  6  ^Ap).  Not  a  fresh  sentence 
oonnoctetl  witii  the  following  words  as  in  A.  Y.,  but  connected 
with  f-h^^firM  (vui  the  luet  by  koI  and.  Rev.,  and  the  liinnff  One. 
Compare  John  i.  4  ;  xiv.  6 ;  v.  26. 


BBYBLATION  OF  JOHN.  438 

And  I  was  dead  {tcai  iyei^fjutpf  pexpi^).  Strictly,  Iheoame. 
So  liev.,  in  margin.  Compare  PhiUp.  iL  8,  "  heoame  obedient 
unto  death." 

For  evermore.    See  on  ver.  6. 

Amen.    Omit 

The  keys  of  Hell  and  Death.  Rev.,  correctly,  of  Death 
and  of  Hades.  Conceived  as  a  prison-hoose  or  a  walled  city. 
See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18.  The  keys  are  the  symbol  of  aathority. 
See  Matt.  xvi.  19 ;  Apoc.  iii.  7  ;  ix.  1 ;  xx.  1.  The  Rabbinical 
proverb  said:  ^^ There  are  four  keys  lodged  in  God's  hand, 
which  He  coinmitteth  neither  to  angel  nor  to  seraph :  the  key 
of  the  rain,  the  key  of  food,  the  key  of  the  tombs,  and  the  key 
of  a  barren  woman." 

19.  Write.    See  on  ver.  11.     Add  therefore. 

The  things  which  are  (2  elaw).  Some  render,  what  they 
are  /  ix,^  what  they  signify ;  but  the  reference  of  fxerii  ravra 
after  these^  hereafter  to  i  eunv  which  are^  seems  to  be  decisive 
in  favor  of  the  former  rendering,  which  besides  is  the  more 
natural. 

Shall  be  (jAiXKeiytvea^).  Not  the  future  of  the  verb  to 
bej  but  are  aiotU  (jUXKei)  to  come  to  pass  {yiveaSai).  Compare 
ver.  1,  ^^  mt^t  come  to  pass."  Here  the  thought  is  not  the 
prophetic  necessityj  but  the  sequence  of  events. 

20.  Mystery  (jiwrrrfpwv).  See  on  Matt.  xiii.  11.  Depend* 
ing  in  construction  upon  the  verb  writer  and  in  apposition  with 
the  things  which  thou  sawest. 

Stars.  Symbols  of  pre-eminence  and  authority.  See  Num. 
xxiv.  17 ;  Dan.  xii.  3.  False  teachers  are  wandering  stars 
(Jude  13).     Compare  Isa.  xiv.  12. 

Angels  (oTTcXo*).    The  exact  meaning  of  the  term  here  is 
uncertain.    The  following  are  the  principal  interpretations : 
Vol.  IL— 38 


in* 


WORD  STUDIEB  TW  1 


1.  7^  oJiciiUs  known  as  anyeU  or  mesaengcrs  oftiu  tyna- 
ytujv/;,  Iran^erred  Co  t/ia  Christum  Church.  These  were  mere 
cicrkfl  or  readcn ;  >o  that  tlieir  poeitioQ  doea  not  anewer  to  that 
of  the  angels  presiding  orer  the  cbarchee.  There  is,  beaides, 
no  trftce  of  the  transfer  of  that  office  to  the  Christian  Chnrch. 

2.  Anffeis  proper,  lleavenly  goardiaQg  of  the  churcheG. 
Thia  is  nrged  on  the  ground  that  the  word  is  constantlj-  n&ed 
in  the  Apocalypse  of  a  heavenly  being;  by  reference  to  the 
angels  of  the  little  ones  (Matt,  zviii.  10),  and  to  Peter's  angel 
(Acts  xii.  15).  It  is  urged  that,  if  an  individual  may  have  a 
guardian  angel,  so  may  a  Church.  Reference  is  also  made  to 
the  tutelar  national  angels  of  Dan.  x.  21  ;  xii.  1. 

Hill  why  sliould  the  seer  be  instructed  to  write  to  heavenly 
moBsengers,  with  exhortations  to  repentance  and  fidelity,  and 
describing  them  aa  "  rich,"  "  poor,"  "  lukewarm,"  etc.  (ch.  ii.  4 ; 
iii.  1,  Uifl 

a.  The  angeU  are  a  peraonijication  of  the  churches  themeelvet : 
the  Church  being  spoken  uf  as  if  concentrated  in  its  angel  or 
uiusMonger.  But  in  ver.  20,  they  are  explicitly  distinguished 
from  the  golden  caudlestickH,  the  chnrclies. 

4.  yAfl  rHlem  ami  itiit<^/ter«  of  the  coiufregation.  These  are 
compared  by  Daniel  (xii.  3)  to  stars.  See  Mai.  ii.  7,  where  the 
priest  is  called  tlie  messenger  (angel)  of  the  Lord  ;  and  iii.  1, 
where  the  aamo  word  is  used  of  the  prophet.  See  also  Uag.  i. 
IS.  Under  this  interpretation  two  views  are  possible,  (a)  The 
anglais  are  Hm/iojui  ;  the  word  affO^as  sometimes  occnrring  in 
that  sense  (as  in  Jerome  and  Socrates).  This  raises  tlie  quest- 
ion of  tlio  existence  of  episcopacy  towards  the  close  of  tlie  first 
century.*  {h)  The  word  is  used  of  the  minUlry  coUfctk^ly  ; 
the  whole  board  of  officers,  including  both  presbyters  and 
deacons,  who  represented  and  were  responsible  for  the  moral 
condition  of  the  chiiivhes.     See  Acts  xx.  17,  28;  1  Pet.  v.  1-5. 

Dr.  Schaffsays:  "Tliis  phraseology  of  the  Apocalypse  already 
looka  towards  the  tdna  of  epUmpact/  in  its  primitive  form,  tliat 
ia,  to  a  monsrohioal  oonoeutration  of  governmental  form  in  one 


■  8m  Ulthop  Ll«hlfoot'i  ttMV  W  thaChrirtimn  MinlMrj,  in  Us  ■'< 
tujr  on  rlilll|ii)i»u»." 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  435 

person,  bearing  a  patriarchal  relation  to  the  congregation,  and 
responsible  in  an  eminent  sense  for  the  spiritual  condition  of 
the  whole.  .  .  .  But  even  in  this  case  we  must  insist  on 
an  important  distinction  between  the  '■  angels'  of  the  Book  of 
Kevelation  and  the  later  diocesan  Bishops.  For  aside  from  the 
very  limited  extent  of  their  charges,  as  compared  with  the 
large  territory  of  most  Greek,  Roman  Catholic,  and  Anglican 
Bishops,  these  angels  stood  ielow  the  Apostles  and  their  legates, 
and  were  not  yet  invested  with  the  great  power  (particularly 
the  right  to  confirm  and  ordain)  which  fell  to  the  later  Bishops 
after  the  death  of  the  Apostles.  .  .  .  The  angels,  accord- 
ingly, if  we  are  to  understand  by  them  single  individuals,  must 
be  considered  as  forming  tbe  transition  from  the  presbyters  oE 
the  apostolic  age  to  the  Bishops  of  the  second  centui^"  ("His- 
tory of  the  Apostolic  Church  "). 


CHAPTER  It 

Each  of  the  epistles  to  the  seren  churches  contains:  1.  A 
command  to  write  to  the  angel  of  the  particular  Church.  2.  A 
sublime  title  of  our  Lord,  taken,  for  the  most  part,  from  the 
imagery  of  the  preceding  vision.  3.  An  address  to  the  angel 
of  the  Church,  always  commencing  with  /  know,  introducing  a 
statement  of  its  present  circumstances :  continuing  with  an  ex- 
hortation either  to  repentance  or  to  constancy ;  and  ending  with 
a  prophetic  announcement,  mostly  respecting  what  shall  be  at 
the  Lord's  coming.  4.  A  promise  to  him  that  overcometh, 
generally  accompanied  with  a  solemn  call  to  earnest  attention : 
"He  that  hath  an  ear,"  etc.  (Alford). 

In  two  churches,  Smyrna  and  Philadelphia,  the  Lord  finds 
matter  for  praise  only.  In  two,  Sardis  and  Laodicea,  with  a 
very  slight  exception  in  the  former,  for  rebuke  only.  In  Ephe- 
■DB,  Pergamum,  and  Thyatira  the  condition  is  a  mixed  one, 
calling  for  mingled  praise  and  rebuke. 

1.  Ephesus.  Ephcsns  was  built  near  the  sea,  in  the  valley 
of  the  Cayster,  under  tlie  shadows  of  Coressua  and  Prion.     In 


43C 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  SEW  TESTAMENT. 


the  timoof  Paul  it  waa  tlie  metropolis  of  the  province  of  Asia. 
It  was  styled  by  Pliny  the  LigfU  of  Aaia.  Its  harbor,  though 
partly  filled  np,  waa  crowded  with  vessels,  and  it  lay  at  the 
janction  of  roads  which  gave  it  access  to  tlio  whole  interior 
continent.  Its  markets  were  the  "  Vanity  Fair"  of  Asia.  Ile- 
rodotUB  says :  "  The  lonians  of  Asia  have  built  their  cities  in  a 
region  where  tlie  air  and  climate  are  the  most  beautifnl  in  the 
whole  world ;  for  no  other  region  is  equally  blessed  with  Ionia. 
For  in  other  countries,  either  the  climate  is  over-cold  and  damp, 
or  else  the  heat  and  drought  are  sorely  oppressive"  (i.,  142). 

In  Paul's  time  it  was  the  residence  of  the  Roman  proconsul ; 
and  the  degenerate  inhabitants  descended  to  everv  species  of 
flattery  in  order  to  maintain  the  favor  of  Home.  The  civiliza- 
tion of  the  city  was  mingled  Greek  and  Oriental.  It  waa  the 
head-quarters  of  the  magical  art,  and  various  superstitions  were 
represented  by  different  priestly  bodies.  The  great  ten)ple  of 
Diana,  the  Oriental,  not  the  Greek  divinity,  was  ranked  among 
the  seven  wonders  of  the  world,  and  Epheans  called  herself  ita 
sacristan  (see  ou  Acts  xLx.  27).  To  it  attached  the  right  of 
asylum.  Legend  related  tttat  when  the  temple  was  finished, 
Mithridates  stood  on  ita  summit  and  declared  that  the  right  of 
asylum  should  extend  in  a  circle  round  it,  as  far  as  he  could 
shoot  an  arrow;  and  the  arrow  miraculously  flew  a  furlong. 
This  fact  encouraged  moral  contagion.  The  temple  is  thus  de- 
scribed by  Canon  Farrar:  "It  bad  been  built  with  ungrudging 
magnificence  out  of  contributions  furnished  by  all  Asia — the 
very  women  contributing  to  it  their  jewels,  as  the  Jewish  women 
had  done  of  old  for  the  Tabernacle  of  the  Wilderness.  To  avoid 
the  danger  of  earthquakes,  its  foundations  were  built  at  vast 
cost  on  artificial  foundations  of  skin  and  charcoal  laid  over  the 
marsh.  It  gleamed  far  off  with  a  atar-like  radiance.  Ita  peri- 
style consisted  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  pillars  of  the  Ionic 
order,  hewn  out  of  Parian  marble.  Its  doors  of  carved  cypress- 
wood  were  surmounted  by  transoms  so  vast  and  solid  that  the 
aid  of  miracles  was  invoked  to  account  for  theu^gkration. 
The  staircase,  which  led  to  the  roof,  was  said  to^^  ^^  ''"' 
out  of  a  single  vine  of  Cyprus.     Some  of  the  pill'  Vved 

with  designs  of  exquisite  beauty  :hin  were  t  'ecea 


I 


BEVELATIOR  OF  JOHN. 

of  Praxiteles  and  PhidiaB  and  Scopas  and  Polycletns.  Paint- 
ings by  the  greatest  of  Greek  artists,  of  which  one — the  like- 
ness of  Alexander  the  Great  by  Apelles — had  been  bought  for 
a  6uin  equal  in  value  to  £5,000  of  modern  money,  adorned  the 
inner  walls,  Tlie  roof  of  the  temple  itself  was  of  cedar-wood, 
supported  by  columns  of  jasper  on  bases  of  Parian  marble.  On 
these  pillars  hung  gifts  of  priceless  value,  the  votive  offerings 
of  grateful  superstition.  At  the  end  of  it  stood  the  great  altar 
adorned  by  the  bas-relief  of  Praxiteles,  behind  which  fell  the 
vast  folds  of  a  purple  curtain.  Behind  this  curtain  was  the  dark 
and  awful  shrine  in  which  stood  the  most  sacred  idol  of  classic 
heathendom ;  and  again,  behind  the  shrine,  was  the  room  which, 
inviolable  under  divine  protection,  was  regarded  as  the  wealth- 
iest and  securest  bank  in  the  ancient  world"  ("  Life  and  Work 
of  St.  Pan),"  ii.,  12). 

Next  to  Rome,  Ephesus  was  the  principal  seat  of  Paul's  tabors, 
lie  devoted  three  years  to  that  city.  The  commonly  received 
tradition  represents  John  as  closing  his  apostolic  career  there. 
Nothing  in  early  Churcit  history  is  better  attested  than  bis 
residence  and  work  in  Ephesus,  the  centre  of  the  circle  of 
churches  established  by  Paul  in  Ionia  and  Phrygia. 

Who  walketh  (o  irfpnraTwv).  More  than  standeth.  The 
word  expresses  Christ's  activity  on  behalf  of  His  Church. 

2.  Thy  works  (ri  efrfa  <tov).     See  on  John  iv.  47. 


Labor  {ko-ttov).  Originally  sitffering,  wearinete ;  beoce  ex- 
Ittmttiny  labor.  The  kindred  verb  Kowtaat  is  often  need  of 
apostolic  and  ministerial  labor  (Rom.  xvi.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  10 ; 
Gal.  iv.  11). 

Patience  {imoiLovnv).  See  on  2  PeL  i.  6 ;  Jas.  v.  7.  Compare 
Paul's  exhortation  to  Timothy  in  Ephesus,  2  Tim.  ii.  25,  26. 

Bear  (fiiurriaai).  See  on  John  x.  31 ;  xii.  6.  Compare  Gal, 
vi.  2,  where  the  word  is  used  of  Christians  hearUigeAch  others' 
burdens. 


i 


43S  woBD  aruDiBS  ra  ths  bew  tsstahemt. 

Them  which  are  evil  {kwcois).  Trench  obserres  tliat  "  it 
is  not  a  tittle  remarkable  that  the  grace  or  virtue  here  ascribed 
to  the  angel  of  the  Ephesian  Church  (compare  ver.  6)  should 
liavQ  a  name  in  claesical  Greek:  fiurovotrtjpia  hatred  of  evil  ; 
the  person  of  whom  the  grace  ia  predicated  being  fucavovrfpov 
fuller  of  evil ;  while  neither  of  these  words,  nor  yet  any  equival- 
ent to  them  occurs  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  the  stranger, 
as  this  hatred  of  evil,  purely  as  evil,  however  little  thought  of 
or  admired  now,  is  eminently  a  Christian  grace." 

Hast  tried  {hrupairw).  Rev.,  didst  try.  See  on  tritd,  1  Pet 
i.  7 ;  and  compare  1  John  iv.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xiL  10. 

3.  The  best  texts  omit  oii  KiKfi^Kon  hast  not  grown  weary,  and 
read  luu  air  iceKoirlaKCi  hast  not  grown  weary.  The  transcribers 
supposed  the  verb  ncovtoat  to  mean  only  to  labor ;  whereas  it 
inclndes  the  sense  of  weariness  from  labor. 

i.  Somewhat.  Not  in  the  test,  and  unnecessary.  The  fol- 
lowing elanse  is  the  object  of  /  haoe.  "  I  have  against  thee  that 
thou  hast  left,"  etc.  '^  It  is  indeed  a  somewhat  which  the  Lord 
has  against  the  Ephesian  Church ;  it  threatens  to  grow  to  be  an 
everything ;  for  see  the  verse  following"  (Trench).  For  the 
phrase  hwve  against,  see  Matt.  v.  23  ;  Mark  xi.  25 ;  Col.  iii.  13. 

Hast  left  (o^Ka^).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  rendering  the 
aorist,  dicht  leave.  The  verb  originally  means  to  send  away  or 
disiatss.     See  on  John  iv.  3. 

First  love.  Compare  Jer.  ii.  2.  The  first  enthneiastic  de- 
votion of  the  Charch  to  her  Lord,  under  the  figure  of  conjugal 
love. 

6.  Thou  art  fallen  (enr^TrrwKa?).     Lit.,  hast  fallen  ovL 

Repent  (/leTawMjo-oi/).     See  on  Matt.  iii.  2;  : 

I  will  come  {Ip^ofi-ai).     Rev.,  correctly,  I  oome. 

Quickly.    Omit 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN. 


i39 


Will  remove  thy  candlestick,  "  Its  candlestick  has  been 
for  centuries  removed  out  of  his  place;  the  squalid  Moham- 
medan village  wliich  is  nearest  to  its  site  does  not  count  one 
Christian  in  its  insigiiiScant  population ;  its  temple  ie  a  mass  of 
shapeless  ruiiie;  its  harbor  is  a  reedy  pool ;  the  bittern  booms 
amid  its  pestilent  and  stagnant  marshes;  and  malaria  and  ob- 
livion reign  supreme  over  the  place  where  the  wealth  of  ancient 
civilization  gathered  around  the  scenes  of  its  grossest  supersti- 
tions and  its  most  degraded  sins"  (Farrar,  "  Life  and  Work  of 
Panl,"  ii.,  43,  44). 

John  employs  the  verb  km^m  remove  (Rev.,  move)  only  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  only  once  besides  the  present  instance,  in  ch. 
vi.  14,  where,  as  here,  it  signifies  moving  in  judgment. 

The  Nicolaitans.  From  nueav  to  conquer,  and  Xao^  th« 
^ojih.  There  are  two  principal  explanations  of  the  term. 
The  first  and  better  one  historical.  A  sect  springing,  according 
to  credible  tradition,  from  Nicholas  a  proselyte  of  Antioch,  one 
of  the  seven  deacons  of  Jerusaleni  (Acts  vi.  5),  who  apostatized 
from  the  truth,  and  became  the  founder  of  an  Antinomiaa 
Gnostic  sect.  They  appear  to  have  been  characterized  by  sen- 
suality, seducing  Christians  to  participate  in  the  idolatrous 
feasts  of  pagans,  and  to  unchaslity.  Hence  they  are  denoted 
by  the  names  of  Balaam  and  Jezebel,  two  leading  agents  of 
moral  contamination  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation. 
Balaam  enticed  the  Israelites,  through  the  daughters  of  Moab 
and  Midian,  to  idolatry  and  fornication  (Num.  xxt.  ;  xxxi.  16). 
Jezebel  murdered  the  Lord's  prophets,  and  set  up  idolatry  in 
Israel.  Tlie  Nicolaitans  taught  that,  in  order  to  master  sensu- 
ality, one  must  know  the  whole  ran^e  of  it  by  experience ;  and 
that  he  should  therefore  abandon  himself  without  reserve  to 
the  lusts  of  the  body,  since  they  concerned  only  the  body  and 
did  not  touch  the  spirit.  These  heretics  were  hated  and  ex- 
pelled by  the  Church  of  Epliesus  (Apoc.  ii.  6),  but  were  tol- 
erated by  the  Church  of  Pergamum  (Apoc.  ii.  15).  The  other 
view  regards  the  name  as  symbolic,  and  Nicholas  as  the  Greek 
rendering  of  Balaam,  whose  name  signifies  destroyer  or  cor- 
rupter of  the  people.    This  view  is  adopted  by  Trench  ("Seven 


I 


440  WORD  BTUDIE8  m  THE  NEW  TBSTAMEarT. 

Churches "),  who  BajB :  "TheKicolaitans  are  the  Baiaamites; 
no  Beet  bearing  the  one  name  or  the  other ;  bnt  thoee  who,  iu 
the  new  dispensation,  repeated  the  ein  of  Balaam  in  the  old, 
and  sought  to  overcome  or  destroy  the  people  of  God  by  the 
same  temptations  whereby  Balaam  bad  sought  to  overcome 
them  before."  The  names,  however,  are  by  no  means  parallel : 
conqueror  of  the  j>eople  not  being  the  same  as  corrupter  of  the 
j>ec^}le.  Besides,  in  ver.  14,  the  Bala&mites  are  evidently  dis- 
tinguished from  the  !N  i col ai tans. 

Alford  remarks :  "  There  is  no  sort  of  reason  for  interpreting 
the  name  otherwise  than  historically.  It  occurs  in  a  passage 
indicating  simple  matters  of  historical  fact,  jnst  as  the  name 
Antipas  does  in  ver.  13." 

7.  He  that  hath  an  «ar,  etc.  Compare  Matt.  xi.  15;  Mark 
iv.  9.  The  phrase  is  not  found  in  John's  Gospel.  It  is  used 
always  of  radical  truUis,  great  principles  and  promises. 

To  him  that  overcometh  (t^  vucSiinC).  A  formula  common 
to  all  these  Epistles.  The  verb  is  used  absolutely  without  any 
object  expressed.  It  is  characteristic  of  John,  occurring  once 
in  the  Gospel,  six  times  in  the  First  Epistle,  sixteen  times  in 
the  Apocalypse,  and  elsewhere  only  Luke  xi.  22  ;  Kom.  iiL  4  ; 
xii.  21. 

Will  I  give.  This  phrase  has  a  place  in  every  one  of  these 
Epistles.  The  verb  is  John's  habitual  word  for  the  privileges 
and  functions  of  the  Son,  whether  as  bestowed  upon  Him  by 
the  Father,  or  dispensed  by  Him  to  His  followers.  See  John 
iii.  35 ;  v.  22,  27,  36  ;  vi.  65 ;  xiiL  3  ;  xvii.  6.  Compare  Apoc. 
ii.  23;  iii.  8;  vi.  4;  xi.  3. 

Of  the  tree  (e«  fiSXou).  The  preposition  e«  out  of  occura 
one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  times  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  its 
proper  signification  is  almost  universally  out  of;  bnt  this  ren- 
dering in  many  of  the  passages  would  be  so  strange  and  nnidiom- 
atic,  that  the  New  Testament  Revisers  have  felt  themselves 
able  to  adopt  it  only  forty-one  times  out  of  all  that  number. 


BBVELATION  OP  JOHN. 


441 


and  employ  of ,  from,  by,  with,  on,  at,  because  of,  hy  reason  of, 
from,  among.  See,  for  instance,  ch,  ii.  7,  SI,  22  ;  vi.  4,  10 ; 
viii,  11 ;  ix.  18 ;  xiv.  13 ;  xv.  2 ;  xvi.  21.  Compare  Jolin  iii. 
31 ;  iv.  13,  vi.  13,  39,  51  ;  viii.  23,  44 ;  ix.  6  ;  xi.  1 ;  xii.  3, 
27,  33  ;  xvii.  15. 

Tree,  lit.,  wood.  See  on  Luke  xxiii.  31 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  24. 
Dean  Plamptre  notes  the  fact  that,  prominent  as  this  symbol 
had  been  in  the  primeval  history,  it  had  remained  unnoticed  in 
the  teaching  wlierc  we  sliould  most  have  looked  for  its  presence 
— in  that  of  the  Psalmist  and  Prophets  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Only  ui  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  had  it  been  used,  in  a  sense 
half  allegorical  and  half  mystical  (Prov.  iii.  18 ;  xiii.  12 ;  xi. 
30  ;  XV.  4).  The  revival  of  the  symbol  in  the  Apocalypse  is  in 
accordance  with  the  theme  of  the  restitution  of  all  things. 
"  The  tree  which  disappeared  with  the  disappearance  of  the 
earthly  Paradise,  reappears  with  the  reappearance  of  the 
heavenly."  To  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  expresses  participation  in 
the  life  eternal.  The  figure  of  the  tree  of  life  appears  in  all 
mythologies  from  India  to  Scandinavia.  The  Habhins  and 
Mohammedans  called  the  vine  the  probation  tree.  The  Zend 
Avesta  has  its  tree  of  life  called  t/ie  DeaiA- Destroyer.  It  grow* 
by  the  waters  of  life,  and  the  drinking  of  its  sap  confers  im- 
mortality. The  Hindu  tree  of  life  is  pictured  as  growing  out 
of  a  great  seed  in  the  midst  of  an  expanse  of  water.  It  faaa 
three  branches,  each  crowned  with  a  sun,  denoting  the  three 
powers  of  creation,  preservation,  and  renovation  after  deBtm(^- 
tion.  In  another  representation  Sudha  sits  in  meditation  under 
a  tree  with  three  branches,  each  branch  having  tliree  stems. 
One  of  the  Babylonian  cylinders  discovered  by  Layard,  repre- 
sents three  priestesses  gathering  the  fruit  of  what  seems  to  be 
a  palm-tree  with  three  branches  on  each  side.  Athor,  the 
Venus  of  the  Egyptians,  appears  half-concealed  in  the  branches 
of  the  sacred  peach-tree,  giving  to  the  departed  soul  the  fmit, 
and  the  drink  of  heaved  from  a  vial  from  which  the  streams  of 
life  descend  upon  the  spirit,  a  figure  at  the  foot  of  the  tree, 
like  a  hawk,  with  a  haman  head  and  with  hands  outstretched. 

In  the  Norse  mythology  a  prominent  figure  is  Igdrasil,  M* 
Aah-tree  of  Existence;  its  roots  in  the  kingdom  of  Hela  or 


i 


442 


WORD  STUDIES  DT  THH  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


Deatli,  iu  trnok  reaching  to  liearen,  and  iu  boughs  spread  over 
the  whole  universe.  At  its  foot,  in  the  kingdom  of  Death, 
sit  three  Noi-nas  or  Fates,  the  Past,  the  Present,  aud  the 
Future,  watering  its  roots  from  the  sacred  well.  Compare  cli. 
xxii.  2,  14,  19.  Virgil,  addressing  Dante  at  the  completion  of 
the  ascent  of  the  Purgatorial  Mount,  bujb  : 

"  That  apple  sweet,  which  llirough  bo  maDf  branohei 
Tha  cure  of  mortaU  goeth  in  puraiiit  of, 
TtMlaj'  shall  put  in  peace  thj  fauuKaringg," 

"  Purgatorio,"  kxtH.,  115-117. 

Paradise.  See  on  Luke  zxiii.  43.  Omit  in  the  midat  of. 
IIapdhei,<To<t  Paradise  "  passes  through  a  series  of  meanings, 
each  one  higher  tlian  the  last.  From  any  garden  of  delight, 
which  is  its  first  meaning,  it  comes  to  be  predominaiitlj  ap- 
plied to  the  garden  of  Eden,  then  to  the  resting-place  of 
separate  souls  in  joy  and  felicity,  and  lastly  to  the  very  heaven 
itself;  and  we  see  eminently  in  it,  what  we  see  indeed  in  so 
many  words,  how  revealed  religion  assumes  them  into  her  ser- 
vice, and  makes  them  vehicles  of  far  higher  truth  than  any 
which  they  knew  at  first,  transforming  and  transfiguring  them, 
as  in  this  case,  from  glory  to  glory  "  (Trench). 

S,  Smyrna.  Lying  a  little  north  of  Ephesus,  on  a  gulf  of 
the  same  name.  The  original  city  was  destroyed  about  b.c.  627, 
and  was  deserted  and  in  ruins  for  four  hundred  years.  Alex- 
ander the  (jireat  contemplated  its  restoration,  and  his  design 
was  carried  out  after  hia  death.  The  new  city  was  built  a 
short  distance  south  of  the  ancient  one,  and  became  the  finest 
in  Asia  Minor,  being  known  as  the  glory  of  Asia.  It  was  one 
of  the  cities  which  claimed  the  honor  of  being  Homer's  birth- 
place. A  splendid  temple  was  erected  by  the  Smyrnaeans  to 
his  memory,  and  a  cave  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  city  was 
shown  where  he  was  said  to  have  composed  his  poems.  Smyr- 
na's fine  harbor  made  it  a  commercial  centre  ;  but  it  was  also 
distinguished  for  its  schools  of  rhetoric  and  philosophy.  Poly- 
carp  was  the  first  bishop  of  its  church,  which  suffered  much 
from  persecution,  and  he  was  said  to  have  suffered  martyrdom 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  443 

in  the  Btadiam  of  the  city,  a.d.  166.  It  is  argaed  with  some 
plausibiiitjr  that  Poljcarp  was  bishop  of  Smyrna  at  the  time  of 
the  composition  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  was  the  person  ad- 
dressed here.  This  question,  however,  is  boand  np  with  that 
of  the  date  of  composition  (see  Trench,  '^  Epistles  to  the  Seven 
Oharches  ").  The  city  was  a  seat  of  the  worship  of  Cybele  the 
Mother  of  the  gods,  and  of  Dionysus  or  Bacchus. 

Was  dead  {iyivero  veKpo^).    Lit,  became  dead. 

Is  alive  (l^rfo-ev).  Lit,  lived.  Rev.,  properly,  lived  again; 
the  word  being  used  of  restoration  to  life.  See,  for  a  similar 
usage,  Matt.  ix.  18 ;  John  v.  25. 

9.  Thy  works  and.    Omit 

Tribulation  (^Xi^iy).  See  on  Matt  xiii.  21.  Referring  to 
the  persecutions  of  Jewish  and  heathen  oppressors.  See  on 
Smyrna^  ver.  8. 

Poverty  (irrfox^itay).  Because,  like  ail  the  other  early  Christ- 
ian churches,  the  majority  of  its  members  were  of  the  poorer 
classes,  and  also,  perhaps,  with  reference  to  their  robbery  by 
persecutors.     See  on  poor^  Matt.  v.  3. 

Rich.  In  faith  and  grace.  Compare  Jas.  IL  6,  7 ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  17,  18 ;  Luke  xii.  21 ;  Matt  xix.  21. 

Blasphemy  {pKaa^iUav).  See  on  Mark  vlL  22.  Not  prim- 
arily direct  blasphemy  against  God,  but  reviling  at  believers. 

Jews.  Literally.  Not  Christians,  as  in  Philip,  iii.  3;  Rom. 
ii.  28,  29.  Actually  Jews  by  birth,  but  not  spiritually.  The 
title  is  not  given  them  by  the  Spirit,  nor  by  the  seer,  but  by 
themselves ;  and  none  would  use  that  title  except  such  as  were 
Jews  by  birth  and  by  religion.  The  enmity  of  the  Jews  against 
Christians  is  a  familiar  fact  to  all  readers  of  the  book  of  Acts ; 
and  it  is  a  matter  of  history  that  their  malignity  was  especially 
displayed  toward  the  Church  of  Smyrna.    In  the  circular  letter 


444  WORD  STOBIE8  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

addressed  by  the  Church  of  Smyrna  to  the  churches  in  the 
Christian  world,  it  ie  related  that  Jews  joined  with  heathen  in 
clatnoring  that  Polycarp  should  be  east  to  the  lions  or  homed 
alive,  and  were  foremost  ok  eSo?  avroU  {as  was  their  wottt)  in 
bringing  logs  for  the  pile,  and  in  the  endeavor  to  prevent  the 
remains  of  the  martyr  from  being  delivered  to  bis  Christian 
associates  for  burial. 


SynagoEue  of  Satan.  Yar  synagog^ue,  eeeoa  assembly,  3^. 
ii.  2,  the  only  passage  in  which  the  word  is  used  for  a  Christian 
assembly.  This  fact  goes  to  snpport  the  literal  explanation  of 
the  term  Jews.  For  Satan,  see  on  Luke  x.  18.  For  John's  nee 
of  the  expression  the  Jews,  see  on  John  i.  19.  The  nse  of  the 
word  here  in  an  honorable  sense,  so  difFerent  from  John's  cust- 
om, lias  been  nrged  against  his  aiitliorsiiip  of  the  Apocalypse. 
Bnt  John  here  only  quotes  the  word,  and,  further,  employs  it 
without  the  article. 


10.  Fear  not  {/i^hiv  <f>o^ov).    Lit,  fea 
verb,  see  on  Luke  i.  50. 


notAtTiy.     For  the 


Behold  (i5oi>  Br/).  The  particle  Hjfor  certmn,  which  is  not 
rendered,  gives  a  quality  of  assurance  to  the  prediction. 

The  Devil  {SidffoXK).  See  on  Matt.  iv.  1.  The  persecu- 
tion of  the  Christians  is  thus  traced  to  the  direct  agency  of 
Satan,  and  not  to  the  offended  passions  or  prejudices  of  men. 
Trench  observes:  "  There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  the 
records  which  have  come  down  to  us  of  the  early  persecutions, 
than  the  sense  which  the  confessors  and  martyrs  and  those  who 
afterwards  narrate  their  sufferings  and  their  triumphs  entertain 
and  litter,  that  these  great  fights  of  affliction  through  which 
they  were  called  to  pass,  were  the  immediate  work  of  the 
Devil." 

Shall  cast  (/lAAct  0aXeiv).     Eev.,  rightly,  is  about  to  catt. 

Prison  (0wXa*^f).     See  on  Acts  v.  21. 


RBTELATION  OF  JOIUT.  44S 

May  b«  tried  {ireipaa^rfre).     Tempted,     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  7. 

Tribulation  tan  days  {A\l^t»  Tffitputv  Mko,).  lAt.,  a  trihvf 
lotion  often  days. 

Bb  thou  ("ylvov).  The  exact  force  of  the  word  cannot  be 
given  by  a  correBponding  word  in  English.  Lit.,  "income Mom." 
There  is  to  he  a  succession  of  trials  demanding  an  increase  in 
the  power  and  a  variety  in  the  direction  of  faith.  With  refer- 
ence to  these  trials,  faithfulness  is  to  be  not  only  existent  bnt 
becoming,  developing  with  new  strength  and  into  new  applica- 
tions. 

Unto  death  (a^P*  ^^"^■'''''v).  Not  faithful  until  the  time  of 
death,  but  faithful  up  to  a  measure  which  will  endure  death  for 
Christ's  sake.     "  It  is  an  inientive,  not  an  extensive  term." 


A  crown  (t6c  trre^voj').  Rev.,  rightly,  "t/i6  crown."  See 
on  1  Pet.  V.  4;  Jas.  i.  13.  Vrovm  is  used  with  a  variety  of 
words:  crown  of /■iyA(<'0«OTieM(2  Tim.  iv.  8);  y^ry  (1  Pet.  v. 4) ; 
beauty  (Isa.  Ixii.  3,  Sept.,  A.  V.,  glory) ;  pride  (fga.  xxviii.  1) ; 
rejoicing  {1  Theas.  ii.  19). 

Of  life  {tt?  ?w^).  The  full  phrase  is  the  crovmofthe  life: 
i.e.,  the  crown  which  consists  in  life  eternal.  The  image  is  not 
taken  from  the  Greek  games,  although  Smyrna  contained  a 
tcnipio  of  Olympian  Jupiter,  and  Olympian  games  were  cele- 
brated there.  It  is  the  diadem  of  royalty  rather  than  the  gar- 
land of  victory,  though  more  commonly  used  in  the  latter  sense. 
It  is  not  likely  that  John  would  use  an  image  from  the  games, 
since  there  was  the  most  violent  prejudice  against  them  on  the 
part  of  Jewish  Christians;  a  prejudice  which,  on  occasions  of 
their  celebration,  provoked  the  special  ferocity  of  the  pagans 
against  what  they  regarded  as  the  unpatriotic  and  unsocial 
character  of  Christ's  disciples.  It  was  at  the  demand  of  the 
people  aesembled  in  the  stadium  that  Polycarp  was  given  up 
to  death.  Moreover,  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  symbol  in  the 
Apocalypse  is  taken  from  heathenism.    The  imagery  is  Jewish. 


446  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THH  HEW  TESTAMENT. 

11.  Ba  hurt  {aSuci}^).     Strictly,  wi-onged. 

Second  death.  An  expreeeion  pecnliar  to  the  ApocalypscL 
See  x\.  6, 14;  xxi.  8.  In  those  two  paesages  it  ie  defined  as  tha 
lake  of  fire.     The  death  awaiting  the  wicked  after  judgment. 

12.  Pergamos.  The  proper  form  of  the  name  is  Pergamutn. 
It  was  situated  in  Teuthrania  in  Myeia,  in  a  district  watered  by 
three  rivers,  by  one  of  wiiich  it  communicated  with  the  eea. 
The  original  city  waa  built  od  a  lofty  hill,  which  afterward, 
became  the  citadel  as  liouses  sprang  up  around  its  base.  The 
local  legends  attached  a  sacred  character  to  the  place,  which, 
together  with  its  natural  strength,  made  it  a  place  of  deposit  for 
royal  treasure.  The  city  was  mainly  indebted  to  Eiimenes  II. 
(b.o.  197-159)  for  its  embellishment  and  extension.  In  additioa 
to  walks  and  public  buildings,  he  founded  the  library,  which 
contained  two-hundred-thousand  volumea,  and  was  second  only 
to  that  of  Alexandria.  Tlie  kingdom  of  Pergamuiu  became  & 
lioman  province  b.c.  130  ;  but  the  city  continued  to  flourish,  sty 
that  Pliny  styled  it  hi/ far  the  most  Uluatrioua  of  Aula.  All 
the  maiu  roads  of  Western  Asia  converged  there.  Fergamnm 
was  celebrated  for  the  manufacture  of  ointments,  pottery,  tapea- 
tries,  and  parchment,  which  derives  its  name  (charta  Perga- 
tnena)  from  the  city.  It  contained  a  celebrated  and  much-fre- 
quented temple  of  j£sculapius,  who  was  worshipped  in  the  form 
of  a  living  serpent  fed  in  the  temple.  Hence  ^Esculapins  waa 
called  the  god  of  Pergamum,  and  on  the  coins  striick  by  the 
town  he  often  appears  with  a  rod  encircled  by  a  serpenL  The 
great  glory  of  the  city  was  the  Nicephorium,  a  grove  of  great 
beauty  containing  an  assemblage  of  temples.  The  city  has  been 
described  as  a  sort  of  union  of  a  pagan  cathedral -city,  a  univers- 
ity-town, and  a  royal  residence,  embellished  during  a  successioa 
of  years  by  kings  who  all  had  a  passion  for  expenditure  and 
ample  means  of  gratifying  it.  The  streams  which  embraced 
the  town  irrigated  the  groves  of  Nicephorium  and  of  ~ 
ins,  in  which  flourished  the  licentious  rites  of  pagan 
The  sacred  character  of  the  city  appears  in  coins  and 
tions  which  described  the  Pergamenes  by  the  title  claimed 


^Ecuiap-  ^^ 

antiquity.  ^^^^ 

d  inscrip-  ^m 

laimed  by-  ^^^H 


BBVKLATION  OF  JOHN.  447 

the  worshippers  of  Diana  at  Ephesns,  ve»tc6pai  t&mple-^ioeep&rs 
or  sacristans. 

The  sharp  sword  with  two  edges.    See  on  eh.  i.  16. 

13.  Dwellest  {KaroaceU).    See  on  Lnke  xL  26 ;  Acts  ii.  6. 

Seat  {Spovoi).  Rev.,  rightly,  tAronSj  which  is  a  transcript  of 
the  Greek  word.  Better  than  seat,  because  it  is  intended  to 
represent  Satan  as  exercising  dominion  there.  The  word  is 
nsed  in  the  New  Testament  of  a  kmgh/  throne  (Lnke  i.  32,  52; 
Acts  ii.  30) :  of  the  judicial  tribunal  or  bench  (Matt  zix.  28 ; 
Luke  xxii.  30) :  of  the  seats  of  the  elders  (Apoc.  iv.  4 ;  xi.  16). 
Also,  by  metonymy,  of  one  who  exercises  authority^  so,  in  the 
plural,  of  angels  (Col.  i.  16),  thrones  belonging  to  the  highest 
grade  of  angelic  beings  whose  place  is  in  the  immediate  pres- 
ence of  God. 

Holdest  fast  {icparev;).     See  on  Matt  viL  8 ;  Acts  ilL  IL 

My  name.    See  on  1  John  L  7. 

My  faith.    See  on  Acts  vi.  7. 

Antipas.    There  is  no  other  record  of  this  martyr. 

14.  Doctrine  (8iSa;^y).     Rev.,  better,  teaching. 

Balaam.  See  Num.  xxv.  1-9;  xxxL  15,  16.  Ck>mpaie  S 
Pet.  ii.  15 ;  Jude  11. 

A  stumbling-block  {trKdvidKmf).  See  on  offendj  Matt  ▼• 
29,  and  offence^  Matt.  xvi.  23. 

Before  {hwirwv).   Lit,  in  the  sight  of.    See  on  Luke  xxiv.  IL 

Things  sacrificed  to  idols  {elZv^Kkdvra).    In  the  A.  Y.  the 

word  is  rendered  in  four  different  ways :  mecUs  offered  to  idols 
(Acts  XV.  29) :  things  offered  to  idols  (Acts  xxi  25) :  things  that 


448 


WOBD  STDDIB8  IK  THE  NBW  TESTAKEKT. 


are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols  (1  Cor.  viii.  4)  j  and  as  hera 
Kev,,  uniformly,  things  sacrificed  to  idols. 

The  eating  of  idol  meats,  whtcb  was  no  temptatioti  to  the 
Jewish  Christian,  was  quite  otherwise  to  the  Gentile.  The  act 
of  Bacri6ce,  among  all  ancient  natiouu,  was  a  social  no  less  than 
a  religious  act.  Commonly  only  a  part  of  the  victim  was  con- 
sumed as  an  offering,  and  the  rest  became  the  portion  of  the 
priests,  was  given  to  the  poor,  or  was  sold  again  in  the  markets. 
Hence  sacrifice  and  feast  were  identified.  The  word  originally 
used  for  kilting  in  sacrifice  (Sveiv)  obtained  the  general  sense  of 
killing  (Acta  x.  13).  Among  the  Greeks  this  identification  was 
carried  to  the  highest  pitch.  Thncydides  enumerates  sacrifices 
among  popular  entertainments.  "We  have  not  forgotten,"  he 
says,  "  to  provide  for  our  weary  spirita  many  relaxations  from 
toil.  We  fiave  regular  games  and  sacrifices  throughout  the 
year  "  (ii.,  38).  So  Aristotle :  "  And  some  fellowships  seem  to 
be  for  the  sake  of  pleasure  ;  those  of  the  followers  of  Love,  and 
those  of  club-diners ;  for  these  are  for  the  sake  of  sacrifice  and 
social  interconrse"  ("  Ethics,"  viii.,  9,  5).  Suetonius  relates  of 
Claudius,  the  Roman  Emperor,  that,  on  one  occasion,  while  in 
the  Forum  of  Augustus,  smelling  the  odor  of  the  banqnet 
which  was  being  prepared  for  the  priests  in  the  neighboring 
temple  of  Mars,  he  left  the  tribunal  and  placed  himself  at  the 
table  with  the  priests  ("Claudius,"  33).  Also  how  Vitelliua 
would  snatch  from  the  altar-fire  the  entrails  of  victims  and  the 
corn,  and  consume  them  ("  Vitellins,"  13).  Thus,  for  the  Gent- 
ile, "refusal  to  partake  of  the  idol-meats  involved  absence 
from  public  and  private  festivity,  a  withdrawal,  in  great  part, 
from  the  social  life  of  hia  time."  Tlie  subject  is  disfiussed  by 
Paul  in  Rom,  xiv.  2-21,  and  1  Cor.  viii.  1-xi.  1.  The  council 
of  Jerusalem  (Acta  xv.)  forbade  the  eating  of  meat  offered  to 
idols,  not  as  esteeming  it  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law,  but  as 
becoming  a  possible  occasion  of  sin  to  weak  Christians.  In  his 
letter  to  the  Corinthians,  among  whom  the  Jewish  and  more 
scrupulous  party  was  tlie  weaker,  Paul,  in  arguing  with  the 
stronger  and  more  independent  party,  never  alludes  to  the  de- 
cree of  the  Jerusalem  council,  but  discusses  the  matter  from 
the  stand-point  of  the  rights  of  conscience.     While  be  admits 


HEVELATIOW   OF  JOHW.  449 

the  possibility  of  a  blameless  participation  in  a  banquet,  even 
in  the  idol-temple,  he  diesuades  from  it  on  the  ground  of  its 
dangerous  consequences  to  weak  consciences,  and  as  involving 
a  formal  recognition  of  the  falae  worship  which  they  had  re- 
nounced at  their  baptism.  "  In  the  Epistle  to  the  lionjans  we 
see  the  excess  to  which  the  scruples  of  the  weaker  brethren 
were  carried,  even  to  the  pitch  of  abstaining  altogether  from 
animal  food ;  as,  in  the  Nicolaitans  of  the  Apocalyptic  chui'ches, 
we  see  the  excess  of  the  indifferentist  party,  who  plunged  with- 
out restraint  into  all  the  pollutions,  moral  ae  well  as  ceremon- 
ial, with  which  the  heathen  rites  were  accompanied"  (Stanley, 
"On  Corinthians").  "It  may  be  noted  as  accounting  for  the 
stronger  and  more  vehement  language  of  the  Apocalypse,  con- 
sidered even  as  a  simply  human  book,  that  the  conditions  of 
the  case  had  altered.  Christians  and  heathen  were  no  longer 
dwelling  together,  as  at  Corinth,  with  comparatively  slight  in- 
terruption to  their  social  intercourse,  but  were  divided  by  a 
sharp  line  of  demarcation.  The  eating  of  things  sacriticed  to 
idols  was  more  and  more  a  crucial  test,  involving  a  cowardly 
shrinking  from  the  open  confession  of  a  Christian's  faith.  Dis- 
ciples who  sat  at  meat  in  the  idol's  temple  were  making  merry 
with  those  whose  hands  were  red  with  the  blood  of  their  fel- 
low-worshippers, and  whose  lips  had  uttered  blaspheming  scoffa 
against  the  lloly  Name  "  (Plumptre). 

In  times  of  persecution,  tasting  the  wine  of  the  libations  or 
eating  meat  offered  to  idols,  was  anderstood  to  signify  recanta- 
tion of  Christianity. 

15.  So.  Even  as  Balak  had  Balaam  for  a  fake  teacher,  M 
hast  thou  the  Nicolaitan  teachers. 

Nicolaitans.    See  on  ver.  6. 

Which  thiDE  I  hate.    Omit. 

16.  I  will  make  war  (iroXtfi^aat).  The  worde  toar  and  make 
war  occur  oftener  in  the  Apocalypse  than  in  any  other  hook  of 
the  New  Testament.  "  Aa  eternal  roll  of  thunder  from  tho 
throne  "  (Renan). 


450  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THB  RBW  TB8TAHBNT. 

17.  To  eat.    Omit 

Of  the  hidden  manna  {rov  /tdwa  roC  xtxpyfi/ievov).  The 
allusion  may  be  partly  to  the  pot  of  manna  which  was  laid  up 
ia  the  ark  in  the  eanctnary.  See  Exod.  xvi.  33-34;  compare 
Ileb.  ix.  4.  That  the  imagery  of  the  ark  was  familiar  to  John 
appears  from  ch.  xi,  19.  This  allnaion  however  ia  indirect,  for 
the  manna  laid  np  in  the  ark  was  not  for  food,  but  waa  s 
memorial  of  food  once  enjoyed.  Two  ideas  eeem  to  be  com- 
bined in  the  figure: 

1.  Christ  aa  the  bread  from  heaven,  the  nourishment  of  the 
life  of  believers,  the  true  manna,  of  which  those  who  eat  shall 
never  die  (John  vi.  31-33 ;  48-51) ;  hidden,  in  that  He  is  with- 
drawn from  sight,  and  the  Christian's  life  is  liid  with  Him  in 
God  (Col.  iii,  3).  2.  The  eatiafaction  of  the  believer's  desire 
when  Christ  ehall  be  revealed.  The  hidden  manna  shall  not  re- 
main for  ever  hidden.  We  shall  see  Christ  as  Ke  is,  and  be  like 
Him  (1  John  iii,  2).  Christ  gives  the  manna  in  giving  Himself. 
"  The  seeing  of  Christ  as  He  is,  and,  throngb  this  beatific  vision, 
being  made  like  to  Him,  is  identical  with  the  eating  of  the  hid- 
den manna,  which  shall,  as  it  were,  be  then  bronght  forth  from 
tlie  sanctuary,  the  holy  of  holies  of  God's  immediate  presence 
where  it  was  withdrawn  from  sight  so  long,  that  all  may  par- 
take of  it ;  the  glory  of  Christ,  now  shrouded  and  concealed, 
being  then  revealed  to  His  people  "  (Trench). 

This  is  one  of  numerous  illustrations  of  the  dependence  of  the 
Apocalypse  upon  Old  Testament  history  and  prophecy.  '*To 
such  an  extent  is  tliis  the  case,"  says  Professor  Milligan,  "that 
it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  contains  a  single  figure  not  drawn 
from  the  Old  Testament,  or  a  single  complete  sentence  not 
more  or  less  built  up  of  materials  brought  from  the  same 
source."  See,  for  instance,  Balaam  (li.  14) ;  Jezebel  (ii.  20) ; 
Michael  (xii.  7,  compare  Dan.  x.  13  ;  xii.  1) ;  Abaddon  (is. 
11);  Jerusalem,  Mt.  Zion,  Babylon,  tlie  Euphrates,  Sodom, 
Egj'pt  (xxi.  2  ;  xiv.  1 ;  xvi,  19 ;  ix.  14  ;  xi.  8) ;  Gog  and  Ma- 
gog (xx.  8,  compare  Ezek.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.).  Similarly,  the  tree 
of  life,  the  sceptre  of  iron,  the  potter's  vessels,  the  morning-star 
(ii.  7,  17,  27,  28).     Heaven  is  described  under  tlie  figure  of  the 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  451 

tabernacle  io  the  wilderoess  (xi.  1,  19  ;  yi.  9  ;  viii.  3  ;  xi.  19  ; 
iv.  6).  The  Bong  of  the  redeemed  ie  the  gong  of  Moeee  (xv.  3). 
The  plagues  of  Egjpt  appear  Id  tlie  blood,  tire,  tliimder,  dark- 
ness and  locusts  (ch.  viii.).  "  The  great  earthquake  of  cli.  vi.  is 
taken  from  Haggai ;  the  san  becoming  black  as  eackclotli  of 
hair  and  the  moon  becoming  blood  (cli.  viii )  from  Joel :  the 
■tars  of  heaven  falling,  the  Hg-tree  casting  her  untimely  figs, 
the  heavens  departing  as  a  scroll  (cb.  viii.)  froui  Isaiali :  the 
scorpions  of  ch.  ix.  from  Ezekiel :  the  gathering  of  the  vine  of 
the  earth  (ch.  xiv.)  from  Joel,  and  the  treading  of  the  wine- 
press in  the  same  chapter  from  Isaiah."  So  too  the  details 
of  a  single  viBiou  are  gathered  out  of  different  prophets  or 
different  parts  of  the  same  prophet.  For  instance,  the  vision 
of  the  glorified  Redeemer  (i,  12-20).  The  golden  candlesticks 
are  from  Exodna  and  Zechariah ;  the  garment  down  to  the  foot 
from  Exodus  and  Daniel ;  the  golden  girdle  and  the  hairs  like 
wool  from  Isaiah  and  Daniel ;  the  feet  like  burnished  brass, 
and  the  voice  like  the  sound  of  many  waters,  from  Ezekiel ;  the 
two-edged  sword  from  Isaiah  and  Psalms ;  the  countenance 
like  the  sun  from  Exodus;  the  falling  of  the  seer  as  dead 
from  Eiodus,  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel ;  the  laying  of  Jesus* 
right  hand  on  the  seer  from  Daniel. 

"  Not  indeed  that  the  writer  binds  himself  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment in  a  slavish  spirit.  lie  rather  uses  it  with  great  freedom 
and  independence,  extending,  intensifying,  or  transfiguring  its 
descriptions  at  his  pleasure.  Yet  the  main  source  of  his  em- 
blems cannot  be  mistaken.  The  sacred  books  of  his  people  had 
been  more  than  familiar  to  him.  They  had  penetrated  his 
whole  being.  They  had  lived  within  him  as  a  germinating  seed, 
capable  of  shooting  op  not  only  in  the  old  forms,  but  in  new 
forms  of  life  and  beauty.  In  the  whole  extent  of  sacred  and 
religious  literature  there  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else  such  a 
perfect  fusion  of  the  revelation  given  to  Israel  with  the  mind 
of  one  who  would  either  express  Israel's  ideas,  or  give  titter- 
ance,  by  means  of  the  symbols  supplied  by  Israel's  history,  to 
the  present  and  most  elevated  thoughts  of  the  Christian  faith  " 
(this  note  is  condensed  from  Professor  Milligan's  "  fiaird  Lec- 
tures on  the  Kevelation  of  St.  John"). 


452  WORD  STUDIES  ITS  THE  (TEW  TBSTAMEST. 

A  white  stone  (^^v  XevKrjv).  See  on  caimleth,  Luke  sir. 
2S;  and  white,  Luke  ix.  29.  The  foundatioD  of  tbe  Egure  is 
not  to  be  eouglit  in  Gentile  but  in  Jewish  customs.  "  White  ia 
everywhere  the  color  and  livery  of  heaven  "  (Trench).  See  ch. 
L  14  ;  iii.  5  ;  vii.  9  ;  xiv.  14  ;  xix.  8,  11,  14  ;  xx.  11.  It  is  the 
bright,  glistering  white.  Compare  Matt,  xxviii.  3  ;  Luke  xxiv, 
4;  John  xx.  12;  Apoc.  xx.  11 ;  Dan.  vii  9. 

It  is  impossible  to  fix  the  meaning  of  the  Bymbol  with  any 
certainty.  The  following  are  aome  of  the  principal  views:  The 
Urim  and  Thummim  concealed  within  the  High -Priest's  breast- 
plate of  judgment.  This  is  advocated  by  Trench,  who  supposea 
that  the  Urim  was  a  peculiarly  rai-©  stone,  possibly  the  diamond, 
and  engraven  with  the  ineffable  name  of  God.  The  new  name 
he  regards  as  the  new  name  of  God  or  of  Christ  (ch.  iii.  12); 
some  revelation  of  the  glory  of  God  which  can  be  communicated 
to  His  people  only  in  the  higher  state  of  being,  and  which  they 
only  can  understand  who  have  actually  received. 

Professor  Milligan  supposes  an  allusion  to  the  plate  of  gold 
worn  on  tlie  High-Priest's  forehead,  and  inscribed  with  the 
words  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  but,  somewhat  strangely,  runs 
the  figure  into  the  stone  or  pebble  used  in  voting,  and  regards 
the  white  stone  as  carrying  the  idea  of  the  believer's  acquittal 
at  the  hands  of  God. 

Dean  Plumptre  sees  in  the  stone  tbe  signet  by  which,  in 
virtue  of  its  form  or  of  the  characters  inscribed  on  it,  he  who 
possessed  it  could  claim  from  the  friend  who  gave  it,  at  any 
distance  of  time,  a  frank  and  hearty  welcome ;  and  adds  to  this 
an  allusion  to  the  custom  of  presenting  such  a  token,  with  the 
guest's  name  upon  it,  of  admission  to  the  feast  given  to  those 
who  were  invited  to  partake  within  the  temple  precincts — a 
feast  which  consisted  wholly  or  in  part  of  sacrificial  meats. 

Others,  regarding  the  connection  of  tbe  stone  with  the  manna, 
refer  to  tbe  use  of  the  lot  cast  among  the  priests  in  order  to 
determine  which  one  should  offer  the  sacrifice. 

Others,  to  the  writing  of  a  candidate's  name  at  an  election 
by  ballot  upon  a  stone  or  bean. 

In  short,  the  commentators  are  utterly  divided,  and  the  true 
interpretation  remains  a  matter  of  conjecture. 


J 


BBVSLATION  OF  JOHN.  '453 

A  new  name.  Some  explain  the  new  name  of  Ood  or  of 
Christ  (compare  eh.  iii.  12);  others,  of  the  recipient's  own 
name.  ^^A  new  name  however,  a  revelation  of  Iiis  everlasting 
title  as  a  son  of  God  to  glory  in  Christ,  bnt  consisting  of  and 
revealed  in  those  personal  marks  and  signs  of  God's  peculiar 
adoption  of  himself^  which  he  and  none  other  is  acquainted 
with"  (Alford).  Bengel  says:  ^'Wonldstthon  know  what  kind 
of  a  new  name  thou  wilt  obtain  ?  Overcome.  Before  that  thou 
wilt  ask  in  vain,  and  after  that  thou  wilt  soon  read  it  inscribed 
on  the  white  stone." 

18.  Thyatira.  Situated  on  the  confines  of  Mysia  and  Ionia. 
According  to  Pliny  it  was  known  in  earlier  times  as  Pelopia 
and  Enhippia.  Its  prosperity  received  a  new  impulse  under 
the  Roman  Emperor  Vespasian.  The  city  contained  a  number 
of  corporate  guilds,  as  potters,  tanners,  weavers,  robe-makers, 
and  dyers.  It  was  from  Thyatira  that  Lydia  the  purple-seller 
of  Philippi  came,  Paul's  first  European  convert  The  numer- 
ous streams  of  the  adjacent  country  were  full  of  leeches.  The 
principal  deity  of  the  city  was  Apollo,  worshipped  as  the  Sun* 
god  under  the  surname  Tyrimnas.  A  shrine  outside  the  walla 
was  dedicated  to  Sambatha,  a  sibyl.  The  place  was  never  of 
paramount  political  importance. 

Son  of  God.  Compare  Son  of  man,  ch.  L  13;  Ps.  ii.  7; 
ch.  xix.  13. 

Who  hath  His  eyes,  etc.    See  on  ch.  i.  14, 15. 

Thy  works,  and  the  last,  etc  Omit  (md,  and  read,  as  Ber., 
and  that  thy  last  toorks  are  more  than  thejvtet. 

20.  A  few  things.    Omit. 

Thou  sufferest  (^o^).     Used  absolutely.     ToLeraiesL 

That  woman.    Rev.,  the  vxyman.    Some  translate  thy  wife. 

Jezebel.  Used  symbolically,  but  with  reference  to  the  no- 
torious historic  Jezebel.    She  was  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal,  king 


4S4 


WORD  STUDIKB  IN  THE  ITBW  TBSTAKKHT. 


of  Sidon  (1  Kings  xvi.  31),  formerly  a  prieet  of  Aetarte,  and 
who  had  made  liis  way  to  the  throne  by  the  murder  of  his  pre- 
decessor Pheles.  Allah's  marriage  with  her  was  the  tirst  iuetance 
of  a  marriage  with  a  heathen  princess  of  a  king  of  the  northeru 
kiugdom  of  Israel.  This  alliance  was  a  tiiruing-point  in  the 
moral  history  of  the  kingdom.  From  the  times  of  David  ami 
Solomon  many  treaties  had  been  concluded  between  Phoenicia 
and  Israel ;  bat  it  was  at  the  same  time  the  special  business  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  to  restore  the  ancient  rigidness 
of  the  nationality  of  Israel.  Jezehel  looked  down  with  perverse 
pride  upon  a  people  whose  religion  she  neither  understood  nor 
respected.  Though  the  ten  tribes  had  yielded  to  idolatry  in 
the  worship  of  the  calves,  the  true  God  was  etiil  worshipped 
and  the  law  of  Moses  acknowledged.  From  the  time  of  Ahab's 
marriage  the  apostasy  of  Israel  became  more  decided  and  deadly. 
She  was  "a  woman  in  whom,  with  the  reckless  and  licentious 
habits  of  an  Oriental  queen,  were  united  the  fiercest  and  sternest 
qualities  inherent  in  the  old  Semitic  race.  Her  husband,  in 
whom  generous  and  gentle  feelings  were  not  wanting,  was  yet  of 
a  weak  and  yielding  character  which  soon  made  him  s  tool  in 
her  hands.  .  .  .  The  wild  license  of  her  life  and  the  magical 
fascination  of  her  arts  or  her  character  became  a  proverb  in 
the  nation.  Round  her  and  from  her,  in  different  degrees  of 
nearness,  is  evolved  the  awful  drama  of  the  most  eventful 
crisis  of  this  portion  of  the  Israelite  history  "  (Stanley,  "  Jewish 
Church").  She  sought  to  exterminate  the  prophets  of  Jehovati 
(1  Kings  xviii.  13),  and  inaugurated  the  worship  of  Baal  the 
Sun-god  on  a  magnificent  scale.  Two  sanctuaries  were  estab- 
lished, oue  for  each  of  the  great  Phcenician  deities,  at  each  of 
the  two  new  capitals  of  tlie  kingdom,  Samaria  and  Jezreel. 
The  sanctuary  of  Astarte  or  Ashtaroth  (the  Phoenician  Venus) 
at  Jezreel  was  under  Jezebel's  special  sanction,  and  there  is 
reason  to  suppose  that  she  ministered  as  a  priestess  in  that 
licentious  worship.  Four  hundred  priests  or  prophets  were 
attached  to  this  sanctuary  and  were  supported  at  her  table. 
The  sanctuary  to  Baal  at  Samaria  was  large  enough  to  contain 
all  the  worship]>er8  of  the  northern  kingdom.  Its  staff  con- 
sisted of  four  hundred  and  lifty  priests,  and  the  interior  c 


ts  stalt  con- 
interior  con-  J 


RBVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  455 

tained  representations  of  the  Son-god  on  small  pillars,  while  a 
large  statue  of  the  same  deity  was  set  up  in  front.  At  these 
sanctuaries  Ahab  in  person  offered  sacrifices. 

Expositors  are  divided  as  to  the  symbolic  import  of  the  name 
in  this  passage,  some  referring  it  to  a  single  person — '^  some 
single  wicked  woman  in  the  Church  of  Thyatira  inheriting  this 
name  of  infamy  in  the  Church  of  God,"  giving  herself  out  as  a 
prophetess,  and  seducing  the  servants  of  Christ  to  commit  forn- 
ication and  to  eat  things  offered  to  idols.  Others  interpret 
the  name  as  designating  an  influential  heretical  party  in  tlie 
Church :  but,  as  Alford  remarks,  ^'  the  real  solution  must  lie 
hidden  until  all  that  is  hidden  shall  be  known."  It  is  clear,  at 
any  rate,  that  Thyatira,  like  the  Church  of  old,  had  sinned  by 
her  alliance  with  a  corrupt  faith  and  practice. 

To  teach  and  to  seduce  {SiSdaiceip  xai  irXapoaSai).  The 
best  texts  read  teal  S^Bda'fC€l  koI  irXava  and  she  teacheth  and 
aedtuseth.  So  Rev.  For  sediioeth  see  on  erry  Mark  xii.  24,  and 
deceiver  and  erroTy  Matt  xxviii.  63,  64.  The  word  irXavav  to 
seduce  is  found  of tener  in  the  Apocalypse  than  elsewhere  in 
the  New  Testament.  It  never  means  mere  error  as  such,  but 
fundamental  depari/wre  from,  ike  truth. 

To  commit  fornication  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to 
idols.  Both  sins  of  the  historical  Jezebel.  See  2  £ings  ix.  22, 
30 ;  Jer.  iv.  30;  Nahum  iii.  4. 

21.  Space  (ypovov).    lit,  time^  as  Bev. 

Repent  {jji^Taiw/jcTj).    See  on  Matt.  iii.  2 ;  xxi.  29. 

Of  her  fornication  (itc).  Lit.,  cut  qf;  i.e.,  so  as  to  come  out 
of  and  escape  from  her  sin.     See  on  ver.  7. 

22.  Into  a  bed.  Of  anguish.  The  scene  of  the  sin  is  also 
the  scene  of  the  punishment 

Commit  adultery  (jioix^^^^)*  ^  wider  term  than 
iropvewou  to  commit  fomixxUian.     Compare  the  metaphorical 


456  WORD  8TDD1B8  IN  THE  NEW  TB8TAMENT. 

meaning  expressing  the  rebellion  &nd  idolatry  of  Israel  (Jer.  iiL  1 
8;  V.7;  Ezek.  ivi.  32). 

With  her  {f^er'  avr^).  Not  with  her  as  the  con^ux  adv.lten\ 
bat  v)hG  sliare  with  her  in  her  adulteries. 

Of  their  deeds  («  rmv  epytnv  airrStv).  Head  airr^  her 
(deeds).     Repent  out  of{iK)  aa  in  ver.  21. 

23.  Children  (t^ki«»).  Emphatic.  Distingnished  from  M* 
j>articipatora  of  ver,  22,  as  her  proper  adherents,  "  who  are 
begotten  of  her  and  go  to  coQBtitiite  her."  Others,  however, 
deny  any  distinction  (Milligan),  and  others  (ae  Trench)  explain 
as  the  less  forward  and  prominent  membere  of  the  wicked  com- 
pany, deceived  where  tlie  others  were  the  deceivers. 

With  death  (^i"  ^avdrtp).  To  kill  with  death  is  a  very  strong 
expression.  Compare  Lev.  xx.  10,  Sept.,  ^vdrp  ^vaTovtr^cav 
ghaU  be  put  to  death  (A.  V.  and  Rev.).  Lit,  let  them  he  put  to 
death  with  death.  The  reference  can  hardly  be  to  the  slaughter 
of  Ahab's  seventy  sons  (2  Kings  x.  6,  7)  who  were  not  Jezebel'e 
children. 

All  the  churches.  Not  merely  the  seven  chnrches,  bnt 
the  churches  throughout  the  world. 

Shall  know  {yi>aitT0VTai).     See  on  John  ii.  2i. 

Searcheth  (ipewav).  See  John  v.  39;  vii,  62;  Bom.  viil. 
27,  Compare  Jer.  xi.  20 ;  xvii.  10 ;  xx.  12 ;  1  Pet.  i.  11.  De- 
noting  a  careful  search,  a  following  vp  or  tracking.  See  Gen. 
xxxi.  35  ;  1  Kings  xx.  fl ;  Prov.  xx.  27 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10, 

Reins  {yei^povi).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Strictly, 
kidneys.  Used  of  the  thoughts,  feelings,  and  j/urposea  of  the 
soul.  A  similar  nee  of  the  physical  for  the  spiritual  organ  is 
trjrXay^i'a  bowels  for  heart.     Seo  oa  pitiful,  1  Pet.  iii.  8. 

24.  And  nnto  the  rest.    Omit  anJ,  and  render,  as  Rev.,  to 

you  I  aaij,  to  the  rest,  etc. 


1 


I 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  467 

And  which  {icaX  omiv;).  Omit  koX  and.  The  compound 
relative,  wAic/i,  claesifiee;  which  are  of  thme  who  know  not,  e\c 

The  depths  of  Satan  (to,  ^u^  tov  XaTova).  The  reference 
is,  most  probabl  V,  to  the  Guoatic  sect  of  the  Ophites  (0^19  a  ser- 
J>ent),  or,  in  Hebrew,  Naasenee  {lUMsA  a  serpent),  Berpetit-wor- 
shippers,  a  sect  the  origin  of  which  ie  unknown,  but  whidi 
existed  as  late  as  the  sixth  century' ;  BJnce,  in  530,  Justinian 
passed  laws  against  it.  "The  veneration  of  the  serpent  was 
but  the  logical  development  of  a  theory,  the  germ  of  which  is 
common  to  many  of  the  Gnostic  sects.  Proceeding  on  the  as- 
sumption that  the  creator  of  the  world  is  to  be  regarded  as  an 
evil  power,  a  thing  in  hostility  to  the  supreme  God,  it  follows 
aa  a  natural  conseqnence  that  the  fall  of  man  through  disobedi- 
ence to  the  command  of  his  maker  nnist  be  regarded,  not  as  a 
transgression  against  the  will  of  the  supreme  God,  bnt  as  an 
emancipation  from  the  authority  of  an  evil  being.  The  serpent, 
therefore,  who  tempted  mankind  to  sin,  is  no  longer  their  de- 
stroyer but  their  benefactor.  He  is  the  symbol  of  intellect,  by 
whose  means  the  first  human  pair  were  raised  to  the  knowledge 
of  tlie  existence  of  higher  beings  than  their  creator.  This  con- 
ception, consistently  carried  out,  would  have  resulted  in  a  direct 
inversion  of  the  whole  teaching  of  scripture;  in  calling  evil 
good  and  good  evil;  in  converting  Satan  into  God  and  God 
into  Satan.  The  majority  of  the  Ophite  sects,  however,  seem 
to  have  shrunk  from  this  portentous  blasphemy.  While  ac- 
knowledging the  fall  of  man  as,  in  some  manner,  a  deliverance 
from  evil  and  an  exaltation  of  human  nature,  they  hesitated  to 
carry  out  their  principle  by  investing  the  evil  spirit  with  the 
attributes  of  deity.  A  kind  of  compromise  was  made  between 
scripture  and  philosophy.  The  serpent  was,  notwithstanding 
his  service  to  mankind,  represented  as  a  being  of  evil  nature 
and  an  enemy  to  man,  though  his  work  was  ovcrniled  to  man's 
good,  and  he  himself  was.  beyond  Iiis  intention,  the  instrument 
of  a  higher  wisdom.  But  in  one  sect  at  least  of  the  OphiteB, 
the  more  logical  and  thoroughly  blasphemous  consequences  of 
the  first  principles  were  exhibited  openly  and  unhhisliinply" 
(M.TUsel,  "Gnostic  Heresies'").     The  characteristic  boast  of  the 


458  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  ITBW  TESTAMENT. 

Onoetics  was  their  knowledge  of  the  depths  of  divine  things 
Id  this  they  were  probably  perverting  and  caricaturing  the 
words  of  Paul  (Ilom.  xi.  33 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10). 

As  they  apeak.  Rev.,  aa  they  aay.  The  questions  are, 
let.  What  is  the  phrase  alluded  to?  Is  it  the  familiar  formula 
of  these  heretics,  "  the  depths,"  or  "  the  depths  of  God,"  the 
deptJis  of  Satan  being  added  by  the  Lord  himself  in  ironical 
contrast  with  the  depths  of  divine  knowledge, — or  ig  it  the 
depths  of  Satan  f  2d.  Does  aa  they  say  refer  to  Christians, 
describing  the  depths  of  the  Gnostics  as  deptlis  of  Satan,  or 
does  it  refer  to  the  heretics  themselves,  calling  their  own  mys- 
teries deptlis  of  Satan  f 

The  majority  of  commentators  regard  as  they  say  as  referring 
to  the  heretics,  and  as  applying  only  to  tlie  word  depths ;  of 
Satan  being  added  by  the  Lord  in  indignation,  AJford  says 
that  no  such  fonnula  as  depths  of  Satan,  or  any  resembling  it, 
is  fonnd  as  used  by  the  ancient  Gnostic  heretics. 

Other  burden  {aXKo  ffdpm).  The  words  for  burden  in  the 
New  Testament  are  Syieix;  (only  in  Heb.  xii.  1),  0apo<!  (Matt.  xx. 
12 ;  Gal.  vi.  2),  and  tpoprlov  (Matt.  xi.  30 ;  xxiii.  4 ;  Gal.  vi.  5). 
'OyKtm  refers  to  bulk,  ffapo^  to  weit/ht,  ^prCov  to  a  burden  so 
far  as  it  is  borne  {i^epo)).  Thus  in  Heb.  xii.  1,  "  lay  aside  every 
weight  (57*09),"  the  figure  being  that  of  ruimera  in  the  race- 
course, and  the  word  appropriate  as  denoting  the  bulky  robes 
and  the  accontrements  of  the  ordinary  dress  which  might  im- 
pede the  freedom  of  the  limbs.  In  Matt.  xx.  12,  "  the  burden 
{^dpoi)  and  heat  of  the  day,"  the  idea  is  that  of  lieavy  toil  press- 
ing like  a  weight.  So  Gal.  vi.  2,  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burd- 
eTts."  But  in  Gal.  vi.  5,  the  emphasis  is  on  the  act  of  bearing  ; 
and  therefore  tf>opTiov  is  need :  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden;  "  i.e.,  every  man  shall  carry  that  which  it  is  appointed 
him  to  bear.  The  reference  in  that  passage  is  probably  to  the 
prohibition  enjoined  by  the  apostolic  council  of  Jerusalem, 
which  concerned  the  very  things  which  are  rebuked  here— forn- 
ication and  abstinence  from  idol-meats.  In  the  narrative  of 
that  council  the  phrase  occurs  "to  lay  upon  you  no  greater 


RBYBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  459 

burden  "  (Acts  xv.  28).  The  meaning  accordingly  will  be,  '^  I 
put  npon  jon  no  other  bnrden  than  abstinence  from  and  pro- 
test against  these  abominations." 

25.  Hold  fast  {icpaniaaTe).    See  on  Mark  viL  8 ;  Acts  iii.  11. 

Till  I  come  (dxp^  oi  Ay  fi^)»  The  conditional  particle  &9 
marks  the  time  of  His  coming  as  uncertain. 

26.  Keepeth  my  works  {Tqp&v  rk  ipya  fuw).  The  phrase 
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  The  toorks  are  those 
wliich  Christ  oammanda^  which  He  €loeSj  and  which  are  ths 
fruits  of  His  Spirit.    See  on  John  iv.  47. 

Power  (^i^vaUuf).  See  on  John  L  12.  Bey.,  better,  ou- 
tharUy. 

Nations  {iSpw). »  See  on  Matt.  xxr.  82,  and  OerMleSj  Luke 
iL  32.  Properly,  here,  the  Gtontiles,  as  opposed  to  the  true  Israel 
of  God. 

27.  Shall  rule  {iro^uum).  Lit.,  shall  shepherd.  A  com- 
parison with  ch.  viL  17,  brings  out  the  terrible  irony  in  this 
word.  Compare  Ps.  ii.  9,  Sept.,  where  the  same  word  is  used. 
A.  V.J  break.  See  on  nUey  Matt.  ii.  6 ;  feedj  Acts  zx.  28 ;  1 
Pet  y.  2  ;  Jude  12. 


Rod  (pd/SB^).  Commonly  rendered  slqfj  once  sceptre^  Heh. 
i.  8.    This  is  its  meaning  here. 

Vessels  {c/uwi).    See  on  ffoodsj  Matt  xii  29;  vessetf  1  Pet 

111.  7. 

Of  the  potter  {tctpafUKi).     From  tdpafUK pcitef^s  day. 

Shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers.  The  A.  Y.  follows  the 
reading  owrpifi^iaeTa*^  the  future  tense  of  the  verb.  The  cor- 
rect  reading  is  awrrplfierai,  the  present  tense.  Bender  there- 
fore, as  liev.,  ^^  as  the  vessels  of  the  potter  are  broken.^    See 


460  WORD  STUDIES  TS  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

on  Mark  v.  i,  and  bruising,  Luke  is.  39.     The  oTiv  together 
gives  the  picture  of  the  fragments  collapsing  into  a  heap. 

28.  The  morning-star  {r'ov  a*rrepa  tov  irpalvov).  7^ star^ 
t/iat  of  the  morning.  One  of  John'e  characterietic  conetrocl- 
ions.  See  on  1  John  iv,  9.  The  reference  is,  most  probably, 
to  Christ  himself.  See  ch.  xxii.  16.  lie  will  give  Ilimeelf. 
This  interpretation  falls  in  with  the  promise  of  power  over  tbo 
nations  in  ver.  26.  The  star  was  the  ancient  emblem  of  sover- 
eignty. See  Num.  xxlv.  17 ;  Matt.  ii.  2,  "  It  was  the  symbol 
of  sovereignty  on  its  brighter  and  benignant  aide,  and  was 
therefore  the  fitting  and  necessary  complement  of  the  dread 
attributes  that  had  gone  before.  The  king  came  not  only  to 
judge  and  punish,  but  also  to  illumiue  and  cheer  "  (Plumptrej. 
Compare  2  Pet  i.  19. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Sardis.  The  capital  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Lydia. 
It  was  situated  in  a  plain  watered  by  the  river  Pactolus.  The 
city  was  of  very  ancient  origin.  Herodotus  (i.,  84)  gives  the 
account  of  its  siege  and  capture  by  Cyrus,  and  of  its  previous 
fortification  by  an  old  king,  iteles.  It  was  ruled  by  a  series  of 
able  princes,  the  last  of  whom  was  CrtHsus,  celebrated  for  hie 
wealth  and  his  misfortunes.  In  the  earlier  part  of  his  reign  he 
extended  his  dominion  over  the  whole  of  Asia  Minor,  with  the 
exception  of  Lycia  and  Cilicia.  Tiie  Lydian  rule  was  termin- 
ated by  the  conqnest  of  Cyrus.  From  tlie  Persians  it  passed 
into  the  hands  of  Alexander  the  Great,  after  which,  for  the 
next  three  hundred  years,  its  fortunes  are  obscure.  In  b.c.  214 
it  was  taken  and  sacked  by  Antiochus  the  Great  after  a  siege 
of  two  years.  The  kings  of  Pergamus  next  succeeded  to  the 
dominion,  and  from  them  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Ro- 
mans. 

In  the  time  of  Tiberina  it  was  desolated  by  an  earthquake, 
together  with  eleven  or  twelve  other  important  cities  of  Asia, 
and  the  calamity  was  increased  by  a  pestilence. 


RBVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  461 

Sardis  was  in  very  early  times  an  important  commercial  city. 
Pliny  says  that  the  art  of  dyeing  wool  was  invented  there,  and 
it  was  the  entrepdt  of  the  dyed  woollen  manofactures,  carpets, 
etc.,  the  raw  material  for  which  was  furnished  by  the  flocks  of 
Phrygia.  It  was  also  the  place  where  the  metal  eUctrum  was 
procured.  Qold  was  found  in  the  bed  of  the  Pactolus.  Silver 
and  gold  coins  are  said  to  have  been  first  minted  there,  and  it 
was  at  one  time  known  as  a  slave-mart.  The  impure  worship 
of  the  goddess  Cybele  was  celebrated  there,  and  the  massive 
ruins  of  her  temple  are  still  to  be  seen.  The  city  is  now  a 
heap  of  ruins.  In  1850  no  human  being  found  a  dwelling 
there. 

The  seven  Spirits  of  God.    See  on  ch.  L  4. 

2.  Be  watchful  i^Cmw  ypfiyop&v).  Lit,  become  awake  and 
on  the  watch.    See  on  Mark  xiiL  S5 ;  1  Pet  ▼•  8.     Become 

what  thou  art  not 

Strengthen  (<m}pi(6y).  See  on  1  Pet  ▼.  10,  and  compare 
Luke  xxii.  32 ;  Rom.  i.  11 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  S. 

That  are  ready  to  die  (&  fUXXei  cnroBopehi).  Bead  ifieXKop 
were  ready  or  ahovi  (to  die). 

I  have  not  found  thy  works  (ov  eUpffxd  <rw  rh  ipya). 
Some  texts  omit  the  article  before  worksj  in  which  case  we 
should  render,  /  hofoe  found  no  works  of  thine.    So  Bev. 

Perfect  (7r€7rXi7pa»/iiva).    lAi.^fylfiUed.    So  Bev. 

God.    The  best  texts  insert  /Aot;»  ^^my  God." 

3.  Thou  hast  received  and  heard  (cIXi^^ov  icai  9iicowra^). 
The  former  of  these  verbs  is  in  the  perfect  tense :  thou  hast 
received  the  truth  as  a  permanent  deposit.  It  remains  with 
thee  whether  thou  regardest  it  or  not.  The  latter  verb  is  in 
the  aorist  tense,  didst  hear  (so  Bev.),  denoting  merely  the  act 
of  hearing  when  it  took  place. 


WORD   STUDIB8  Dt  THE  NEW  TBBTAMKST. 


Watch.    See  on  Ter.2. 

On  thoe.    Omit. 

As  a  thief  ((>k  hcX^ttti;;).  77i.ief,  as  dietingnisbed  from  Xjjv 
T^f  robber,  a  plunderer  on  a  larger  Bcale,  who  eecuree  his 
booty  not  by  etealtli,  but  by  violence.  Ilence  the  word  is  ap- 
propriate here  to  mark  the  unexpected  and  Btealthy  coming  of 
the  Lord.     Compare  1  These,  v.  2,  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10. 

Thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee. 
The  Greek  proverb  says  that  the  feet  of  the  avenging  deities 
are  shod  with  wool.  The  sentiment  is  voiced  in  the  two  fol- 
lowing  fragiueuts  from  jEschylus : 

"  Whether  one  sleep  or  wilk  or  alt  at  e>M, 
Dnaeei)  *dc1  voIggIubs  Juatioe  dogB  hie  Hl«pB, 
Bb-lklng  alhirirt  hii  pUh  from  right  or  laft; 
Nor  what  U  foaUj  doae  will  aigbt  oonoetl ; 
Wh&t«'er  tboQ  doesl  some  god  boholdeth  thea." 

"  And  ioA  Ihoa  deem  thit  thoa  ehalt  e'er  o'ercomt 
Wisdom  dirine  ?    That  retribution  Uea 
Somewhere  remote  from  mortals  *    Close  it  huid, 
Unseen  itself,  it  see*  and  kaoWB  full  well 
Whom  It  befits  to  smite.     But  thoa  Icnow'it  not 
The  hoar  when,  swift  >nd  sndden,  it  shsU  oom* 
And  sweep  awa;  the  irioked  from  the  earth." 

4.  Thou  hatt  a  few  names.  The  best  texts  insert  itXX^ 
hit  between  these  words  and  the  close  of  the  preceding  verse. 
So  Rev.  But,  notwithstanding  the  general  apathy  of  the 
Church,  thou  hast  a  few,  etc.  Compare  ver.  1,  ihou  hast  a 
funne,  and  see  on  ch.  xi.  13.  Names  is  equivalent  to  persona, 
a  few  who  may  be  rightly  najned  as  exceptions  to  the  general 
conception. 


Even  in  Sardis.    Omit  koX  even. 


Defiled  (efidkuvav).     See  on  1  Pet.  i.  4. 


J 


REVSLATION  OF  JOHN.  468 

Garments.  See  the  same  figure,  Jade  23.  The  meaning 
J8,  have  not  sullied  the  purity  of  their  Christian  life. 

In  white  {iv  XevicoK).  With  ifAartoi^  ffarmerUs  understood. 
See  on  ch.  ii.  17,  and  compare  Zech.  iii.  3,  5.  ^'  White  colors 
are  suitable  to  the  gods  "  (Plato,  ^^  Laws,"  xii.,  956).  So  Yirgil, 
of  the  tenants  of  Eljsium : 

"  Lo,  priests  of  holj  life  and  olisste  while  thej  in  life  had  part; 
Lo,  god-loved  poets,  men  who  spake  things  worth/  Phcohns'  hearts 
And  the/  who  bettered  life  on  earth  bj  new-found  masterj ; 
And  the  J  whose  good  deeds  left  a  tale  for  men  to  name  them  bj : 
And  all  the/  had  their  brows  about  with  snowj  fiUets  bound." 

'*JSneid,'*Ti.,  661-WS. 

The  same  shall  be  clothed  {oSro^  wepifiaXHrai).  Foro$ro9 
this,  or  the  eamej  read  oirw^  thus:  " shall  thtis  be  arrayed."  So 
Bev.  The  verb  denotes  a  solemn  investiture,  and  means  liter- 
ally to  throw  or  put  around* 

5.  Book  of  life.  lit,  the  hook  of  the  Ufe.  For  the  figure^ 
•ee  Exod.  xxxii.  32 ;  Ps.  Ixix.  28 ;  Dan.  xiL  1 ;  Philip,  iy.  8. 
Compare  Luke  x.  20 ;  Heb.  xii.  23. 

I  will  confess  (^|6fio\o7ifao/Mu).  Opetdy  confess  {i^.  See 
on  Matt  xi.  25 ;  Acts  xix.  18 ;  Jas.  y.  16. 

7.  Philadelphia.  Seyenty-five  miles  southeast  of  Sardis. 
The  second  city  in  Lydia.  The  adjacent  region  was  celebrated 
as  a  wine-growing  district,  and  its  coins  bore  the  head  of  Bac- 
chus and  the  figure  of  a  Bacchante.  The  population  included 
Jews,  Jewish  Christians,  and  converts  from  heathenism.  It 
suffered  from  frequent  earthquakes.  Of  all  the  seven  churches 
it  had  the  longest  duration  of  prosperity  as  a  Christian  city.  It 
still  exists  as  a  Turkish  town  under  the  name  of  Allah  Shehr^ 
CUy  of  Ood.  The  situation  is  picturesque,  the  town  being  buOt 
on  four  or  five  hills,  and  well  supplied  with  trees,  and  the  clim- 
ate is  healthful.  One  of  the  mosques  is  believed  by  the  native 
Christians  to  have  been  the  gathering-place  of  the  church  ad- 
dressed in  the  Apocalypse.     '^  One  solitary  pillar  of  high  an- 


464  WORD  STUDIES  HT  THE  VEW  TBSTAUENT. 

tiqiiity  liftB  been  often  noticed  as  reminding  beholders  of  tlie 
words  in  cli.  iii.  12;  'Uiiu  that  ovet'cometh  will  I  make  a 
pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God.' " 

He  that  is  holy  (o  ar/ux;).  See  on  Acta  xxvi.  10.  Christ  is 
called  hofy.  Acts  ii.  27;  xiii.  35;  Heb.  vii.  26;  in  all  which 
passages  the  word,  however,  is  oo-iot,  which  is  hol^  Jy  sanction, 
applied  to  one  wlio  diligently  observes  all  the  sanctities  of  re- 
ligion. It  is  appropriate  to  Christ,  tlierefore,  as  being  the  one 
in  whom  these  eternal  sanctities  are  grounded  and  reside, 
"^7*05,  the  word  used  here,  refers  rather  to  separation  from 
evil. 

Ha  that  is  true  (o  dX»).9iw?).     See  on  John  i.  9.     'i4Xi}3uro« 

is  not  merely  i/enuitie  as  contrasted  with  the  absolutely  false, 
bat  as  contrasted  with  that  which  is  only  subordinatcly  or  typi- 
cally true.  It  expresses  the  j>erfect  realization  of  an  idea  as  con- 
trasted with  itspartial  realization.  Tlius,  Moses  gave  bread,  but 
the  Father  giveth  the  true  bread  (tov  oprof  toc  aXifSivov).  Ibiael 
was  a  vine  of  God's  planting  (Pa.  Ixxx,  8),  Christ  is  tlie  true  (n 
d\Ti$tvT})  vine  (John  xv.  1),  The  word  is  so  characteristic  of 
Jolin  that,  while  found  only  once  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  once 
in  a  Faiiline  Epistle,  and  four  times  in  the  Epistle  to  the  He- 
brews, it  occurs  nine  times  in  the  fourth  Gospel,  four  times  in 
John's  First  Epistle,  and  ten  times  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  in 
every  instance  in  these  three  latter  books  in  its  own  distinctive 
aignification. 

The  key  of  David.  See  on  ch.  i.  18,  and  compare  Isa.  xxii. 
22,  David  is  the  type  of  Christ,  the  supreme  ruler  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  See  Jer.  xxx.  9;  Ezek,  xxxiv,  23 ;  xxxvii. 
24.  Tlie  house  of  David  is  the  typical  desiguation  of  the  king- 
dom of  Jesus  Christ  (Ps.  cxxii.  5).  The  holding  of  the  keys, 
the  symbols  of  power,  thus  belongs  to  Christ  as  Lord  of  the 
kingdom  and  Church  of  God.  See  on  Matt.  xvi.  19 :  He  ad- 
mits and  excludes  at  His  pleasure. 

No  man  shutteth  [ovBel':  KKeUi).  'Rea.d  kkelaei  shall  akut 
So  Rev. 


J 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  465 

8.  I  have  set  {SeStaxa).  lAt^  I  have  gifoen.  For  a  similar 
phrase  see  Luke  ;ui.  51. 

An  open  door  {^vpav  avefntyfUin/p).  Bev.,  more  literally, 
a  door  opened.  This  is  variouslj  explained.  Some  refer  it  to 
the  entrance  into  the  joj  of  the  Lord ;  others  to  the  initiation 
into  the  meaning  of  scriptnre ;  others  again  to  the  opportunity 
for  the  mission-work  of  the  Church.  In  this  last  sense  the 
phrase  is  often  used  bj  Paul.  See  1  Cor.  xvi.  9  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12 ; 
Col.  iv.  3.  Compare  Acts  xiy.  27.*  I  have  given  is  appropri- 
ate, since  all  opportunities  of  service  are  gifts  of  God.  See  on 
ch.  ii.  7. 

For  thou  hast  {Sti  ^€k).  Some  texts  make  behold — shut 
parenthetical,  and  render  ori  thaty  defining  thy  toorke^  etc  So 
Rev. 

A  little  strength  {jAucpiv  ivpofuv).  This  would  mean,  thou 
hast  some  power,  though  small.  Many,  however,  omit  the  in- 
defiuite  article  in  translating,  and  render  thou  hast  little  etrength; 
i.e.,  thou  art  poor  in  numbers  and  toorkUy  resauroee.  So  Al- 
ford,  Trench,  and  Diisterdieck. 

And  {koX).  John's  single  copula  instead  of  a  particle  of 
logical  connection.  See  on  John  i  10 ;  vL  46 ;  1  John  L  6 ; 
John  viii.  20. 

Hast  kept  my  word  {inipffa'd^  fiov  rhv  X6yov).  Bev.,  ren- 
dering  the  aorist  more  strictly,  didst  keep.  For  the  phrase,  see 
John  xvii.  6,  8. 

9.  I  will  make  (&Sa>/a).  Bev.,  rightly,  I  give.  See  on  ver. 
8.    The  sense  is  broken  off  there  and  resumed  here. 

Of  the  synagogue  (ix  r^  trwarftia^).  Certain  ones  of  the 
synagogue.    Most  interpreters  refer  to  the  Jews.     Others  ex* 

*  This  is  the  explanation  of  Trench,  Plamptre,  Dusterdieok,  and  Alford, 
and  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  bo  the  preferable  one.    Professor  Milligan  arguea 
at  length  for  the  second  explanation,  which  is  Bengers. 
Vol.  11.-80 


466 


WORD  STUDIBS  DJ  THB  »BW  TBSTAMEirr. 


plain  more  generally,  of  the  bowing  down  of  the  Church's  ene- 
mies at  her  feet.  Trench  refers  to  a  passage  in  the  Epistle  of 
Ignatius  to  this  Philadelphian  church,  implying  the  actual 
presence  in  the  midst  of  it  of  converts  from  Judaism,  who 
preached  the  faith  which  they  once  persecuted. 


roi)?  Tva  li^anv). 


Of  Satan.    See  on  c 


I  will  make  them  to  come  {iroii^ira  a 
Lit.,  I  will  laahe  them  tliat  they  ahall  come. 

Worship  before  thy  feet.     Compare  Isa.  Ix.  li;  xlix.  23. 

10.  The  word  of  my  patience  (t6»' X070P  t^?  u7ro/««/^s /miu). 
Kot  the  words  which  Christ  has  spoken  concerning  patience,  but 
the  word  of  Christ  which  requires  patience  to  keep  it;  the 
gospel  which  teaches  the  need  of  a  patient  waiting  for  Christ. 
On  jxUience,  see  on  2  Pet.  i.  6 ;  Jas.  v,  1. 

From  the  hour  (e*e).  The  preposition  implies,  not  a  keeping 
from  temptation,  but  a  keeping  in  temptation,  as  the  result  of 
which  they  ahall  be  delivered  ovi,of'\X&  power.  Compare  John 
xvii.  15. 

Of  temptation  (toO  wetpaa-fiov).  Lit.,  "of  M«  trial."  8w 
on  Matt.  vi.  13  ;  1  Pet.  i.  7.     Rev.,  trial. 

World  {oUovfiev^).    See  on  Lake  ii.  L 

11.  Behold.    Omit 

That  no  one  take  thy  croytniiva  fi/itSeUXdfiyTivtrri^vov 
oov).  Take  it  away.  The  idea  is  not  that  of  one  believer 
stepping  into  the  place  which  was  designed  for  another,  but  of 
an  enemy  taking  away  from  another  the  reward  which  he  him- 
self has  forfeited.  The  expression  is  explained  by  Col.  ii.  18, 
It  is  related  by  Mahomet  that,  after  having  attempted,  in  vain, 
to  convert  one  Abdallah  to  the  faith,  and  liaving  been  told  by 
him  to  go  about  liie  business  and  to  preach  only  to  tho; 
should  come  to  him — he  went,  downcast,  to  a  friend's 


I 


bouse.  J 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  467 

His  friend,  perceiving  that  he  was  ead,  asked  him  the  reason  ; 
and  on  being  told  of  Abdallali'B  insult,  said,  "Treat  )iini  gently ; 
for  I  swear  that  when  God  sent  thee  to  us,  we  iiad  already 
Btmng  pearls  to  crown  him,  and  he  seeth  that  thou  hast 
snatched  the  kingdom  out  of  his  grasp."  For  crown,  see  on  ch. 
ii.  10.  Thi/  crown  is  not  the  crown  which  thou  kast,  bnt  the 
crown  which  thou  ahait  fiave  if  thou  shall  prove  faithful. 

12.  Pillar  {tnvKov).  The  word  occurs,  Gal.  ii.  9 ;  1  Tim.  iii 
IS;  Apoc.  X.  1.  The  reference  here  is  not  to  any  prominenct 
in  the  earthly  church,  as  Gal.  ii.  9,  bat  to  blessedness  in  the 
fature  state.  The  exact  meaning  is  doubtful.  Some  explain, 
hes/uiUAave  a  fixed  and  important  place  in  th^  glorijied  chureh. 
Compare  Matt.  xix.  2S.  Others  emphasize  the  idea  of  KtahUity, 
and  find  a  possible  local  reference  to  the  frequent  earthquakes 
from  which  Philadelphia  had  suffered,  and  which  had  shaken 
its  temples.  Strabo  says :  "  And  Philadelphia  has  not  even  its 
walls  unimpaired,  but  daily  they  are  shaken  in  some  way,  and 
gaps  are  made  in  them.  But  the  inhabitants  continue  to  oc- 
cupy the  land  notwithstanding  their  sufferings,  and  to  build 
Dew  houses."  Others  again  emphasize  the  idea  of  beauty. 
Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  where  the  saints  are  described  as  Umng 


Tttmpla  {va^.     See  on  Matt.  ir.  5. 

Upon  him.  The  conqueror,  not  the  pillar.  Compare  cb. 
TiL  3 ;  ix.  4 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xxii.  4.  Probably  with  reference  to  the 
golden  plate  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  worn  by 
the  High-Priest  upon  his  forehead  (Exod.  xxviii.  36,  36),  See 
on  ch.  ii.  17. 

New  Jerusalem.  See  Ezek.  xlviii.  35.  The  believer  whose 
brow  is  adorned  with  this  name  has  the  freedom  of  the  heav- 
enly city.  Even  on  earth  his  commonwealth  is  in  heaven 
(Phil.  iii.  20).  "Still,  his  citizenship  was  latent:  he  was  one 
of  God's  hidden  ones ;  but  now  he  is  openly  avonched,  and  has 
Aright  to  enter  in  by  the  gates  to  the  cffy  "(Trench).  The 
city  is  called   by  John,  the  great  and  holy  (cli.  xxi.  10);  by 


i 


468  WOHD  STDDIBS  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Matthew,  the  holy  city  (iv.  5);  bj  Pftiil,  Jeruaaiem  which  it 
above  (Gal.  iv.  6);  by  tlie  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  the  city  of 
t/ig  living  God,  the  heavenly  </eruaalem  (Heb.  xii.  22).  Plato 
calls  hie  ideal  city  CaUipolia,  the  fair  city  (*'  Republic,"'  vii,,  527), 
and  the  name  Ouranopolie,  heavenly  city,  was  applied  to  Rome 
and  Eyzanlium.  For  n^w  («iui^),  see  on  Matt.  xxvi.  29,  The 
new  JeniBaleni  is  Dot  a  cxly  freshly  built  {via),  but  is  n^w  [Ktuvif) 
in  contrast  with  the  old,  outworn,  sinful  city.  In  the  Gospel 
John  habitually  uses  the  Greek  and  civil  form  of  the  name, 
' Iepo<ToKvfia ;  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  Hebrew  and  more  holy 
appellation,  TepoutraXij/t,* 

14.  Of  the  Laodiceans  (AaoBiKetov).  Bead  iv  Aao&ticeia  in. 
Zaodicea.  Laodicea  lueana  Jueti<:e  of' C/te  j)eople.  Ab  Laodice 
was  a  common  name  among  the  ladies  of  the  royal  house  of  the 
SeleucidEQ,  the  name  was  given  to  several  cities  in  Syria  and 
Asia  Minor.  The  one  here  addressed  was  on  the  confines  of 
Phrygia  and  Lydia,  abonl  forty  miles  east  of  Ephesns,  and  was 
known  as  Ijaodicea  on  tiie  Lycus.  It  had  borne  successively 
the  names  of  Diospolis  and  Rboas,  and  was  named  Laodicea 
when  refonnded  by  Antiochus  Theos,  b.c.  261-246.  It  was 
situated  ou  a  group  of  bills  between  two  tributaries  of  the 
Lycus — the  Asopus  and  the  Caprns.  Towards  the  end  of  the 
Roman  Republic,  and  under  the  first  emperors,  it  became  one  of 
the  most  important  and  flouriehing  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  One 
of  its  citizens,  liiero,  bequeathed  ail  bis  enormous  properly  to 
the  people,  and  adorned  the  city  with  costly  gifts.     It  was  the 

*  The  [iterktnre  of  hymnologj  to  rerj  rioh  m  hjmiii  depicting  the  glorj  of 
the  heATsnl;  city.  In  Latin  there  mre  J^r^ivUem  tumiruua,  which  reappeus 
)u  Jeraiaiem  my  happy  home,  and  0  Mothtr  dear  Jenaalam:  Urbt  Uata  Je- 
rusalem, whiob  reappeare  in  BteiMd  eily,  hfar^Ttlt/  Salem .'  Urbt  8iim  Anrea, 
in  Jenualem  ttis  golden  and  Jtraialmn  (he  giorimit.  Of  this  0  bmui  patria, 
traasiated  in  To  lAee,  0  dear,  dear  Country,  Is  a  portion.  Also  Bernard's  Me 
rocepUt  Sim  Ula.  In  Bngliah  may  be  noted,  besides  the  tramilations  just  re- 
ferred to,  Steal  plaee,  tvieet  piaee  alone ;  Bear  ahdt  God  Ifte  Fiord  hath  rpiikrn  - 
JerutiUem,  my  happy  home,  itihen  fhaU  J  come  to  theef  In  G«rtD*n,  Meyfart's 
Jenualem  du  hechgd>aiitK  titadt.  and  Hitler's  0  Jemiaiem  rfu  Schdne.  Of  Mej- 
fart's  hymn  there  are  two  English  IrauHlations.  one  by  Miss  Winkworth.  Je- 
rueaiem,  lho<i  eily  fair  und  high,  and  the  oliier  by  Bishop  Whittiosbku  at 
Maryland,  Jeruealeia,  hitjh  Unner  thy  gluriuui  walk 


A 


BEVELATIOH  OF  JOHH.  468 

scat  of  large  monej  traiiBactiong  and  of  an  exteneire  trade  in 
wood.  Tlie  citizens  developed  a  taste  for  Greek  art,  and  were 
diatingniBhed  in  science  and  literature.  Laodicea  was  the  seat 
of  a  great  medical  Bcliool.  During  the  Koman  period  it  was 
the  chief  city  of  a  Roman  conveniua  or  politica]  district,  in 
which  courts  were  held  by  tlie  proconsul  of  the  province,  and 
where  the  taxes  from  the  subordinate  towus  were  collected. 
Cicero  held  liie  court  there,  and  many  of  his  letters  were  writ- 
ten thence.  The  conveiitus  represented  by  Laodicea  comprised 
not  lesa  than  twenty-five  towns,  and  inscriptions  refer  to  the 
city  as  "the  metropolis."  The  Greek  word  5(oi'«ijiTi?.  corre- 
sponding to  the  Latin  ixmventua,  was  subsequently  applied  to 
an  ecclesiastical  district,  and  appears  in  diocese.  The  tutelary 
deity  of  the  city  was  Zeus  (Jupiter).  Rence  its  earlier  name, 
Dwapolin,  or  City  of  Zeus,  Many  of  its  inhabitants  were  Jews. 
It  was  subject  to  frequent  earthquakes,  which  eventually  re- 
sulted in  its  abandonment.  It  is  now  a  deserted  place,  but 
its  ruins  indicate  by  their  magnitude  its  former  importauce. 
Among  these  are  a  racecourse,  and  three  theatres,  one  of  which 
is  four  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  diameter.  An  importaDt 
church  council  was  held  there  in  the  fourth  century. 

The  Amen.  Used  only  here  as  a  proper  name.  See  Isa. 
Ixv.  16,  where  the  correct  rendering  is  the  God  of  the  Arnen, 
instead  of  A.  V.  God  of  truth.  The  term  applied  to  the  Lord 
signifies  that  lie  Himself  is  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  God  has 
spoken  to  the  churches. 

Faithful  (irMTToc).  The  word  occurs  in  the  Xew  Testament 
in  two  senses :  trusty,  faithful  (Matt  xxiv.  45 ;  xxv.  21,  23 ; 
Luke  xii.  42);  and  believing,  vonjiding  (John  xx.  27;  Gal.  iii. 
9 ;  Acta  xvi.  1).     Of  God,  necessarily  onl  i  in  the  former  senee. 

True  (dXij5«^).  See  on  ver.  7.  The  veracity  of  Christ  is 
thus  asserted  in  the  word  faithful,  true  being  not  true  as  dis- 
tinguished froTn  false,  but  true  to  the  normal  idea  of  a  loU/ness. 

The  beginning  (^  apj(^-  The.  beginner,  or  auth&r ;  not  as 
Col.  i.  15,  the  first  and  most  excellent  creature  of  God's  hands. 


470 


WORD  STCDDCS  m  THE  NEW  TEBTAMEST. 


"  The  etrese  laid  in  the  Epistle 
ority  of  those  to  whom  the  self- 


ColossiaDs  on 
'Same  name  of  dffj(al 


the  inferi- 


n-incnpalUies  was  given  ...  to  the  One  who  was  the  true 
beginiiiDg,  or,  if  we  might  venture  on  an  unfamiliar  use  of  a 
familiar  word,  the  true  Prinoipaliti/  of  God'a  creation,  may 
account  for  the  prominence  which  the  name  had  gained,  and 
tlierofore  for  its  use  here  in  a  message  addressed  to  a  church 
exposed,  like  that  of  Colossje,  to  the  risks  of  angelolatrj,  of 
the  substitution  of  lower  priacipalities  and  created  mediators 
for  llim  who  was  the  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church** 
(Plumptre).     Compare  Ueb.  xii.  2,  apyijyov  leader. 

15.  Cold  (^rtp^pof).  Attached  to  the  world  and  actively  op- 
posed to  the  Church.  "Tiiis,"  as  AJford  remarks,  "as  well  as 
the  opposite  state  of  spiritual  fervor,  would  be  an  intelligible 
and  plainly-marked  condition  ;  at  all  events  free  from  the  dan- 
ger of  mixed  motive  and  disregarded  principle  which  belongs 
to  the  lukewarm  state:  inasmuch  as  a  man  in  earnest,  be  he 
right  or  wrong,  is  ever  a  better  uau  than  one  professing  what 
he  does  not  feel." 

Hot  {{eoTw)-  From  few  to  boU  or  seethe.  See  on  ferveniy 
Acts  xviii.  25. 

16.  Lukewarm  (^Xtopof).  Only  here  iu  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

Foremost  and  most  numerous  among  the  lost,  Dante  places 
those  who  had  been  content  to  remaio  neutral  in  the  great  con- 
test between  good  and  evil. 

"  Hut«r,  whftt  li  thla  whl«h  now  I  hearT 
Whit  folk  is  Ihis,  whioli  BeemB  bj  pain  u>  Tanqaiahed  f " 
And  lie  to  me:   <'  This  mlaerable  mode 
Haintaiu  llie  m  lanchol;  souls  ot  thosu 
Who  lived  withoateo  Itifamj'  or  praise. 
Commingled  am  tliey  with  lliat  caitiff  clioir 
Of  augelB,  who  have  not  rebellious  been, 
Nor  faithful  were  to  God.  but  were  for  self. 
Thu  hearenB  uipelled  them,  not  to  be  lesa  fUr  ; 
Nor  them  the  nethermorw  abyss  receives. 
For  glory  doqb  the  damned  would  have  from  them." 

"Iiift>rno,"iil..SS-tt,  I 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  471 

I  will  (jUXXoai).  lam  about  or  ha^ve  in  mind.  Not  a  declar- 
ation of  immediate  and  inexorable  doom,  but  implying  a  pos- 
Bibility  of  the  determination  being  changed. 

Spue  {ifiicrai).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Com- 
pare Lev.  xviii.  28 ;  xx.  22. 

17.  Because  thou  sayest.  Connect,  as  A.  Y.  and  Rev., 
with  what  follows,  not  with  what  precedes.  Some  interpret 
/  v)ill  y>ue  thee  oiU  of  my  matdh  beoauee  thou  sayeti^  etc. 

Increased  with  goods  (ireirXoim^iea).  Rev.,  Aow  gotten 
riches.  The  reference  is  to  imagined  epiritual  riches,  not  to 
worldly  possessions. 

Thou.    Emphatic. 

Wretched  (o  TaXa/niw/909).  Rev.,  better,  giving  the  force  of 
the  article,  tiis  wretched  one.  Fr^m  rXan  to  endure^  and  wtipd 
a  trial. 

Miserable  {iKuufi^).    Only  here  and  1  Cor.  xv.  19.    An  ob* 

ject  of  jnty  {iKm). 

Poor  {irrmx^k).     See  on  Matt  v.  8. 

18.  I  counsel  {irvfifiovXevm).  With  a  certain  irony.  Though 
He  might  command,  yet  He  advises  those  who  are,  in  their 
own  estimation,  supplied  with  everything. 

To  buy.  Compare  Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Matt.  xiii.  44, 46.  Those  who 
think  themselves  rich,  and  yet  have  jnst  been  called  beggars  by 
the  Lord,  are  advised  by  Him  to  bay.  The  irony,  however, 
covers  a  sincere  and  gracious  invitation.  The  goods  of  Christ 
are  freely  given,  yet  they  have  their  price— renunciation  of  self 
and  of  the  world. 

Gold  (xP^erlov).  Often  of  gold  money  or  ornaments.  So  1 
Pet.  L  18 ;  Acts  Hi.  6 ;  1  Pet  iii.  3.  Also  of  native  gold  and 
gold  which  has  been  smelted  and  wrought  (Heb.  ix.  4).    There 


472  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  KBW  TKBTAMEKT. 

may  very  properly  be  a  reference  to  the  extensive  money  traoft 
actions  of  Laodicea. 

Tried  rn  the  fire  (vetrvp<uiiivov  ix  irvptK).  The  verb  meaDs 
to  bum,  to  be  on  fire:  in  the  perfect  pasBive,  as  here,  kindled-, 
inade  to  glow;  thence  melted  by  fire,  and  so  refined.  Rev.,  re- 
fined hyfire.  By  fire  is,  literally,  oui  of  the  fire  (e«;  see  on 
ch.  ii.  7). 

White  raiment.     Kev.,  garmanis.     See  on  ver.  4. 

Mayest  be  clothed  (Trept^oXp).  Rev.,  more  literally,  Tnoy- 
m(  clvtke  thyself.      See  on  ver.  5- 

Do  not  appear  (/^^  <f>avepa>^).  Rev.,  more  literally,  he  not 
ttiade  nuiiiifcst.  See  on  John  xxi.  1.  Stripping  and  exposure 
is  a  frequent  method  of  putting  to  open  shame.  See  2  Sam.  x. 
4 ;  Isa.  XX.  4 ;  xlvii.  23  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  37.  Compare  also  Matt, 
xxii.  11-13;  Col.  ui.  10-14. 

Anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve  {xoXKavpiov  eyj(pim>v 
Toik  o^aXfiov^  aov).  The  correct  reading  ie  eyxpurai,  the  in- 
finitive, to  anoijU,  instead  of  the  imperative.  So  liev,,  eye-salve 
to  anoint  thine  eyes,  KoKKovpwv,  of  which  the  Latin  co/lyrittm 
is  a  transcript,  is  a  diminntive  of  KoXKvpa  a  roU  of  coarse  bread. 
See  1  Kings  xiv.  3,  Sept. ;  A.  V,,  cracJcneU.  Here  applied  to 
a  roll  or  stick  of  ointment  for  the  eyes.  Horace,  describing  his 
Bnmdisian  journey,  relates  how,  at  one  point,  he  was  troubled 
with  inflamed  eyes,  and  anointed  them  with  black  eye-salve 
{iiip'a  collyria.  Sat,  i.,  v.,  30).  Juvenal,  describing  a  snper- 
etitious  woman,  aays ;  "  If  the  corner  of  her  eye  itches  when 
rubbed,  she  consults  her  horoscope  before  calling  for  s^ve " 
(coUi/ria  ;  vi,,  577).  The  figure  sets  forth  the  spiritnal  anoint- 
ing by  whicli  the  spiritual  vision  is  purged.  Compare  Angns- 
tino,  "Confessions,  vii.,  7.  8.  "Throngh  my  own  swelling  waa 
I  separated  from  Tliee :  yea,  my  pride-pwollen  face  closed 
mine  eyes.  ...  It  was  pleasing  in  Thy  sight  to  reform 
deformities;  and  by  inward  goads  didst  Thou  ronse  me,  that 
should  be  ill  at  ease  until  Tliou  wert  manifested  to  my  inwaj 


REVBLATIOK  OF  JOHN.  473 

Bight.  Thus,  by  the  secret  liand  of  Thy  medicining,  was  my 
swelliDg  abated,  and  the  troabled  and  bedimmed  eyesight  of 
my  mind,  by  the  smarting  anointings  of  healthful  sorrows,  was 
from  day  to  day  healed."    Compare  1  John  iL  20,  27. 

19.  As  many  as  I  love.  In  the  Greek  order  /  stands  first 
as  emphatic. 

Rebuke  (^Xey^^).     See  on  John  iii.  20.    Bev.,  re^pnyiot. 

Chasten  {^aJbev^.     See  on  Luke  zxiii.  16. 

Be  zealous  ((j^Xeuc).  The  verb  is  akin  to  {Icor^  hat  in  ver. 
16,  on  which  see  note. 

Repent.    See  on  Matt  iii.  2;  xxi.  29. 

20.  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock.  Compare  Cant  v.  2. 
Kpowo  /knock  was  r^arded  as  a  less  classical  word  than  icoTrro** 
KpowD  is  to  knock  ttriih  the  knttcJdea,  to  rap;  K&nTm,  with  a 
he(wy  blow;  ^ro^iy  of  the  knocking  of  some  one  within  the  door^ 
warning  one  without  to  withdraw  when  the  door  is  opened. 
Compare  Jas.  y.  9.  ^  He  at  whose  door  we  ought  to  stand  (for 
He  is  the  Door,  who,  as  such,  has  bidden  ua  to  knock),  is  con- 
tent that  the  whole  relation  between  Him  and  us  should  be 
reversed,  and,  instead  of  our  standing  at  His  door,  condescends 
Himself  to  stand  at  ours  "  (Trench).  The  Oreeks  had  a  word 
^vpavK&v  for  a  lover  waiting  at  the  door  of  his  beloved.  Trench 
cites  a  passage  from  Nicolaus  Cabasilas,  a  Oreek  divine  of  the 
fourteenth  century :  "Love  for  men  emptied  God  (Philip,  ii.  7). 
For  He  doth  not  abide  in  His  place  and  summon  to  Himself  the 
servant  whom  He  loved ;  but  goes  Himself  and  seeks  him ;  and 
He  who  is  rich  comes  to  the  dwelling  of  the  poor,  and  discloses 
His  love,  and  seeks  an  equal  return ;  nor  does  He  withdraw 
from  him  who  repels  Him,  nor  is  He  disgusted  at  his  insolence ; 
but,  pursuing  him,  remains  sitting  at  his  doors,  and  that  He 
may  show  him  the  one  who  loves  him,  He  does  all  things,  and 
sorrowing,  bears  and  dies." 


474  WOBD  STUDIES  V)  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT, 

My  voice.  Christ  not  only  knocks  but  speaks.  "The  voice 
very  often  will  interpret  and  make  intelligible  the  purpose  o£ 
the  knock  "  (Trench). 

Hear — open  the  door.     No  irresistible  grace. 

Will  sup  (SeMTt^ffo)).  See  on  Lnkexiv.  12.  For  the  image, 
compare  Cant.  v.  2-6;  iv.  16;  ii.  3.  Christ  is  the  Bread  of 
Life,  and  invites  to  the  great  feast.  See  Matt,  viii.  11 ;  ixv. 
1  sqq.  The  consummation  will  be  at  the  marriage- sapper  of 
the  Lamb  (Mark  xiv.  25 ;  Apoc.  xix.  7-9). 

He  with  me.  It  is  characteristic  of  John  to  note  the  say* 
inga  of  Christ  which  express  the  reciprocal  relationa  of  Himself 
and  His  followers.  See  John  vi.  56  ;  s.  38 ;  xiv.  20 ;  zv.  4,  6 ; 
xvii.  21,  26.     Compare  John  xiv.  23. 


21.  He  that  overcometh.    See  on  ch.  ii.  7. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
The  Revelation  proper  now  begins. 


•i 


1.  After  this  (/*€T(i  TaDra).  Rev.,  literally,  q/ierM«a«Min^ 
Not  indiiiatiijg  a  break  in  the  ei^tatic  state  of  the  seer,  but  only 
a  ancceBsion  of  separate  visions. 

I  looked  (elSov).  Rev.,  better,  I  saw.  Not  of  the  directinff 
of  attention,  bnt  of  the  simple  reception  of  the  vision. 

A  door  was  opened  {$vpa  avetpyftht}).  Rev.,  rightly,  omits 
■was.  A  door  set  open.  The  A.  V.  implies  that  the  seer  wit- 
nessed the  opening  of  the  door. 

In  Heaven.  Compare  Ezek.  i.  1;  Matt.  iii.  16;  Acts  rii 
66 ;  X.  11.     In  all  these  heaven  itself  is  opened. 

Was.     Omit.     Render,  as  Rev,,  "a  voice  as  of  a  trnmpet." 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  475 

A  trumpet  (0^0X^17709).  See  on  Matt  xxiv.  31.  Pioperlj 
c  war-trumpet^  though  the  word  was  ako  used  of  a  sacred 
trumpet,  with  the  epithet  ie/x£  sacred. 

Speaking — saying  (XaXouai;^ — yJkifxwrd).  See  on  Matt, 
xxviii.  18.  The  former  verb  indicates  the  breaking  of  the 
silence,  the  latter  the  matter  of  the  address. 

Hereafter  (/mt^  raXnei).  Some  editors  connect  these  words 
with  the  succeeding  verse,  substituting  them  for  koX  and  at 
the  beginning  of  that  verse,  and  rendering,  ^'  I  will  show  thee 
the  things  which  must  come  to  pass.  After  these  things  straight- 
way I  was,"  etc. 

2.  I  was  in  the  Spirit  {iyepofM/fv  iv  irpevfAari).  Strictly,  I 
became:  I  found  myself  in.  Appropriate  to  the  sudden  and 
unconscious  transportation  of  the  seer  into  the  ecstatic  state. 
Thus  Dante  describes  his  unconscious  rapture  into  Paradise: 

"  And  suddenly  it  Memed  that  dmj  to  dMj 
Was  added,  as  if  He  who  had  the  power 
Had  with  another  snn  the  heaven  adorned.** 

Beatrice,  noting  his  amazement,  says : 

**  Thon  makest  thjself  so  doll 
With  false  imagining,  that  thou  seest  not 
What  thon  wouldst  see  if  thoa  hadst  shaken  H  oflL 
Thon  art  not  upon  earth  as  thou  believest ; 
But  lightning,  fleeing  its  appropriate  site, 
Ne*er  ran  as  thon,  who  thitherward  retomeat.'* 

**  ParadlMb"  L,  eO-M 

A  throne.    See  Ezek.  i.  2&-28. 

Was  set  {itceiTo).  Denoting  merely  jxmitonj  not  that  the 
eeer  saw  the  placing  of  the  throne.     Compare  John  ii.  6. 

One  sitting.  He  is  called  henceforward  throughout  the 
book  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne^  and  is  distinguished  from  the 
Son  in  ch.  vL  16 ;  vii.  10,  and  from  the  Uoly  Spirit  in  ver.  5. 


476  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

He  is  commoDly  underBtood  to  be  God  the  Father  ;  bat  aome 
nnderetand  the  triune  God.* 

3.  Jasper  stone.  The  laat  of  the  twelve  stonee  io  the  High- 
Priest'e  breaetplste  (Exod,  xxviii.  20  ;  xxsix.  13),  and  the  first 
of  the  twelve  enumerated  in  the  foundation  of  the  New  Je- 
rusalem (Apo<;.  xxi.  19).  Also  the  stone  employed  in  the  Buper- 
Btructure  of  the  wall  of  the  Heavenly  City  {ch.  xxi.  18).  The 
stone  itself  was  of  different  colore,  the  beet  being  purple.  Ac- 
cording to  ch.  xxi.  II,  it  represents  a  crystalline  brightneee. 

Sardine.  liev.,  Sardius.  The  sixth  foundation-stone  of 
the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  in  ch.  xxi.  20.  A  red  stone,  suppoeed 
to  answer  to  our  cornelian.  Pliny  derives  its  name  from  Sardis 
where  it  was  discovered.  Others  from  the  Persian  sered,  j/ei- 
lovyish  red.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  fiymbolism  must  remain 
uncertain,  owing  to  our  ignorance  of  the  precise  meaning  of 
"  jasper,"  a  name  which  seems  to  have  covered  a  variety  of 
atones  now  known  nnder  other  classifications.  Some  interpi-et- 
era,  assuming  the  jasper  to  be  sparkling  white,  find  in  it  a  rep- 
resentation of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  in  the  fiery  sardiaB  a 
representation  of  Ilia  wrath. 

Rainbow  (^/>tf)-  Only  here  and  ch.  x.  1.  The  word  is 
identical,  and  sceius  to  have  liad  some  original  connection  with 
Iris,  the  deity  known  as  the  messenger-goddess  of  Olympas. 
In  Homer  the  word  is  used  in  both  b 


"  And  if  Ihou  wisbest  now  to  uk  of  me, 
No  dreun  I  km,  bat  lovely  KaS.  diTlne  : 
Wliereof  let  this  b«  Qnto  thea  &  sign, 
That  wheD  thou  vak'it,  the  maaj-oolored  bow 
AorosE  the  vortd  the  morniDg  snn  sh&ll  thrQw. 
But  me  indeed  thine  eyva  «hill  not  behold. 
Then  he,  awaking  in  the  morning  eold, 
A  sprinkle  of  One  r&ln  felt  on  hia  fnee, 
And  letpiag  to  his  feet,  in  that  wild  pUuM, 


*  So  Professor  Ullligin,  who  thinks  that  the  whole  scene 
Iw.  Ti.,  which,  he  remarlu,  is  always  jostly  regarded  as  one 
adombratious  of  the  Trinity  oontained  in  the  Old  Testament. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  477 

Looked  round,  and  mw  the  morning  sunlight  throw 
Aorofls  the  world  the  manj-oolored  bow  ; 
And  trembling  knew  that  the  high  gods  indeed 
Had  sent  the  messenger  unto  their  need/' 

William  Morris,  ''Jason/'  zi.,  100-200. 

In  classical  Oreek  the  word  is  used  of  any  bright  halo  sur- 
rounding  another  body ;  of  the  circle  round  the  ejes  of  a  pea* 
xxKsk's  tail,  and  of  the  iris  of  the  eye. 

"  And  I  beheld  the  flamelets  onward  go, 
Leaving  behind  themselves  the  air  depicted. 
And  the/  of  trailing  pennons  had  the  semblanoe^ 
So  that  it  overhead  remained  distinct 
With  sevenfold  lists,  all  of  them  of  the  colors 
Whence  the  san*s  bow  is  made,  and  Delia's  girdle. **  * 

Dante,  *'Purgatorio/*  xxix.,  Tft-TBL 

*'  Within  the  deep  and  luminous  subsistence 
Of  the  High  Light  appeared  to  me  three  oirolef, 
Of  threefold  color  and  of  one  dimension. 
And  hy  the  second  seemed  the  first  reflected 
As  Iris  is  bj  Iris,  and  the  third 
Seemed  fire  that  equally  from  both  is  breathed/' 

«*  Paradiso,'»  tttHL,  115-iaa 

On  this  passage,  which  belongs  to  the  description  of  Dante's 
vision  of  the  Eternal  Trinity,  Dean  Pluniptre  remarks:  '^One 
notes,  not  without  satisfaction,  that  Dante  shrinks  from  the 
anthropomorphism  of  Byzantine  and  early  Western  art,  in 
which  the  Ancient  of  Days  was  represented  in  the  form  of 
venerable  age.  For  him,  as  for  the  more  primitive  artists,  the 
rainbow  reflecting  rainbow  is  the  only  adequate  symbol  of 
the  "God  of  God,  Light  of  Light"  of  the  Nicene  Creed,  while 
the  fire  of  love  that  breathes  from  both  is  that  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  "  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son." 

Round  about  the  throne.    Compare  Ezek.  i.  26,  28. 

Emerald  {crfiapof^fiw^).     The  stone  is  first  mentioned  by 
Herodotus,  who  describes  a  temple  of  Hercules  which  he  visited 

*Zd.,  the  halo  round  the  moon. 


478 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


at  Tjre,  lie  says :  "  I  f ouud  it  ricliij"  adorned  witli  a  number 
of  offerings,  among  which  were  two  pillars,  one  of  pnre  gold, 
the  other  of  emerald  (aftaparfBov  Xi^v),  shiniug  with  great 
brilliancy  at  night"  (ii.,  44"i.  Also  in  his  story  of  Polycrates  of 
Sainos,  the  signet-ring  which  Polycrates  cast  into  tlie  eea,  waa 
an  emerald  Bet  in  gold  (iii.,  41).  It  is  claimed,  however,  that 
the  real  emerald  was  unknown  to  the  ancients.  Itawlineon 
thinks  that  the  pillar  in  the  Tyrian  temple  was  of  glass.  The 
bow  waa  not  wanting  in  the  other  colors,  but  the  emerald  wa» 
predominant. 

4.  Throne  (Spovov).  A  seat  or  chair.  In  Homer,  an  arm- 
chair with  liigh  back  and  footstool.  Cnshions  were  laid  upon 
the  seat,  and  over  both  seat  and  back  carpets  were  spread.  A 
royal  throne.  Used  of  the  oracular  seat  of  the  priestess  of 
Apollo.  Apollo,  in  the  "Eumenides"  of  jEschylus,  says: 
"  Never,  when  I  sat  in  the  diviner's  seat  {jiatntKottTW  iv  ^povotft) 
did  I  speak  anght  else  than  Zeus  the  father  of  the  Olympians 
bade  me"  (616-018).  Plato  uses  it  of  a  teacher's  seat.  "  I  saw 
Ilippiaa  the  Elean  sitting  in  the  opposite  portico  in  a  chuir 
(ev  3p6v^).  Others  were  seated  round  him  on  benches  {eirl 
^d^ptov),"  questioning  him,  "and  he  ex  oathedrd  {fv  dpov^ 
Ka$^fieuo<;,  lit.,  sitting  in  the  chair)  was  determining  their 
several  questions  to  them,  and  discoursing  of  them  "  ("  Pro- 
tagoras," 315).  Also  used  of  a  Judge's  bench,  and  a  bishop's  seat. 

Seats  {Spovoi).  "Rev,,  rightly,  throTies.  The  word  is  the 
same  as  the  last 

i  saw.     Omit 

Elders  {irpea^vripow).  See  on  Acts  xiv.  33.  The  twenty- 
fonr  elders  are  usually  taken  to  represent  the  one  Church  of 
Christ,  as  at  once  the  Church  of  the  old  and  of  the  new  Cove- 
oant,  figured  by  the  twelve  patriarchs  and  the  twelve  apostles. 

■■  Then  saw  T  peoiile.  m  behind  their  lekdeis, 
Comiog  bflhind  them,  gBnnenieil  in  wbiw, 
And  Booh  m  whiteuem  never  waa  on  eurUL. 


HBV^LATIO«  OP  JOHK.  479 

Under  to  fair  a  heBren  W  I  dawrtbe 
The  four  tad  twantj-elders,  too  by  two, 
Came  on  inooronate  with  floirer-da-liice." 

Dante,  "Purgalorio,"  nix.,  64-64. 

Clothed  ['irepi0e0>urj/*h>av<i).  Rev,,  arrayed.  Better,  as  in- 
dicating a  more  Bolerua  investitare.     See  on  ch.  iii.  5. 

They  had.    Omit. 

Crowns  (erre^oiw*?).  Seeon  1  Petv.  4;  JaB.  i.  13.  St^ows 
with  the  epithet  golden  is  fonnd  only  in  the  Apocalypse.  Com- 
pare ch.  ix.  7 ;  xiv.  14.  The  natural  inference  from  this  epithet 
and  from  the  fact  that  the  symboliera  of  the  Apocalypse  is  He- 
brew, and  that  the  Jews  had  the  greatest  detestation  of  the 
Greek  games,  would  he  that  m-i^avot  is  Itere  used  of  the  r&yal 
crown,  especially  since  the  Chureli  is  here  represented  aa  tri- 
umphant— a  kingdo-n  and  priests.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the 
three  passages  of  the  Apocalypse  where  John  evidently  refera 
to  the  kingly  crown,  he  uses  Std&iifia  (ch.  xii.  3 ;  xiii.  1 ;  com- 
pare xvii,  9,  10  ;  xix.  13).  Trench  ("  Synonyms  of  the  New 
Testament")  claims  that  the  crown  in  this  passage  is  the  crown, 
not  of  kinghood,  but  of  glory  and  immortality.  The  golden 
crown  (<rT€(f>av<K)  of  the  Son  of  Man  (cli.  xiv.  14)  is  the  con- 
queror's crown. 

It  must  be  frankly  admitted,  however,  that  the  somewhat 
doubtful  meaning  here,  and  such  passages  of  the  Septuagint  as 
2  Sam.  xii.  30;  1  Chron.  xx.  2;  Pe.  xx.  3;  Ezek,  xxi.  26  ;  Zech. 
Ti.  11, 14,  give  some  warrant  for  the  remark  of  Professor  Thayer 
("New  Testament  Lexicon ")  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  the 
distinction  between  ffriifxiixK  and  Sui&rjfta  (the  victor's  wreat/i 
and  the  kingly  croum)  was  strictly  observed  in  Ilellenistic  Greek. 
7%e  crown  of  thorns  {irr^amt)  placed  on  our  Lord's  head,  was 
indeed  woven,  but  it  was  the  caricature  of  a  royal  crown. 

5.  Proceeded  (^inro^KuovTai).  ^v.,proceed.  The  tense  is 
graphically  changed  to  the  present. 

Lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voicet.  Compare Exod. 
xix  16.     Variously  interpreted  of  God's  might.  His  judgment, 


WORD  STdDIBS  m  THB  ITBW  TESTAMBHT. 

Hie  jpowsr   ovet-  nature,  and   His    indignation   againat    iht 
wwked. 

Lamps  (Xo^MroSes).  The  origio  of  oar  lamip,  but,  properly, 
a  torch;  the  word  for  lamp  being  'Kvyyty;,  a  hand-lamp  filled 
with  oil  (Matt.  v.  15  ;  Luke  viii.  16  ;  John  v.  35).  See  on  Matt. 
XXV.  1.  Trench  says :  "  The  true  Hindoo  way  of  lighting  up,  is 
by  torches,  held  by  men  who  feed  the  fiame  with  oil  from  a  aort 
of  bottle  constructed  for  the  purpose." 

Seven  Spirits  of  God.    See  on  ch.  i.  4. 

6.  Of  glass  {vaKivti).  Kev.,  glassy,  which  describes  the 
api'earance  not  the  material.  The  adjective,  and  the  kindred 
noun  fjaXo;  glass  occur  only  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  etymology 
is  uucertaia  ;  some  maintainiug  an  Egyptian  origin,  and  others 
referring  it  to  the  Greek  va  to  rain,  with  the  original  significa- 
tion of  rain-drop.  Originally,  some  kind  of  clear,  transparent 
stone.  Herodotus  says  that  the  Ethiopians  place  their  dead 
bodies  "  in  a  crystal  pillar  which  has  been  hollowed  out  to  receive 
them,  crystal  being  dug  up  in  great  abuodance  iu  their  country, 
and  of  a  kind  very  easy  to  work.  Yon  may  see  the  corpse 
through  the  pillar  within  which  it  lies ;  and  it  neither  gives  out 
any  unpleasant  odor,  nor  is  it  in  any  respect  unseemly :  yet 
there  is  uo  part  that  is  not  as  plainly  visible  as  if  the  body  were 
bare"  (tli.,  24).  Glass  is  known  to  have  been  made  in  Egypt 
at  least  3,800  years  ago.  The  monnmeuts  show  thai  the 
same  glass  bottles  were  used  then  as  ha  later  times  ;  and  glass- 
blowiug  is  represented  in  the  paintings  in  the  tombs.  The 
Egyptians  possessed  the  art  of  coloring  it,  and  of  introducing 
gold  between  two  layers  of  glass.  The  ruins  of  glass-furnaces 
are  still  to  be  seen  at  the  Natron  Lakes.  The  glass  of  Eg)-pt 
was  long  famous.  It  was  much  used  at  Some  for  ornamental 
purposes,  and  a  glass  window  has  been  discovered  at  Pompeii. 
Pliny  speaks  of  glass  being  malleable. 

Crystal.  Compare  Ezek.  i.  22 ;  Job  zxxvii.  18 ;  Exod.  xxiv. 
10.  The  word  is  used  in  classical  Greek  for  t^e.  Thucydides, 
describing  the  attempt  of  the  Platfeana  to  break  out  from  their 


A 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHK.  481 

city  when  besi^ed  by  the  PeloponnesiaDs  and  BoBotians,  relates 
their  climbing  over  the  wall  and  crossing  the  ditch,  bnt  only 
after  a  hard  struggle ;  ^'  for  the  ice  {KpwrraXko^)  in  it  was  not 
frozen  hard  enough  to  bear  "  (iii.,  23).  Crystal,  regarded  as  a 
mineral,  was  originally  held  to  be  only  pure  water  congealed, 
by  great  length  of  time,  into  ice  harder  than  common.  Hence 
it  was  believed  that  it  could  be  produced  only  in  regions  of  per- 
petual ice. 

In  the  midst  of— round  about.  Commonly  explained  as 
one  in  the  midst  of  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  throne.  ^'At 
the  extremities  of  two  diameters  passing  through  the  centre  of 
the  round  throne  "  (Milligan). 

Beasts  ($&&).  Be  v.,  Umng  creatwreB.  Alford  aptly  remarks 
that  heasU  is  the  most  unfortunate  word  that  could  be  imagined. 
Bea9t  is  Stfpiov.  Z&ov  emphasizes  the  vit(d  demerUj  Sr/piop  the 
bestial. 

Full  of  eyes  before  and  behind.  The  four  living  beings 
are  mainly  identical  with  the  cherubim  of  Ezek.  i.  6-10 ;  x.  5- 
20 ;  Isa.  vi.  2,  3 ;  though  with  some  differences  of  detail.  For 
instance,  Ezekiel's  cherubim  have  four  wings,  while  the  six 
described  here  belong  to  the  seraphim  of  Isaiah.  So  also  the 
Trisagion  {thrice  hchf)  is  from  Isaiah.  In  Ezekiel's  vision 
each  living  being  has  all  four  faces,  whereas  here,  each  of  the 
£x>ur  has  one. 

"  There  came  oloee  after  them  four  animala, 
Inooronate  each  one  with  verdant  leaf, 
Plumed  with  six  wings  was  everj  one  of  them. 
The  plumage  full  of  ejes;  the  ejes  of  Argos 
If  the/  were  liying  would  be  such  as  these. 
Reader  I  to  trace  their  forms  no  more  I  waste 
Mj  rh jmes ;  for  other  spendings  press  me  so. 
That  I  in  this  caunot  be  prodigal. 
But  read  Eaekiel  who  depicteth  them 
As  he  beheld  them  from  the  region  cold 
Coming  with  cloud,  with  whirlwind,  and  with  fire ; 
And  such  as  thou  shalt  And  them  in  his  pages, 
Such  were  thej  here  ;  saving  that  in  their  plumage 
John  is  with  me,  and  differeth  from  him.*' 

Dante,  "  Purgatorio,"  zzix.,  9d-10S. 
Vol.  IL— 31 


482 


WOBD  STDDIBS  Ql  THB  HBW  TBBTAJUtNT. 


7.  Lion,  calf,  man,  eagle.    From  tbis  passage  is  deriw 
the  familiar  bj' iiiboligm  of  the  four  EvaDgelistB;  Mark  seated 
OD  a  lioD,  Luke  ou  a  steer,  Matthew  on  a  mao,  and  John  on  an 
eagic.    Theae  are  varied  however.     IrenseuB  attributes  the  lion 
to  John,  and  the  eagle  to  Mark.     Augustine  the  lion  to  Mat-  i 
tbew,  the  man  to  Mark. 

Lion.     See  on  1  Pet.  v.  8. 

Catf  Omo^p).    Compare  Luke  xv,  23,    In  the  Septoagmt  f 
an  ox  or  ateer.     Exod.  xxii.  1 ;  Exek.  i.  10. 

Eagle  {a^T^).     See  on  Matt.  xxiv.  28. 

8.  Had  {elxo")-    f  he  best  texts  read  Sx'"'"  ^ving,  the  pai 
ciple  in  the  singular  number  agreeing  with  each  one. 

Each  of  them  (&  KoSt'  kavrh).  Lit,  one  by  kimadf.  Tb 
beat  texts  read  h>  koB^  h/  one  by  one  at  every  one.  Compart 
Mark  xiv.  19. 

Six  wings.  Compare  lea.  vi.  2.  Dante  pictures  his  Lncifer, 
who  is  the  incarnation  of  demoniac  animalism,  with  three  beads 
and  six  wings. 


"  UDdememth  each  eime  forth  two  might]'  wjngi, 

Sooh  u  befitting  were  ao  great  «  bird  : 

Sails  of  tlie  sea  I  never  saw  so  large. 

Ko  feathers  bad  thej.  bat  as  of  a  bat 

Tbeir  fashion  wu  ;  and  he  wu  waving  Ihem, 

So  that  three  wlnda  proceeded  forth  therefrom. 

Thereby  Coaytaa  wholl;  was  congealed  " 

"  Inferno,"  u 


4 


Dean  Flnmptre  remarks  that  the   six  wings  seem  the  only^ 
anrvival  of  the  higher  than  aogelic  state  from  which  Lucifer  >| 
had  fallen. 

About  him  (kukXoSct').     The  best  texts  place  the  comnia.-l 
after  t^  six  instead  of  after  KVKKo^ev  around,  and  connect  «v- 
xXodef  with  the  sncceeding  clause,  rendering,  are  fvU  of  eyet 
round  aioiU  and  within.     8o  Rev. 


KBTBI.A.TION    07  JUHN.  483 

They  wsrs  full  {yiftotrra).     Read  fifiavaw  areJvU, 

Round  about  and  within.  Aronnd  and  inude  each  wing, 
and  on  the  part  of  the  body  beneath  it. 

They  rest  not  {itydirawrtv  ovk  iypvaiv).  Lit.,  they  ha/oe  no 
rest.  So  Kev.  See  on  give  rest,  Matt.  xi.  28 ;  and  resteth,  1 
Pet.  iv.  14. 

Holy,  etc.  Compare  Isa.  vi.  3,  which  is  the  original  of  the 
formula  known  as  the  Trisagio^i  {thrice  holy),  used  in  the  an- 
cient liturgies.  In  the  Apostolic  CoaetitntioDB  it  runa :  "  Holy, 
holy,  holy  Lord  God  of  Hosts !  Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of 
Thy  glory,  who  art  blessed  forever,  Aiuen."  Afterwards  it  was 
sung  in  the  form  "  Holy  God,  holy  Mighty,  holy  Immortal, 
have  mercy  upon  us."  So  in  the  Alexandrian  liturgy,  or  lit- 
urgy of  St.  Mark.  Priest.  "  To  Thee  we  send  np  glory  and 
giving  of  thanks,  and  the  hymn  o£  the  Trisagion,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  ever  and  to  ages  of  ages.  Peopls. 
Amen  I  Holy  God,  holy  Mighty,  Holy  and  Immortal,  have 
mercy  apon  as."  In  the  liturgy  of  Chrysostom  the  choir  sing 
the  Trisagion  five  times,  and  in  the  meantime  the  priest  says 
secretly  the  prayer  of  the  Trisagion.  "God  which  art  holy 
and  restest  in  the  holies,  who  art  hymned  with  tlie  voice  of  the 
Trisagion  by  the  Seraphim,  and  glorified  by  the  Cherubim,  and 
adored  by  all  the  heavenly  powers!  Thou  who  didst  from 
nothing  c^\  all  things  into  being ;  who  didst  make  man  after 
Thiue  image  and  likenoBS,  and  didst  adorn  him  with  all  Thy 
graces ;  who  givest  to  him  that  seeketh  wisdom  and  under- 
standing, and  passest  not  by  the  sinner,  but  dost  give  repent- 
ance unto  salvation  ;  who  has  vouchEafed  that  we.  Thy  humble 
and  unworthy  servants,  should  stand,  even  at  this  time,  before 
the  glory  of  Thy  holy  altar,  and  shonld  pay  to  Thee  the  wor- 
ship and  praise  that  is  meet ; — receive,  Lord,  out  of  the  month 
of  sinners,  the  hymn  of  the  Trisagion,  and  visit  us  in  Thy  good- 
ness. Forgive  us  every  offence,  voluntary  and  involnntary. 
Sanctify  our  sonis  and  bodies,  and  grant  that  we  may  serve 
Thee  in  holiness  all  the  days  of  our  life  ;  through  the  interces- 


484 


WORD   STODIKS   IN   THE  NEW  TB8TAMBNT. 


(Alond.) 


sion  of  the  Iiolj  Mother  of  God,  and  a 
pleased  Thee  since  the  beginning  of  the 
holy  art  Thou,  one  God  and  to  Thee." 

According  to  an  unreliable  tradition  this  Eonnula  was  received 
during  an  earthquake  at  Constantiuople,  in  the  reign  of  Theo- 
doeius  11.,  through  a  boy  who  was  caught  up  into  the  eky  and 
heard  it  from  the  angels.  The  earliest  testimonies  to  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Trisagion  date  from  the  fifth  century  or  tlio  latter 
part  of  the  fourth.  Later,  the  words  were  added,  "that  was 
cnicified  for  us,"  in  order  to  oppose  the  heresy  of  the  Theo- 
paschites  (6eo!  Goiiy  iraa-)(ta  to  suffer)  who  lield  that  God  had 
suffered  and  been  cnicified.  To  this  was  added  later  the  words 
"Christ  our  king:"  the  whole  reading,  "Holy  God,  holy 
Mighty,  holy  Immortal,  Christ  our  king  that  was  cnicified  for 
us,  have  mercy  on  us."  The  formula  thus  entered  into  the 
controversy  with  the  Mouophysites,  who  claimed  that  Christ 
had  but  one  composite  nalrn*.  Dante  introduces  it  into  1  " 
"  Paradiao." 

"  The  One  and  Two  uid  Throe  who  «Ter  liTath 
And  reignetb  eier  in  Three  uid  Two  and  ODa, 
Not  ciroomscrlbed  uid  »ll  things  cironmscribin^ 
Three  sevenl  times  wui  ohanled  bjr  eich  one 
Among  thow  spirits,  with  snch  melodj 
That  for  ftll  merit  it  were  just  reward." 

"Parkdiso,"zIr.,38-3&  ] 


'*  When  I  w&s  aUent,  sweetest  son|;  did  flow 
Through  all  tha  heaven,  and  mj  lady  to« 
With  them  oried  hoi/,  hoi j,  hoi j  1  " 

*■  Paradiso,"  xirl,  e7-«9. 

The  interpretations  of  the  symbols  of  the  four  living  creatnres 
are,  of  course,  numerous  and  varied.  Some  of  them  are :  the 
four  Evangelists  or  Gospels ;  the  four  elements  ;  the  fonr  car- 
dinal virtues  ;  the  four  faculties  or  powers  of  the  human  soul ; 
the  Lord  in  the  fourfold  great  events  of  redemption  ;  the  four 
patriarchal  churches ;  the  fonr  great  apostles,  the  doctors  of  the 
Church ;  the  four  principal  angels,  etc.  The  best  modem  in- 
terpreters explain  the  four  forms  as  representing  animated 
nature — "  man  with  his  train  of  dependent  b 


epresenting  animated l 

t  beings  brought  nei^^^H 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  485 

to  God,  and  made  partakers  of  redemption,  thns  fulfilling  the 
language  of  St.  Paul,  that  ^  the  creation  itself  also  shall  be  de- 
livered from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the 
glory  of  the  children  of  God'"  (Rom.  viii.  21 ;  Milligan).  Diis- 
terdieck  says :  ^^  The  essential  idea  which  is  symbolized  in  the 
figures  of  the  four  living  creatures  may  be  expressed  in  such 
words  as  those  of  Ps.  ciii.  22."  Full  of  eyes,  they  are  ever  on 
the  alert  to  perceive  the  manifestations  of  divine  glory.  Cover- 
ing their  faces  and  feet  with  their  wings  (Isa.  vi.  2),  they  mani- 
fest their  reverence  and  humility.  Flying,  they  are  prompt  for 
ministry.  ^^  We  thus  have  the  throne  of  God  surrounded  by 
His  Church  and  His  animated  world ;  the  former  represented 
by  the  twenty-four  elders,  the  latter  by  the  four  living  beings" 
(Alford). 

Which  is  to  come  (o  ipxofievo^).  lit.,  which  oometh  or  U 
comi/ng, 

9.  When  {irrav).  IFA^n^oet;^,  implying,  with  the  fntore  tense, 
the  eternal  repetition  of  the  act  of  praise. 

Give  {JUnrownv).     Lit.,  as  Rev.,  shall  give. 

10.  Cast  (fidXKovaiv).  Read  fidkownv  shall  cast.  The  cast- 
ing of  the  crowns  is  an  act  of  submission  and  homage.  Cicero 
relates  that  when  Tigranes  the  king  of  the  Armenians  was 
brought  to  Pompey's  camp  as  a  captive,  prostrating  himself 
abjectly,  Pompey  ^^  raised  him  up,  and  replaced  on  his  head  the 
diadem  which  he  had  thrown  down "  (Oration  "  Pro  Sestio," 
xxvii.).  Tacitus  gives  an  account  of  the  public  homage  paid  by 
the  Parthian  Tiridates  to  the  statue  of  Nero.  ^^A  tribunal 
placed  in  the  centre,  supported  a  chair  of  state  on  which  the 
statue  of  Nero  rested.  Tiridates  approached,  and  having  im- 
molated the  victims  in  due  form,  he  lifted  the  diadem  from  his 
head  and  laid  it  at  the  feet  of  the  statue,  while  every  heart 
throbbed  with  intense  emotion  "  (^^  Annals,"  xv.,  29). 

11.  O  Lord  (tcvpui).  Read  o  xvpto^  koX  6  Oeos  ^^t&v  aur  Lard 
and  our  God.     So  Rev.     See  on  Matt.  xxi.  3. 


r 


486  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

To  receive  {Xaffetv).     Or  perhaps,  better,  to  take,  since  the 
glory,  honor,  and    power  are  the  absolute   posBesaion  of 
Almighty.     See  on  John  iii.  32. 

Power.  Instead  of  the  iJumki  in  the  ascription  of  the  lirii^ 
creatures.  In  the  excess  of  gratitude,  self  is  forgotten.  Their 
thanksgiving  is  a  tribute  to  the  creative  power  which  called 
them  into  being.  Note  the  articles,  "  ike  glory,"  etc.  (so  Rev.), 
expressing  the  absoluteness  and  universality  of  these  attributes. 
See  on  ch.  i.  6. 

All  things  (t^  ircdrra).      With   the   article   signifying   th» 

unifoarse. 

For  thy  pleasure  (S^  to  SiXijfia  <rov).  Lit.,  hecause  of  thy 
will.  So  Rev.  Alford  justly  remarks:  '■^ For  thy pUaturt  of 
the  A..  Y.  introduces  an  element  entirely  strange  to  the  context, 
and,  however  true  in  fact,  most  inappropriate  here,  where  the 
in  for  renders  a  reason  for  the  worthiness  to  take  honor  uut 
glory  and  power." 

They  are  (fUrlv).  Read  fjvav  they  were.  One  of  the  great 
MS8.,  B,  reads  oiiK  ^aav  they  were  Jiot;  i.e.,  they  were  created 
ont  of  nothing.  The  ware  is  not  cama  into  being,  but  simply 
theyematad.  See  on  John  i.  3 ;  vii.  34;  viii.  58.  Some  explain, 
they  existed  in  contrast  with  their  previous  non-existence;  in 
which  case  it  would  seem  that  tlie  order  of  the  two  clausea 
should  have  been  reversed ;  besides  which  it  is  not  John's 
habit  to  apply  this  verb  to  temporary  and  passing  objecu. 
Professor  Milligan  refers  it  to  the  eternal  type  existing  in  the 
divine  mind  before  anything  was  created,  and  in  conformity 
with  whicli  it  was  made  when  the  moment  of  creation  arrived. 
Compare  lleb.  viii.  5.  "  Was  the  heaven  then  or  the  world, 
whether  called  by  this  or  any  other  more  acceptable  name — as- 
saming  the  name,  I  am  asking  n  question  which  has  to  be  asked 
at  the  beginning  of  every  inquiry — was  the  world,  I  say,  always 
in  existence  and  without  beginnin;^,  or  created  and  having  a 
beginning)  Created,  I  reply,  being  visible  and  tangible  and 
having  s  body,  and  therefore  sensible ;  and  all  sensible  things 


1 


4 
4 


J 


RET-ELATIOir  OF  JOHN.  487 

which  are  ftppreheoded  hy  opinion  and  sense  are  in  a  procesa  of 
creation  and  created.  Now  that  which  is  created  mnst  of  neces- 
sit;  be  created  b;  a  cause.  Bat  how  can  we  find  out  the  father 
and  maker  of  all  this  unireree  ?  And  when  we  have  found  him, 
to  speak  of  hia  nature  to  all  men  is  impossible.  Yet  one  more 
question  has  to  bo  asked  about  him,  which  of  the  patterns  bad 
the  artificer  in  view  when  he  made  the  world ! — the  pattern 
which  is  unchangeable,  or  that  which  is  created }  If  the  world 
be  indeed  fair  and  the  artificer  good,  then,  as  is  plain,  he  must 
have  looked  to  that  which  is  eternal.  But  if  what  cannot  be 
said  withont  blasphemj  is  true,  then  be  looked  to  the  created 
pattern.  Every  one  will  see  that  he  must  have  looked  to  the 
eternal,  for  the  world  is  the  fairest  of  creations  and  he  is  the 
best  of  causes"  (Plato,  "Timfeos,"  38,  29). 


CHAPTER  V. 

1.  In  (^0-  ^^)  °*^  '^^^  ^*<^'^  <"'  '^l'  '*7  upon  the  open 
hand. 

A  Book  (/St^X/of).  See  on  Matt.  xix.  7 ;  Mark  z.  4 ;  Luke 
iv.  17.     Compare  Exek.  ii.  9 ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  2  ;  Zech.  v.  1,  2. 

Within  and  on  the  back  aide  {i<Tta^tv  xaX  SwurSa-).  Com- 
pare Ezek.  ii.  10.  Indicating  the  completeness  of  the  divine 
counsels  contained  in  the  book.  Rolls  written  on  both  sides 
were  called  opiatograpki.  Fliny  the  younger  says  that  hia 
uncle,  the  elder  Pliny,  left  him  an  hundred  and  sixty  comment- 
aries, most  minutely  written,  and  written  on  the  back,  by  which 
this  number  is  multiplied.  Juvenal,  inveighing  against  the 
poetaftors  who  are  declaiming  their  rubbish  on  all  sides,  says: 
'"Shall  that  one  then  have  recited  to  me  bis  comedies,  and  this 
his  elegies  with  impunity!  Shall  huge  'Telephus' with  im- 
punity liave  consumed  a  whole  day ;  or — with  the  margin  to 
the  end  of  the  book  already  filled — 'Orestee,'  written  on  the 
very  back,  and  yet  not  concluded?"  (L,  3-6). 


I 


J 


488  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  ITBW  TBBTAMEITT. 

Sealed  {icaTeiTtj>parftiTfi€vop).  Only  liere  in  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment. The  prepOBitiou  Kara  denotes  sealod  tl<non.  So  Rev., 
(lose  sealed.  The  roll  is  wound  round  a  staff  and  fastened  down 
to  it  with  llie  seven  seals.  The  unrolling  of  the  parchment  is 
nowhere  indicated  in  the  vision.  Commentators  Lave  puzzled 
themselves  to  explain  the  arrangement  of  the  seale,  so  as  to  ad- 
mit of  the  unrolling  of  a  portion  with  the  opening  of  each  seal, 
Diisterdieck  remarks  that,  with  an  incompai-ably  more  beaati- 
fnl  and  powerful  representation,  the  contents  of  the  roll  are 
successively  symbolized  by  the  vision  which  follows  upon  the 
opening  of  eacit  seal.  "The  contents  of  the  book  leap  forth 
in  plastic  symbols  from  the  loosened  seal."  Milligan  explains 
the  seven  seals  as  one  seal,  comparing  the  seven  churches  and 
the  seven  spirits  as  signifying  one  church  and  one  spirit,  and 
doubts  if  the  number  seven  has  here  any  mystical  meaning. 
Others,  as  Alford,  claim  that  the  completeness  of  the  divine 
purposes  is  indicated  by  the  perfect  number  seven. 

2.  Strong.  Either  as  being  of  higher  rank,  or  with  ref- 
erence to  the  great  voice. 

Worthy  (afiw).     As  in  John  i.  27.     Morally  entitled. 

3.  Under  the  earth.    In  Hades. 

To  look  i^Keireiv).  See  on  John  i.  29.  To  take  s  single 
look  at  the  contents, 

4.  I  wept  {tKKatov).    Audible  weeping.     See  on  Luke  vi.  21. 

5.  Of  the  elders  («  riav  vpftr&vripwv).  Strictly,  from 
9mong  the  elders. 

The  Lion.     See  Gen.  xlix.  9. 

The  Root  of  David.     See  on  Nazarene,  Matt  ii  23. 

Hath  prevailed  {evUrfaev).     Or  overcame. 

To  loose.    Omit. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  489 

6.  And  lo !    Omit 

In  the  midst  of.  Not  an  the  throne,  bnt  perhaps  in  the 
space  in  the  centre  of  which  is  the  throne,  and  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  the  twenty-four  elders. 

A  Lamb  (apvlov).  The  diminutive,  very  frequent  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  once  in  the  Gospel  of  John  (xxi.  15).  No- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  Isa.  liii.  7 ;  John 
i.  29,  36.  Christ  had  just  been  spoken  of  as  a  lion.  He  now 
appears  as  a  Iwmb.  Some  interpreters  emphasize  the  idea  of 
gentleness^  others  that  of  sacr\fioe. 

Slain  {i<r<f)arffiipov).  The  verb  indicates  viotence^  hutchery. 
See  on  1  John  iii.  12.  It  is  also  the  sacrificial  word.  Exod. 
xii.  6. 

Stood  {itrnitd^).  Rev.,  more  correctly,  standing.  Though 
slaitghtered  the  lamb  stands.  Christ,  though  slain,  is  risen  and 
living. 

Seven  horns  and  seven  eyes.  See  remarks  on  the  Apo- 
calyptic imagery,  ch.  i  16.  The  horn  is  the  emblem  of  might. 
See  1  Sam.  ii.  10;  1  Kings  xxii.  11 ;  Ps.  cxii.  9;  Dan.  vii.  7, 
20  sqq. ;  Luke  i.  69.  Compare  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  The  eyes  rep- 
resent the  discerning  Spirit  of  Ood  in  its  operation  upon  all 
created  things. 

Sent  forth  {airetrraXfiha).     See  on  Mark  iii.  14. 

7.  Took  {€t\af<l>ev).  Lit.,  hath  taken.  The  perfect,  alternat- 
ing with  the  aorist,  is  graphic. 

8.  Had  taken  {iKadev).    Lit.,  took.    The  aorist  is  resumed. 

Every  one  of  them  harps  (&a<rro9  teiSdpa^).  Hev.,  less 
clumsily,  having  ecbch  one  a  harp.  Each  one,  that  is,  of  the 
elders.  KiSdpa  harp  signifies  an  instrument  unlike  our  harp 
as  ordinarily  constructed.  Rather  a  lute  or  guitar^  to  which 
latter  word  kithara  is  etymologically  related.    Anciently  of  a 


400  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THB  VKW  THSTAUBRT. 

triangolar  ebape,  witli  eevea  airings,  afterwards  increaeed  to 
eleven.  Josephos  says  it  had  ten,  and  waa  played  with  &  plec- 
trum or  small  piece  of  ivory. 

Viall  (^uiXoc).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse.  The  word  vial, 
used  commonly  of  a  small  bottle,  gives  a  wrong  picture  here. 
The  ^tdXfi  was  a  broad,  flat  vessel,  osed  for  boiling  liquids, 
sometimes  as  a  cinerary  urn,  and  for  drinking,  or  ponring  liba- 
tions. Also  of  the  shallow  cup,  usually  without  a  foot,  in  which 
libations  were  drawn  out  of  the  mixer.  Herodotus  says  that  at 
Flatfea  tlie  Spartan  Helots  were  bidden  by  Pausanias  to  bring 
together  the  booty  of  the  Persian  camp,  and  that  they  found 
"  many  golden  mixers  and  baiola  {^t£KiK\  and  other  fieirto/uira 
{drinking-vaaaelt)  "  (ix.,  30).  From  its  broad,  flat  shape  'Aptw 
^(dXi/  howl  of  Mar8via»  a  comic  metaphor  for  a  shield.  It  was 
also  used  for  sunken  work  in  a  ceiling.  In  the  Septnagint  the 
word  is  frequently  used  for  howls  or  basona.  See  Kum.  vii.  13, 
19,  25,  31,  37,  i3,  etc. ;  1  Kings  vii.  50 ;  Zech.  ix.  15.  Here, 
ceT^»er»,  though  several  different  words  of  the  Septnagint  and 
Xew  Testament  are  rendered  canMr  /  as  ^t^iei).  1  Kings  vii 
50  ;  Svfuar^pMv,  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19  ;  Ezek.  viii.  11 ;  Heb.  Ix. 
4 ;  Xiffainaroy,  Apoc.  viii.  3.  Svtffieij  however  is  tAe  golden  in- 
cenae-cup  or  apoon  to  receive  the  frankincense  which  waa  lighted 
with  coals  from  the  brazen  altar,  and  offered  on  the  golden 
altar  before  the  veil.  The  imagery  is  from  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  service. 

Incensa  {Svfi,Mfi&rmif).  The  directions  for  the  compoaitioD 
of  the  incense  for  the  tabernacle-worship,  are  given  Exod.  xxz. 
37,  38. 

Praysrtt  For  incense  as  the  symbol  of  prayer,  see  Lev.  xvi. 
12,  13  ;  Ps.  cxii.  2.  See  on  Luke  i.  9.  Edersheim,  describing 
the  offering  of  incense  in  the  temple,  sayst  *'  As  the  President 
gave  the  word  of  command  which  marked  that  *the  time  of 
incr^nee  had  come,'  the  whole  ninltitnde  of  the  people  without 
withdrew  from  the  inner  court  and  fell  down  before  the  Ixird, 
spreading  their  hands  in  silent  prayer.     It  is  this  most  solemn 


REVELATION  OF  JOHH.  491 

period,  when,  tlxroaghont  the  yast  temple-bnildings,  deep  silence 
rested  on  the  worshipping  moltitade,  while  within  the  sanctnarj 
itself  the  priest  laid  the  incense  on  the  golden  altar,  and  the 
clond  of  odors  rose  np  before  the  Lord,  which  serves  as  the 
image  of  heavenly  things  in  the  Apocalypse  (viiL  1,  3, 4).  The 
prayers  offered  by  priests  and  people  at  this  part  of  the 
service  are  recorded  by  tradition  as  follows :  ^  True  it  is  that 
Thon  art  Jehovah,  oar  Qod  and  the  Ood  of  oar  fathers ;  oar 
King  and  the  King  of  oar  fathers ;  oar  Savioar  and  the  Bock 
of  oar  salvation ;  oar  Help  and  oar  Deliverer.  Thy  name  is 
from  everlasting,  and  there  is  no  God  beside  Thee.  A  new 
song  did  they  that  were  delivered  sing  to  Thy  name  by  the  sea- 
shore. Together  did  all  praise  and  own  Thee  as  Sling,  and  say, 
^  Jehovah  shall  reign  who  saveth  Israel.' "  Compare  *^  the  Song 
of  Moses,"  ch.  xv.  8,  and  ^*  a  new  song,"  ver.  9. 

9.  Th^y  ting-  Present  tense,  denoting  the  oontinaoos^  un- 
ceasing worship  of  heaven,  or  possibly,  as  describing  their 
^^  office  generally  rather  than  the  mere  one  particolar  case  of 
its  exercise  "  ( Alf ord). 

Redeem  (^yjpa^ov).  lit,  puroha$$f  as  Bev.  See  John  iv. 
8 ;  vi.  6. 

Us.    Omit  us  and  supply  m&nj  as  Ber. 

With  Thy  blood  {h  r^  aXfiari  aw).  lit^  <<  m  Thy  blood.'' 
The  preposition  in  is  used  Hebraistically  of  the  price;  the  value 
of  the  thing  purchased  being  contained  in  the  price. 

Kindred  (^vXQ?).  Bev.,  Uiie.  Often  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

People,  nation  (KaoO,  fSvov^;).    See  on  1  Pet.  iL  9. 

10.  Us  i'ifUK).     Bead  airrod^  tAem. 

Kings  ifiaatXek).  Bead  fiaaCKiUaf  a  kingdom.  See  on 
ch.  i.  6. 


493  WORD  8T17DIB8  W  THK  HBW  TBBTAMENT. 

We  shall  reign  (fiairiKewro/iev).  Read  fiaaiXfvowiv  they 
reign.     Their  reigning  id  not  future,  but  present. 

11.  Ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  (jajptaZtt  fxvpi- 
a&tov).  Lit.,  ten  tliouearuit  of  ten  tkousanda.  Compare  Pe. 
Ixviii.  17;  Dan.  viii.  10.  MvpiAi,  whence  the  English  myriady 
means  the  number  ten  thousand.  So.  literallj',  Acts  xix.  19, 
dpyvplov  fi.vpta&a'i  Trerre  Jifty-thousaml  pieces  of  s\U>er ;  lit., 
f-ve  tenr4konsaruIs.  In  the  plural  used  for  an  unlimited  num- 
ber.    See  Luke  xii.  1 ;  Acts  xxi.  30 ;  Heb.  xii.  22 ;  Jude  14. 

Tnousands  (^iXtoSe;).  X,i\idt,  a  collective  term  like  ixvpiMt, 
meaning  the  number  one  thoueand,  is  almost  invariably  nsed 
with  men  in  the  Apocalypse.  See  ch.  vii.  4;  xi.  13.  Oulv 
once  wilh  a  material  object  {ch.  xxi.  16).  With  inferior  objects 
^<Xto(  a  thousand  is  used.  See  ch.  xi.  3  ;  xii.  6.  These  words 
are  the  theme  of  Alford's  noble  hjmn — 

"  Ten  thouund  times  ten  IhousMld 
lu  Bporkling  rumuDt  bright, 
The  ftrmies  of  the  ruisomed  au 
Throng  up  th>>  Bleeps  of  light : 
Tie  Uniahed,  all  ia  KnUhed. 
Thuir  flght  witb  death  uid  ein  ; 
Fling  open  tridu  the  golden  gKUt, 
And  let  the  victort  in." 

12.  Power,  etc.  Rev.,  "■the  power."  Compare  the  ascrip- 
tion in  ch.  iv.  11,  on  which  see  note,  and  notice  that  each  sep- 
arate particular  there  has  the  article,  while  here  it  ie  attached 
only  to  the  first,  the  power,  the  one  article  including  all  the 
particulars,  as  if  thej  formed  bat  one  word.  On  the  dosolo- 
gies,  see  on  ch.  i.  6. 

Riches  (■n-XouTov).  Not  limited  to  Bpiritoal  riches,  bat  de- 
noting the  fulness  of  every  gift  of  God.  Jas.  i.  17 ;  Acts  xviL 
25.     Only  here  i 


Blessing  (evXoyiav).      See  on  the  kindred  word  eiXoyriri^ 
bUssed,  1  Pet.  i.  3. 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  493 

13.  Creature  {icrCa-fia).  See  1  Tim.  iy.  4 ;  Jas.  i.  18.  From 
€T^o9  to  found.  A  thing  founded  or  creaied.  Key.,  created 
thing.     See  on  John  i.  3. 

In  the  sea  {hrX  r^  ^aUurary:).  More  accurately,  ^^on  the 
flea,"  as  Rev.  Not  ehvpsj  bat  creatures  of  the  sea  which  have 
come  up  from  its  depths  to  the  surface. 

Blessing  (1}  eiXoyla).  Bev.  rightly,  ''the  blessing."  All 
the  particulars  of  the  following  ascription  have  the  article. 

Honor  (ti^mt).  Originally  a  valuing  by  which  the  price  is 
fixed,  hence  the  price  itself^  ihe  thing  prized^  and  so,  generally, 
honor.     See  on  Acts  xxviii.  10. 

Power  (to  tcpdrosi).  Bev.,  the  dominion.  For  the  different 
words  ioT  power y  see  on  2  Pet.  ii.  11. 

14.  Four  and  twenty.    Omit 
Worshipped.    In  silent  adoration. 

Him  that  liveth  forever  and  ever.    Omit 


CHAPTER   VL 

1.  Of  the  seals.    Add  aeven. 
And  see.    Omit 

2.  White  horse.  For  whiUj  see  on  Luke  iz.  89.  Hcrsej 
see  2iech.  i.  7-11 ;  vi.  1-8.  All  the  figures  of  this  verse  are 
those  of  victory.  The  horse  in  the  Old  Testament  is  the  em- 
blem of  war.  See  Job  xxxix.  26 ;  Ps.  IxxvL  6  ;  Pror.  xzL  81 ; 
£zek.  xxvi.  10.     So  Virgil : 

'*  But  I  beheld  upon  the  grass  four  horses,  snowj  white, 
Grasing  the  meadows  far  and  wide,  first  omen  of  mj  sight. 
Father  Anohises  seeth,  and  salth  :  '  New  land  and  bear'st  thoa  war  f 
For  war  are  horses  dight;  so  these  war-threatening  herd-beasts  are.*** 

''^neid,**  iiL,  587. 


WORD  BTDDIBB  m  THS  SSW  TEBTAHEiri:, 

So  Tnmns,  going  forth  to  battle : 

"  Be  tp»ke.  sad  to  the  roofed  place  now  ■wlftl)'  wending  bone, 
CftUed  for  his  alveda,  uid  msrrilf  stood  there  before  their  totUL, 
E'en  tboee  that  Orith^lk  gaTe  Pllumaiu.  gift  auM  fair, 
Whoae  whiteneei  overpuoed  the  anow,  whoM  ipeed  the  winged  tit.'' 

••  JEatii,-  xiL.SlSS. 

Homer  pictares  the  horees  of  Rhesas  as  whiter  than  enow,  aud 
ewifi  aa  the  winds  ("Iliad,"  x.,  436,  437);  and  Herodotua,  de- 
scribing the  battle  of  Platffia  saye:  "The  tight  went  most 
against  the  Greeks  where  Mardonins,  mottnted  on  a  white 
horse,  and  Buri'onnded  by  the  bravest  of  all  the  PerBians,  tlie 
thousand  picked  men,  fought  in  person  "  (ix.,  63).  The  horses 
of  the  Roman  generals  in  their  triumplis  were  white. 

Bow  (rofo)').  See  Ps.  xlv.  4,  5;  Hab.  iii.  8,  9;  lea.  zli.  3; 
Zech.  ix.  13,  14,  in  which  last  passage  the  fignre  is  that  of  a 
great  bow  which  ia  drawn  only  by  a  great  exertion  of  strength, 
and  by  placing  the  foot  npon  it.  Compare  Homer's  picture  of 
Telemachus'  attempt  to  draw  Ulysses'  bow  : 

"  And  then  he  look  his  plioe 
VpOD  the  threihald,  uid  eeuyed  Iha  bow  ; 
And  thrioe  be  nude  tbe  Mtenpt  and  thriea  gare  o'er." 

"  OdjMe/."  Ill  ,  124-85. 

The  anitorB  propose  to  anoint  the  bow  with  fat  in  order  to 
soften  it 

"  Bring  ua  from  within 
An  ample  roll  of  tat.  that  we  ronng  inaa 
B;  wanning  and  anointing  maj  make  loft 
Tbe  i>aw,  and  draw  the  oord  and  end  the  Btrlfe." 

• '  Od7aM7,"  xxL,  178-80. 

A  crown  (trrf^vo?).     See  on  eh.  iv.  4. 

3.  And  see.    Omit. 

Had  opened  (livoi^).  Rev.,  rendering  tbe  aoriet  more 
liteially,  opened. 


RflTKLATIOII  OF  JOHK.  49S 

4.  Rod  {trvppoii).  From  irupjire.  Flame-colored.  Compare 
2  KingB  iii.  22 ;  Zech.  i.  8.     Only  here  and  ch.  xii.  3. 

To  take  peace  from  the  earth.  Compare  Matt.  z.  M; 
ixiv.  7. 

Kill  {ff4>6imTa>).     See  on  ch.  t.  6. 

Sword  (jidj(iupa).  Compare  Matt.  x.  34.  In  Homer,  a  large 
knife  or  dirk,  worn  next  the  eword-aheath,  and  used  to  elaugbter 
animals  for  sacriSce.  Thns,  "The  bdd  of  Atreus,  liaving  drawn 
with  Ilia  hands  the  knife  (jidjftupav)  which  hung  ever  by  tlie 
great  sheath  of  his  sword,  cut  the  hair  from  the  heads  of 
the  lambs.  .  .  .  He  spake,  and  cut  the  Iambs'  throats 
with  the  pitiless  brass"  ("Iliad," iii,  271-292).  It  is  used  by 
the  surgeon  Machaon  to  cut  out  an  arrow  ("  Iliad,"  xi,,  844). 
Herodotus,  Aristophanes,  and  Euripides  use  the  word  in  the 
sense  of  a  kn^e  for  ouUmg  njt  tneat.  Plato,  of  a  knife  for 
pmnviig  trees.  As  a  weapon  it  appears  first  in  Herodotus : 
"  Here  they  (the  Greeks)  defended  themselves  to  the  last,  such 
as  still  had  swm-ds,  using  tliem  (vii.,  225).  Later  of  tJie  sabre 
or  betU  flword,  contrasted  with  the  (i<f)o<i  or  straight  sword. 
Aristophanes  uses  it  with  the  adjective  /im  aitigle,  for  a  razor, 
contrasted  with  /idxaipa  SiirX^,  the  douHe  knife  or  totssors. 
This  and  poft^taia  (see  on  Lnke  ii.  35)  are  the  only  words  used 
in  the  New  Testament  for  «word.  Ui<^  (see  above)  does  not 
occar.  In  Septuagint  ftajfotpa  of  the  knife  tftaori^M  aaed  b^ 
Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  6,  10). 

5.  Come  and  see.    Omit  an^««e. 

Black.  The  color  of  moaming  and  famine.  See  Jer.  iv, 
26 ;  viii.  21 ;  Mai.  iii.  14,  where  mournfully  is,  literally,  in 
black. 

Pair  of  balances  (^vr/ov).  'Rev.,  a  balance.  Properly,  any- 
thing which  joins  two  bodies  ;  hence  a  yoke  (Matt.  xi.  29 ;  Acts 
XV.  10).  The  croae-beam  of  the  loom,  to  which  the  warp  was 
fixed ;  the  thwarts  joining  the  opposite  sides  of  a  ship ;  the 


496  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THH  HEW  TBSTAUBNT. 

beam  of  the  balance,  and  lience  the  halaiice  itself.     The  jm 
inent  of  this  eeal  is  scarcity,  of  which  the  balance  is  a  symbt 
representing  the  time  when  food  is  doled  out  by  weight. 
Lev.  xxvi.  26;  Ezek.  iv.  16. 

6.  Measure  (xoiv^f)'  Chcenix.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. A  dry  measure,  according  to  some,  a  quart;  to  others 
a  pint  and  a  half.  Herodotus,  speaking  of  the  provisions  for 
Xerxes'  army,  assigiiB  a  chcEnix  of  corn  for  a  man's  daily  supply, 
evidently  meaning  a  minimum  allowance  (vii.,  187) ;  and  Thucyd- 
ides,  speaking  of  the  terms  of  truce  between  the  Lacedtenioni- 
ans  and  the  Athenians,  mentions  the  following  as  one  of  thai, 
provisions:  "The  Athenians  shall  permit  the  Lacedsemonians,' 
on  the  mainland  to  send  to  those  on  the  island  a  fixed  quantity- 
of  kneaded  flour,  viz.,  two  Attic  quarts  {j^oiutKat;)  of  barley- 
meal  for  each  man"  (iv,,16).  Jowett  ("Thucydides")  says  that 
the  choenix  was  about  two  pints  dry  measure.  So  Arnold 
("Thucydides"),  who  adds  that  the  allowance  of  two  chcenijies 
of  barley-meal  daily  to  a  man  was  the  ordinary  allowance  of 
a  Spartan  at  the  public  table.     See  Herodotus,  vi.,  57. 

For  a  psnny  {Siivaplov),     See  on  Matt.  xx.  2. 

8.  Pale  {xKtapo'!).  Only  in  the  A{x>calypse,  except  Mark 
vi.  39.  Properly,  greenisKyeiiow,  like  young  grass  or  nuripe 
wheat.  Homer  applies  it  to  honey,  and  Sophocles  to  the  aand. 
QenorMj,  j?aU, pallid.  Used  of  a  mist,  of  sea-water,  of  a  pale 
or  bilious  complexion.  Thucydides  uses  it  of  the  appearance 
of  persons  stricken  with  the  plague  (ii.,  19).  In  Homer  it  is 
used  of  the  paleness  of  the  face  from  fear,  and  so  as  directly 
descriptive  of  fear  ("Iliad,"  x.,  376;  xv.,  4).  Of  olive  wood 
("  Odyssey,"  ix.,  320,  379)  of  which  the  bark  is  gray.  Glad- 
stone says  that  in  Homer  it  indicates  rather  the  absence  than 
the  presence  of  definite  color.  In  the  New  Testament,  always 
rendered  greeri,  except  here.  See  Mark  vi,  39  ;  Apoc.  viii.  7  ; 
ix.  14. 

Hell.  Properly,  Hades.  The  realm  of  the  dead  personified. 
See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18, 


I 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  497 

Power  (i^vaia).  See  on  Mark  iL  10 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  11.  Key., 
better,  avihority. 

With  the  sword  {iv  fiofMfMlq).  Another  word  for  sword. 
Compare  ver.  4,  and  see  on  Lnke  ii.  35. 

With  death  (ey  ^oi^aT^).  Or  pestilence.  The  Hebrew  debery 
pestilence^  is  rendered  bj  the  Greek  word  for  decUA  in  the 
Septuagiut.  See  Jer.  xiv.  12  ;  xxi.  7.  Compare  the  term 
hlcLck-death  applied  to  an  Oriental  plagae  which  raged  in  the 
fourteenth  century. 

With  the  beasts  {inrb  r&v  Sffpltov).  Bey.,  5y.  The  prepos- 
ition vTTo  by  is  used  here  instead  of  iv  in  or  vnthj  indicating 
more  definitely  the  actual  agent  of  destruction;  while  iv  de- 
notes the  element  in  which  the  destruction  takes  place,  and 
gives  a  general  indication  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
wrought.     With  these  four  judgments  compare  £zek.  xiv.  21. 

9.  Altar  (Svauumfpiov).  See  on  Acts  xvii.  23.  The  cUtar 
of  eacrificey  as  is  indicated  by  slain;  not  the  altar  of  incense. 
The  imagery  is  from  the  tabernacle.     £xod.  xxxix.  39  ;  xl.  29. 

Souls  (^^t/^^^)*  ^^  lives.  See  on  3  John  2.  He  saw  only 
bloody  but  blood  and  life  were  equivalent  terms  to  the  Hebrew. 

Slain  (ia^atfiUvwv).  See  on  ch.  v.  6.  The  law  commanded 
that  the  blood  of  sacrificed  animals  should  be  poured  out  at  the 
bottom  of  the  altar  of  burnt-oflFering  (Lev.  iv.  7). 

They  held  {elx^v).  Not  heldfasty  hut  hare  the  testimony^ 
which  was  committed  to  them. 

10.  They  cried  {S/cpa^ov).    See  on  Mark  v.  5. 

How  long  (&»9  Wre).  Lit,  until  when.  Compare  Zech.  L 
12. 

O  Lord  (o  Seinrirrf^).  See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  1.  Only  here  in  the 
Apocalypse.     Addressed  to  God  i*ather  than  to  Christy  and 

Vol.  II.— 32 


498  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  BKW  TBSTAHBNT. 

breathing,  as  FrofesBor  Milligan  remarke,  "  tLe  feeling  of  Old 
Testament  rather  than  of  New  Testament  relation."  Compare 
Actsiv.  24;  Jude  4. 

True  (<i^^^9tl'«).     See  on  John  i.  9;  Apoc.  iii.  7. 

Judge  (KplvtK).  Originally  the  verb  means  to  f^tartUe; 
thence  the  idea  of  aeUction:  topick  out,  and  so  to  discriminate 
or  judge. 

Avenge  (iKiuttU).     Compare  Luke  xviii.  3;  liom.  xii.  19. 

On  th«  earth  (^1  rip  7^).  Earth,  in  the  Apocalypse,  is 
generally  to  be  underetood  of  the  ungodly  earth. 

11.  White  robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of  them 
{fhiArjixav  i/cdatoi^  aroXai  XevKoX).  T)ie  best  texts  read  eS6^ 
airroK  eKoartp  aroXt}  XevKij  there  was  gvoen  them  to  each  one  a 
white  robe.  So  Rev.  XraXi}  is  properly  a  long,  Jfoviing  robe  f 
a  festive  garment.  Compare  Mark  xvi.  5 ;  Luke  xv.  23 ;  ix. 
46. 

Should  rest  {avtvirawmtvrai).  See  on  Matt  xi.  28;  1  Pet. 
V.  14;  compare  ch.  xiv,  13;  Dan.  xii.  13.  Not  merely  rest 
from  their  crying  for  vengeance,  but  rest  in  peace. 

Fellow-servants.     See  Master  in  ver.  10. 

Should  be  fulfilled  (vXfjpaitToirTtu).   Completed  in  nnmber. 
See  Col.  ii.  10.     Some  texts  read  ■rrXtip<i>aanriv  shaR  have  fxJr-  | 
fUed  their  course. 

12.  The  sixth  seal.  "The  Apocalypse  is  monlded  by  the  I 
great  discourse  of  our  Lord  upon  'the  last  things' which  hsi 
been  preserved  for  us  in  the  first  three  Gospels  {Matt.  xxiv.  4—  ] 
XXV.;  Mark  xiii.  5-37  ;  Luke  xxi.  8-36  ;  compare  xvii.  20-37).  I 
The  parallelism  between  the  two  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  i 
knowledged  by  all  inquirers,  and  is  indeed,  in  many  respects,  I 
BO  obvious,  that  it  can  hardly  eRcape  the  notice  of  even  the  ord-  | 
inary  reader.     Let  any  one  compare,  for  example,  the  account  I 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  499 

of  the  opening  of  the  sixth  seal  with  the  description  of  the  end 
(Matt.  xziv.  29,  30),  and  he  will  see  that  the  one  is  almost  a 
transcript  of  the  other.  It  is  remarkable  that  we  find  no  ac- 
count of  this  discourse  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John ;  nor  does  it 
seem  as  su£Eicient  explanation  of  the  omission  that  the  later 
Evangelist  was  satisfied  with  the  records  of  the  discourse  al- 
ready given  by  his  predecessors  "  (Milligan). 

Earthquake  (aeta-fAosi).  Lit.,  shaking.  Used  also  of  a  tem- 
pest. See  on  Matt.  viiL  24,  and  compare  Matt.  xxiv.  7.  Tlie 
word  here  is  not  necessarily  confined  to  shaking  tlie  earth.  In 
Matt  xxiv.  29,  it  is  predicted  that  the  powers  of  the  heamene 
shall  be  shaken  {troKxvl^r^tnnax^  see  on  Luke  xxi.  26).  Here 
also  the  heaven  is  removed  (ver.  14).  Compare  Heb.  xiL  26, 
where  the  verb  o^Im  to  shake  (kindred  with  ceiafAo^)  is  used. 

Black  as  sackcloth  of  hair  (jJiiKa^  A^  adtctca^  rpix^^fo^)' 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  29 ;  Isa.  1.  3 ;  xiii.  10 ;  Jer.  iv.  28;  Ezek. 
xxxii.  7,  8 ;  Joel  ii.  31 ;  ill.  15 ;  Amos  viiL  9, 10 ;  Mic  lii.  6. 
For  sackdathj  see  on  Luke  x.  18. 

The  moon  {^  ^cXi^).  Add  Skrf  whole.  Bsv.j  the  whole 
moon. 

13.  Untimely  figs  {okwSin^).  Better,  as  Bev.,  imr^. 
Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  32;  Isa.  xxxiv.  4.  Only  here  in  the 
New  Testament. 

14.  Departed  {iwexo^plaSff).  The  verb  means  to  eeparaiey 
eever.    Bev.,  was  removed. 

Scroll  (fiifiXJov).    See  on  Luke  iv.  17.   Compare  Isa.  xxxiv.  4. 
Mountain  and  island.  Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  85;  Nahum  i.  5. 

15.  Of  the  earth.    See  on  ver.  10. 


Great  men   (jieyurrope^).      Bev.,  princes.      See  on  kii 
oaptainSj  Mark  vi.  21. 


500  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Chief  captains  (x^Xlapxoii*    See  on  Mark  yi.  21,  aoa  on 

oenturionj  Luke  vii.  2. 

The  mighty  {oi  Bwarol).  The  best  texts  read  ol  taxvpoL 
Bev.,  the  strong.  For  the  difiFerence  in  meaning,  see  on  the 
kindred  words  Bwa/M^  and  urxy^  might  and  jpou^er^  2  Pet.  IL  11. 

Every  free  man.  Omit  even/j  and  read  as  Bev.,  everjf  bond- 
man a/ndfree  man. 

in  the  dens  (ek  r^  (mnfXaia).  Bev.,  oaves.  The  preposi- 
tion €^  into  implies  mnuing  for  shelter  into. 

Rocks  (werpaii).     See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 

16.  Said  (Xiyovaof).    Lit.,  say.     So  Eev. 

Fall  on  us.    Compare  Hosea  x.  8 ;  Luke  xxiiL  80. 

W  rath  {opyry:).  Denoting  a  de&pseated  wrath.  See  on  John 
iii.36. 

17.  The  great  day  (i}  ^fiepa  ^  fieyaKfji).  Lit.,  the  day,  the 
great  (day).    For  the  constraction,  see  on  1  John  iv.  9. 

is  come  {^XSev).    Lit,  came. 

Shall  be  able  to  stand  (Swarai  oraSfifHu).     Bey.,  righUj, 

ie  oMe.    Compare  Nahum  L  6 ;  Mai.  iii.  2. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
1.  These  things  (ra&Ta).     Read  tovto  this. 

Hblding  {Kparovvra/f;).    Holding  fast  or  firmly.     See  on 
Mark  vii.  3 ;  Acts  iii.  11. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  501 

2.  East  (ai/oToX^?  ^\iov).  Rev.,  more  literally,  lAe  aunris- 
ing.     See  on  Matt.  ii.  2 ;  Luke  i.  78.     Compare  Ezek.  xliil.  2. 

The  four  angels.    Compare  Matt.  xxiv.  31. 

3.  In  their  foreheads.  Compare  Exod.  xxviii.  36-38 ; 
Ezek.  ix.  4. 

4.  An  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand.  Not  liter- 
ally, but  tlie  number  symbolical  of  fixedness  and  fall  comple- 
tion (12x12).  Tlie  interpretation  e.  as  usual,  vary  greatly,  di- 
viding generally  into  two  great  classes :  one  holding  that  only 
Jews  are  meant,  the  other  including  the  whole  number  of  the 
elect  both  Jew  and  Gentile.  Of  the  former  claBs  some  regard 
the  sealed  as  representing  Jewish  believers  chosen  out  of  the 
literal  Israel,  Others  add  to  this  the  idea  of  these  as  fonning 
the  Bucleus  of  glorified  humauity  to  which  the  Qentiles  are 
joined.  Others  again  regard  them  as  Jews  reserved  by  God 
until  Autichrist  comes,  to  maintain  in  the  bosom  of  their  nation 
a  true  belief  in  Jehovah  and  Ilis  law,  like  the  seven  thousand 
in  the  days  of  Elijah. 

The  interpretation  of  the  latter  class  seems  entitled  to  the 
greater  weight.  According  to  the  Apocalyptic  usage,  Jewish 
terms  are  ''christianized  and  heightened  in  their  meaning,  and 
the  word  "  Israel "  is  to  be  understood  of  all  Christians,  the 
blessed  company  of  all  faithful  people,  the  true  Israel  of  God." 
See  Rom.  ii.  28,  29 ;  ix.  6,  7 ;  Gal.  vi.  16 ;  Philip,  iii.  3.  The  city 
of  God,  which  includes  all  believers,  is  designated  by  the  JewisJi 
name,  New  Jerusalem.  In  ver.  3,  the  sealed  are  designated 
generally  as  the  servants  of  God.  In  ch.  xiv,  the  one  hnndjed 
and  forty-four  thousand  sealed  are  mentioned  after  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  enemies  of  Christ,  who  have  reference  to  the  whole 
Church  of  Christ ;  and  the  mention  of  the  sealed  is  followed 
by  the  world-wide  harvest  and  vintage  of  the  earth.  The  one 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  in  ch.  xiv,,  have  the  Father's 
name  written  in  their  foreheads ;  and  in  ch.  xxii.  4,  aU  the  in- 
babitante  of  the  New  Jernsalem  are  so  marked.  In  ch.  xxi.  12, 
the  twelve  tribes  include  all  believers.     The  mark  of  Satan 


502  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

which  is  in  the  forehead,  is  set  npon  all  his  senrants  without 
distinction  of  race.  See  ch.  xiii.  16, 17 ;  xiv.  9 ;  xvL  2 ;  zix. 
20 ;  XX.  4.  The  plagues  tlireaten  both  Jews  and  Oentiles,  at 
the  sealing  protects  all. 

9.  I  saw.    This  vision  belongs  to  heaven,  while  the  sealing 
took  place  on  earth. 

Arrayed  {irepifiefiXaifjtivoi).    See  on  ch.  iii  5. 

Robes.    See  on  ch.  vi.  11. 

**  The  anoient  aoriptorei  and  the  new 
The  mark  establish,  and  this  shows  it  me, 
Of  all  the  souls  whom  Gk>d  hath  made  His  friends. 
Isaiah  saith  that  each  one  g^armented 
In  His  own  land  shall  be  with  twofold  garmentii* 
And  his  own  land  is  this  delightful  life. 
Thj  brother,  too,t  far  more  ezplioitlj, 
There  where  he  treateth  of  the  robes  of  white, 
This  reTelation  manifests  to  ns.'* 

D»nte,  <'  Paradiso,**  nnr.,  86-M. 


Palms  {4>oiviicesi).  Properly,  pcUfJv-treeej  but  used  here  of 
palm-iranoAe^.  Not  a  heathen  but  a  Jewish  image  drawn 
probably  from  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.     See  on  John  vii.  2. 

10.  Cried.  The  correct  reading  is  Kpafywrw  they  cry.  So 
Rev. 

Salvation.  The  praise  of  salvation,  ascribing  salvation  to 
God. 

11.  Stood  {itrr/iKeaaii).  Be  v.,  more  correctly,  were  standAng. 
The  tense  is  the  pluperfect,  used  in  this  verb  as  an  imperfect. 

12.  Blessing,  etc.     On  the  doxologies,  see  on  ch.  i.  6. 

*  Dante*s  referenoe  is  to  Isa.  Ixi.  7,  where,  howeTer,  there  is  no  reference 
to  garments,  but  merelj  to  a  double  oompensation. 
f  John. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  503 

13.  Answered.  In  the  sense  of  taking  np  speech  in  con- 
nection with  some  given  occasion,  as  Matt  xi  25.  See  also  on 
John  ii.  18. 

What  are  these,  etc  The  Rev.,  properly,  follows  the  Greek 
order,  which  places  first  ^'  These  whicii  are  arrayed  in  the  white 
robes,  who  are  they?"  emphatic  and  indicating  the  natural  order 
of  the  thought  as  it  presents  itself  to  the  inquirer.  For  whai^ 
render  who^  as  Be\r. 

14.  I  said  {elpfiKd).  Lit,  I  home  said.  Rev.,  renders  by  the 
present,  I  say.    See  on  orisd.    John  i.  15. 

Sir  (levpie).  Add  fAov  my,  and  render,  as  Rev.,  my  Lord. 
An  address  of  reverence  as  to  a  heavenly  being.  See  on  Matt, 
xxi.  3. 

Which  came  {pi  ifr/pyMfoC).  The  present  participle.  Hence, 
as  Rev.,  which  came. 

Out  of  great  tribulation  {iic  r^  dX/'^rca^  r^  iA^£Kar:). 
Lit.,  out  of  the  tribtdatiafij  the  great  (tribulation).  Rev.,  prop- 
erly, gives  the  force  of  the  article,  *'  the  great"  See  on  Matt 
xiii.  21. 

Have  washed  {hrkupov).  The  aorist  tense.  Rev.,  correctly, 
they  washed.  Only  here  and  Luke  v.  2,  on  which  see  note. 
For  the  New  Testament  words  for  washing,  see  on  Acts  xvi.  33. 

Made  them  white.  Compare  Isa.  i.  18;  Ps.  li.  7;  Mark 
ix.  3.  Milligan  remarks  that  robes  are  the  expression  of  char^ 
octeTj  and  compares  the  word  habit  used  of  dress. 

15.  Therefore.    Because  of  this  washing. 

Before  the  throne.    Compare  Eph.  v.  27. 

Serve  (Karpevownv),  See  on  Luke  i.  74.  In  scripture  the 
verb  never  expresses  any  other  service  but  that  of  the  true  God, 
or  of  the  gods  of  heathenism. 


504  woao  sTTDisa  ih  thb  hew  testament. 

Temple  (>«p)-     Or  satuiuary.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 

Dwell  {a-KT}iKoa-ei).  From  ffKr/t^  a  tent  or  tabernacle.  Hence 
better,  as  Rev.,  ghall  sp)-ead  Ills  tabernacle.  See  on  John  i.  14, 
and  compare  Lev.  xxvi.  11 ;  Isa.  iv.  5,  6 ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  27. 

16.  They  shall  hunser  no  more,  etc.  Compare  lea.  xlii. 
10. 

Heat  (icaupLa).  In  lea.  xlix.  10,  the  word  Kovvav  the  tcorck- 
ing  witid  or  sirocco  is  naed.     See  on  Matt.  xx.  12 ;  Jas.  i.  11. 

17.  In  the  midst  (avd  fttavv).    See  on  ch.  v.  6. 

Shall  feed  (ttoi/uii^i).  See  on  shall  be  shepherd  of.  Matt  iL 
6;  Acta  xx.  28;  1  Pet.  v.  2.     Compare  Pb.  xxiii.  1. 

Shall  lead  (oStryfo-ft).     See  on  Luke  vi.  39. 

Living  fountains  of  waters  (tTWtw  inn™?  uSaTOJc).  For 
the  participle  living,  read  fot^s  of  life,  and  render  as  Rev., 
fauntaitis  of  waters  of  life.  Compare  Pa.  xxiii.  3.  In  the 
Greek  order,  of  life  stands  first  as  emphatic. 

All  tears  {■B-av  Mxpwiv).  Rev.,  correctly,  e»ery  tear.  Com- 
pare Isa.  XXV.  8. 


CHAPTER   Tin. 

1.  When  (^}.  Read  vrav,  the  indefinite  particle  with  the 
indicative  mood.  For  a  similar  constrnction,  see  Mark  xi.  19 
(correct  reading).  Alford  observes  that  it  occurs  in  the  open- 
ing of  this  seal  only,  giving  it  an  indefiniteness  which  does  not 
belong  to  any  of  the  rest. 

There  was  {^kwn^.  More  literally,  came,  to  jpass.  Bev., 
there  foUmoed. 

About  ((ik).  a  Qsnal  form  of  expression  with  John.  See 
John  i.  39 ;  vi.  19 ;  xi.  18. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  605 

2.  Stood  (ianiscaatv).    Bev.,  correctly,  atand. 

Trumpets  {cdKirvffe^).    See  on  ch.  L  10. 

• 

3.  At  the  altar  {M  to  SwnaanipMv).  The  best  texts  read 
Svauumipiovt  which  jastifies  the  Rev.,  ^*'  over  the  altar."  For 
aUar^  see  on  ch.  vi.  9.  Interpreters  differ  as  to  whether  the 
altar  meant  is  the  brazen  altar,  as  in  ch.  vi.  9,  or  the  altar  of 
incense^  as  in  ch.  ix.  13.  There  seems  to  he  no  reason  for 
changing  the  reference  from  the  brazen  altar  (see  on  ch.  vi.  9), 
especially  as  both  altars  are  mentioned  in  this  verse.  The  ofSc- 
iating  priest  in  the  tabernacle  or  temple  took  the  fire  for  his 
censer  from  the  brazen  altar,  and  then  offered  the  incense  npoa 
the  golden  altar. 

Censer.    See  on  ch.  v.  8.  ^ 

Incense.    See  on  ch.  v.  8. 

Offer  it  with  the  prayers  (Sc»a|;  roS?  irpoatvyak).  lit^ 
sJuyuld  gi/oe  it  unto  the  prayers.  Rev.,  add  it  unto  the  prayers. 
So  that  the  prayers  and  the  incense  might  ascend  together.^ 
Ilpoaevx^  is  always  used  of  prayer  to  God. 

Golden  altar.    The  altar  of  incense.  Exod.  xxx.  1-6 ;  xxxix» 

38. 

4.  Which  came  with  the  prayers.  An  awkward  render- 
ing,  followed  by  Rev.,  thongh  with  the  omission  of  the  italicized 
which  came.  The  construction  is  ia4fiff  went  vp^  with  the  dative 
case,  to  the  prayers.  ^^The  ascending  smoke  had  reference  to 
the  prayers,  was  designed  to  accompany  them  and  render  them 
more  acceptable  *'  (Winer). 

Of  the  saints  {r&v  arflnv).    See  on  Acts  xxvi.  10. 

5.  Took  {etKffifiev).    Lit,  hath  taken.     So  Rev.,  in  margin. 

With  the  fire  (itc  rov  irvp^).  Lit.,  ''from  or  out  of  the  fire,** 
i.e.j  the  coals  or  hot  ashes.     For  ktc  out  of  see  on  ch.  ii.  7. 


506  WORD  STUDIES  IK  THB  NBW  TESTAMENT. 

Cast  it  into  the  earth.    See  Ezek.  x.  2;  Lake  xii.  49. 

6.  To  sound  (&a  aaXirtamaai).  Lit,  that  they  should  blow 
the  trumpets.  Raised  their  trampets  to  their  mouths  in  act  to 
blow. 

7.  The  first  angel.    Omit  angel. 

Hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood  (xikalS"^  teal  wvp  fAefiuy- 
fiiva  aXfjMTi).  Insert  iv  in  before  o^uari  Hood.  Instead  o£ 
^^with  blood"  as  A.  V.,  and  Rev.,  we  should  render  "tn  blood." 
The  hailstones  and  iire-balls  fell  in  a  shower  of  blood.  Com- 
pare the  account  of  the  plagne  of  fire  and  hail  in  Egypt  (Exod. 
ix.  24)  to  which  the  reference  is  here,  where  the  Septnagint 
reads  and  there  was  hcM  and  the  fire  flaming  in  the  haiL  Clom- 
pare  Joel  iL  30. 

And  the  third  part  of  the  earth  was  burnt  up.    This  is 

added  by  the  best  texts. 

Green  (xXMposi).    See  onpalej  eh.  vL  8. 

8.  As  it  were  (m).  Not  a  monntain,  but  a  fiery  mass  so 
large  as  to  resemble  one. 

Blood.    Reminding  of  the  first  plague  in  Egypt  (Exod.  yiL 

20,  21). 

9.  Life  {'^^vxi^i)'    See  on  3  John  2. 
Ships  i'trXoluv).    See  on  Luke  y.  2. 

10.  Lamp  (Xa/iTT^).    Rev.,  torch.    See  on  eh.  iv.  6. 

11.  Wormwood  (a^p^ipSo^).  Used  metaphorically  in  the  Old 
Testament  of  the  idolatry  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxix.  18) ;  of  calam- 
ity arid  sorrow  (Jer.  ix.  15  ;  xxiii.  15 ;  Lam.  iii.  15,  19)  ;  of 
false  judgment  (Amos  v.  7). 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  507 

13.  An  angel  {ha^  aryyiKov).  For  angd  read  ierou  eagle. 
Lit.,  one  eagle.  The  eagle  is  a  symbol  of  yengeance  in  Deat 
xxviii.  49 ;  Hos.  viii.  1;  Hab.  i.  8. 

Mid  heaven  (jutrovpat^/uvn).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse, 
here,  xiv.  6 ;  xix.  17.  It  means,  properly,  the  meridiatij  the 
highest  point  in  the  heavens  which  the  snn  oocnpies  at  noon: 
not  the  space  between  heaven  and  earth. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  Fall  (Trevrrw/eora).  Lit.,  fallen.  The  star  had  fallen 
before  and  is  seen  as  fallen.  Bev.,  properly,  construes  etar 
Yi\\\xfTom  heaven  instead  of  with^o^^.  Compare  Isa.  ziv.  12  ; 
Luke  X.  18. 

Of  the  bottomless  pit  {rov  ^piaro^  rrfi  hffwratw).  Bev., 
of  the  pit  qft/he  ahyee.  See  on  John  iv.  6,  and  compare  Luke 
xiv.  5.  It  is  not  however  a  pU  that  is  locked,  but  the  long  ehcfft 
leading  to  the  abyss,  like  a  well-shaft,  which,  in  the  East,  is 
of teuer  covered  and  locked. 

2.  Smoke  of  a  great  furnace.  Compare  Gen.  zix.  28; 
Exod.  xix.  18 ;  Matt.  xiii.  42,  50. 

3.  Locusts  (oicp/Se?).  The  idea  of  this  plague  is  from  the 
eightli  plague  in  Egypt  (Exod.  x.  14,  16).  Compare  the  de- 
scription of  a  visitation  of  locusts  in  Joel  ii.  There  are  three 
Hebrew  words  in  the  Old  Testament  which  appear  to  mean 
loeusty  probably  signifying  different  species.  Only  this  word 
is  employed  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  Matt.  iii.  4 ; 
Mark  i.  6. 

« 

Scorpions.  See  Ezek.  ii.  6 ;  Luke  x.  19 ;  xi.  12.  Shaped 
like  a  lobster,  living  in  damp  places,  under  stones,  in  clefts  of 
walls,  cellars,  etc.  The  sting  is  in  the  extremity  of  the  tail. 
The  sting  of  the  Syrian  scorpion  is  not  fatal,  though  very  pain- 


508  WORD  STUDIES  IB  THH  FEW  TB8TAHERT. 

fcl.  The  Barae  is  true  of  the  West  Indian  acorpion.  ThomBon 
Bajs  tliat  those  of  Korth  Africa  are  said  to  be  larger,  and  thai 
their  poison  frequently  causes  death.  The  wildcnieBS  of  Sinai 
is  especially  alluded  to  as  being  inhabited  by  scorpions  at  Uie 
time  of  the  Exodus  (Dent.  viii.  15) ;  and  to  this  very  day  they 
are  common  in  the  same  district.  A  part  of  the  moiintaine 
bordering  on  Palestine  in  the  south  was  named  from  theee 
Akrabb^lm,  Akrdb  being  the  Uebrew  for  scorpion. 

4.  Green.     See  on  cb.  vi.  8. 

Men  which  {av^po)rtrov<;  ohivt^).   The donble  relative  denotes 

the  class.      IU;v.,  such  men  as  have,  etc. 

5.  They  should  be  tormented  {^aaami^Saaw).  See  on 
torments,  Matt.  iv.  24. 

Striketh  {vala^).  Dr.  Thomson  says  that  the  scorpion  can- 
not strike  sideways.  All  accounts  agree  as  to  the  fearful  pain 
from  its  sting. 

6.  Men.     Kather,  the  men:  those  tormented. 

Shall  desire  {hriJ^vfi^av<Ti.v).    'Etrl  has  the  force  of  v 
metUly,  earnestly. 

Shall  flee  (^evfero*).  Read  ^^et  ^fieeih.  ^schylns  says: 
*'  Not  justly  do  mortals  hate  deatli,  since  it  is  the  greatest  de- 
liverance from  their  many  woes  "  ("  Fragment ").  Herodotus 
relates  the  address  of  Artabanus  to  Xerxes,  when  the  latter 
wept  on  beholding  his  vast  armament.  "There  is  no  man, 
whether  it  be  here  among  this  multitude  or  elsewhere,  who  is 
BO  happy  as  not  to  have  felt  the  wish — I  will  not  say  once,  but 
fnll  many  a  time — that  he  were  dead  rather  than  alive.  Ca- 
lamities fall  upon  us,  sicknesses  vex  and  harass  us,  and  make 
life,  short  though  it  be,  to  appear  long-  So  death,  through  the 
wretchedness  of  oar  life,  is  a  most  sweet  refuge  to  our  race" 
(vii.,  46). 


4 


RBYELATION  OP  JOHV.  509 

7.  Shapes  (ofiouo/iaTa).    Lit.,  Uk&nes9e$. 

Horses.  Compare  Joel  ii.  4.  The  likeness  of  a  locust  to  a 
horse,  especially  to  a  horse  equipped  with  armor,  is  so  striking 
that  the  insect  is  named  in  German  H&up/&rd  hay-Aors&j  and 
in  Italian  cavaletta  little  horw. 

Crowns.  Not  actual  crowns,  but  0%  crowns.  Milligan  re- 
marks that  anj  yellow  brilliancy  about  the  head  of  the  insect 
is  a  sufficient  foundation  for  the  figure. 

As  the  feces  of  men.  There  is  a  distant  resemblance  to 
the  human  countenance  in  the  face  of  the  locust  Men  {cofSpA- 
wwv)  is  to  be  taken  not  as  distinguishing  sex,  but  in  the  ffenerio 
^ense :  human  faces. 

8.  Hair  of  women.  The  antenn®  of  the  locust.  There  is 
said  to  be  an  Arabic  proverb  in  which  the  antennas  of  locusts 
are  compared  to  girls'  hair. 

Teeth  of  lions.    Compare  Joel.  i.  6. 

9.  Breastplates.  The  breast  of  the  locust  resembles  the 
plates  of  a  horse's  armor. 

Sound  of  their  wings.  Olivier,  a  French  writer,  says:  ^^It 
in  difficult  to  express  the  effect  produced  on  us  by  the  sight  of 
the  whole  atmosphere  filled  on  all  sides  and  to  a  great  height 
by  an  innumerable  quantity  of  these  insects,  whose  flight  was 
slow  and  uniform,  and  whose  noise  resembled  that  of  rain." 
For  a  graphic  description  of  their  numbers  and  ravages,  see 
Thomson,  ^^  Land  and  Book,  Central  Palestine  and  Phosnicia," 
295-302. 

Of  chariots  of  many  horses.  That  is,  of  many-hareed 
/chariots.  The  Rev.,  by  the  insertion  of  a  comma,  apparently 
takes  the  two  clauses  as  parallel :  tAe  sound  of  charioUj  (the 
sound)  of  many  horees. 


510 


WORD  BTUDraS  IN  TUB  TTHW  TESTA«BMT. 


Tails  like  unto  scorpions.  The  comparieon  with  the  in- 
sect as  it  exists  in  nature  fails  here,  though  Smith's  "  Bible  Dio 
tiooarj  "  gives  ft  picture  of  a  species  of  locast,  the  Acridium 
Lineola,  a  species  commonly  sold  for  food  in  the  markets  of 
Bagdad,  which  has  a  sting  in  the  tail. 

Stings  {tthnpa).  Originally  any  sharp povnt.  A  goad.  See 
on  pricks.  Acts  xxvi.  14,  Plato  uses  it  of  the  peg  of  a  top 
{"  Republic,"  436),  Herodotus  of  an  instrument  of  torturt. 
Deiaocedes,  the  Crotoniat  physician,  having  denied  his  knowl- 
edge of  medicine  to  Darius,  Darius  bade  hie  attendants  "bring 
the  scourges  and  pricking-irons  Kevrpa"  {iii.,  30).  Sophocles 
of  the  buckle-tongues  with  which  CEdipua  put  out  his  eyes. 

"  Woe,  woe.  uid  iroe  >gun  1 
How  throngh  me  duta  the  throb  tbese  oftupt  {■A-Tpw)  hire  caased.** 
■'  <EdipDi  Tjnumns,"  1318. 

Of  ^  Spur  of  a  cock,  the  juill  of  a  porctipin^,  and  the  stingt 
of  insects. 

For  the  A.  V.,  there  were  stings  in  their  tails,  read  as  Rct., 
and  stings;  and  in  their  tails  is  their  power  to  hurt. 

11.  They  had  a  king  over  them  [eyovaw  e<f>  ovrwi'  (9oa-- 
iXia).  Render,  as  Rev.,  they  have  over  them  as  king.  Compare 
Prov.  XXX.  27.     Hence  distinguished  from  the  natural  loenets. 

In    Hebrew  (Effpal<rTl).     Used  only  by  John.     Oompai 
John  v.  2 ;  xix.  13,  17,  20 ;  Apoc.  xvi.  16. 

Abaddon.  Meaning  destruction.  Compare  Job  xxvi.  6 ; 
zxviii.  22;  Prov.  xv.  11.  Here  the  Destroyer,  as  is  evident 
from  the  Greek  equivalent  'AiraXKvDtv  ApoUyon  destroyer. 
Perdition  is  personified.  It  is  after  John's  manner  to  give  the 
Hebrew  with  the  Greek  equivalent.  Compare  John  i.  38,  42  ; 
iv.  25;  ix,  7;  xi.  16,  etc 

18.  The  first  woe  (4  o^  ^  fUa).    Lit.,  the  one  uxw. 

13.  A  voice  (^i^v  ulav).     Lit.,  OTie  voice. 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  511 

Altar.    See  on  ch.  viii.  3. 

14.  In  the  great  river  (hrl).    Rev.,  more  correctly,  ai. 

Euphrates.  The  Euphrates  was  known  as  the  great  Rwerj 
the  Hivery  the  Flood.  It  rises  in  the  mountains  of  Armenia, 
breaks  through  the  Taurus  range,  and  runs  south  and  southeast 
until  it  joins  the  Tigris  in  lower  Babylonia.  Its  total  length 
is  from  1,600  to  1,800  miles,  and  it  is  navigable  for  small  craft 
twelve  hundred  miles  from  its  mouth.  It  was  the  boundary- 
line  of  Israel  on  the  northeast  (G^n.  xv.  18 ;  Deut.  i.  7 ;  Josh, 
i.  4.  Compare  2  Sam.  viii.  3-8 ;  1  Kings  iv.  21).  It  thus 
formed  the  natural  defence  of  the  chosen  people  against  the 
armies  of  Assyria.  The  melting  of  the  mountain  snows  causes 
an  annual  flood,  beginning  in  March  and  increasing  until  May. 
These  floods  became  an  emblem  of  the  judgments  inflicted  by 
Ood  upon  Israel  by  means  of  Babylon  and  Assyria.  The  brook 
of  Shiloah  which  flowed  past  Zion  and  Moriah  was  a  type  of 
the  temple  and  of  its  mighty  and  gracious  Lord ;  and  the  re- 
fusal of  allegiance  to  Gk>d  by  the  chosen  people  is  represented 
as  their  rejection  of  the  waters  of  Shiloah  which  flow  softly, 
and  their  punishment  therefor  by  the  bringing  in  of  the  waters 
of  the  mighty  and  great  river  (Isa.  viii  5-8 ;  compare  Jer. 
xvii.  13).  To  the  prophets  the  Euphrates  was  the  symbol  of 
all  that  was  disastrous  in  the  divine  judgments. 

16.  For  an  hour  and  a  day  and  a  month  and  a  year. 

This  rendering  is  wrong,  since  it  conveys  the  idea  that  the  four 
periods  mentioned  are  to  be  combined  as  representing  tlie 
length  of  the  prepa^tion  or  of  the  continuance  of  the  plague. 
But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  neither  the  article  nor  the  preposition 
are  repeated  before  day  and  month  and  year.  Tlie  meaning  is 
that  the  angels  are  prepared  unto  the  hour  appointed  by  Ood, 
and  that  this  hour  shall  fall  in  its  appointed  day  and  month 
and  year. 

16.  Of  the  horsemen  {rov  hnrucoS).  Singular  number,  like 
the  English  the  horse  or  the  ixwalry. 


512  WORD  8TDDIK8  IK  THB  HHW  TBBTAMEHT, 

Two  hundred  thousand  thousand  {Bvo  nvptaBes  tivpui&eti/). 
Lit.,  tiffo  ten-thousands  of  ten-t/umsands.  See  on  ch.  v,  11, 
Rev,,  twice  ten-thousand  times  ten-thousand.  Compare  Pa. 
Ixviii.  17;  Dan.  vii.  10;  Heb.  xii.  22;  Jude  14. 

17.  Thus  (ojfTo*?).    After  this  manner. 

In  the  vision  (^i*  tJ  opdavi).  Or  "in  my  vision."  See  on 
Acts  ii.  17.  Tiie  reference  to  eight  may  be  inserted  because  of 
/heard  in  ver.  16. 

Of  fire  {irvpLvoiK).     Rev.,  "as  of  fire."     Fiery  red. 

Of  jacinth  {voKiv^lvovt:).  'ToKti'Sos  hyacinth  is  the  name  of 
a  flower  and  also  of  a  precious  stone.  The  noim  occurs  only 
Apoc.  xxi.  20,  and  the  adjective  only  here.  According  to 
classical  mythology,  the  flower  sprang  up  from  the  blood  of  Hy- 
acinthus,  a  boautifiU  Spartan  youth,  who  was  accidentally  killed 
daring  a  game  of  quoits.  It  was  thought  by  some  that  the  let- 
ters AI,  AI,  the  exclamation  of  woe,  could  be  traced  on  the 
petals,  while  others  discovered  the  letter  T,  the  initial  letter  of 
'ToKivSm.  The  stoiy  of  the  slaying  of  Hyacinthus  is  told  by 
Ovid. 

"La,  the  blood 
Whloh,  on  the  gronnd  oatpoored,  hod  sUiaed  tha  sod, 
Ib  blood  no  more.     Brfghter  than  T/riftn  Aj«, 
Like  to  the  Ulj's  sh^pe  a  flovur  appeara, 
Pnrple  In  hae  as  that  Is  siWerj  whlto. 
Nor  jet  does  such  memorial  oonteot 
PhrebaB  Apollo  at  whose  word  it  rose. 
Upon  ita  leaves  he  writes  hia  own  laments. 
And  on  the  flower  forever  stands  inscribed 
AI,  AI." 

"  HatamorphoMe,"  x.,  17S  «qq. 

As  a  atone,  it  is  identified  by  some  with  the  sapphire.  As  to 
color,  the  hyacinth  of  the  Greeks  seems  to  have  comprehended 
the  iris,  gladiolus,  and  larkspur.  Hence  the  different  acconnts 
of  its  color  in  classical  writings,  varying  from  red  to  black.  A 
dull,  dark  blue  seems  to  be  meant  here. 


RBVRLATION  OF  JOHN.  513 

Of  brimstone  (SetwBeg^).  Perhaps  light  yelloWy  such  a  color 
as  would  be  produced  by  the  settling  fumes  of  brimstone. 

Of  the  horses.  In  the  Bible  the  horse  is  always  referred  to 
in  connection  with  war,  except  Isa.  zxyiii.  28,  where  it  is  men- 
tioned as  employed  in  threshing,  the  horses  being  turned  loose 
in  the  grain  as  in  the  Italian  triglia.  The  magnificent  descrip- 
tion in  Job  xxxix.  19-25  applies  to  the  war-horse.  He  is  dis- 
tinguished, not  so  much  for  his  speed  and  utility  as  for  his 
strength  (see  Ps.  xxxiiL  17 ;  cxlvii.  10),  and  the  word  ahbir 
strong  is  used  as  an  equivalent  for  a  horse  (Jer.  viii.  16  ;  xlvii. 
3).  The  Hebrews,  as  a  pastoral  race,  did  not  need  the  horse; 
and,  for  a  long  time  after  their  settlement  in  Canaan,  dispensed 
with  it,  partly  because  of  the  hilly  nature  of  the  country,  which 
allowed  the  use  of  chariots  only  in  certain  places  (Judges  i.  19), 
and  partly  because  of  the  prohibition  in  Dent.  xvii.  16.  Accord- 
ingly they  hamstrung  the  horses  of  the  Canaanites  (Josh.  xi.  6, 9). 
The  great  supply  of  horses  was  effected  by  Solomon  through  his 
connection  with  Egypt.     See  1  Eangs  iv.  26. 

Proceedeth  fire  and  smoke.    Compare  YirgiL 

*'  Then,  if  the  Boand  of  arms  he  heir  from  far, 
Qaiet  he  cannot  stand,  bat  pricks  his  ears. 
Trembles  in  CTery  limb,  and  snorting,  rolls 
The  gathered  fire  beneath  his  nostrils  wide." 

««Georgioi,''iiL,8S-61 

Also  Job  xxxix.  20 :  ^  the  gloiy  of  his  nostrils  is  terrible." 

18.  These  three.  Add  7c\q^m  plagues^  on  which  see  on 
Mark  iiL  10  ;  Luke  x.  80. 

19.  Their  power  {ifouaCtu  airrAv).  Bead  i^ovala  r&y  %inrm§ 
the  power  of  the  horses. 

Like  unto  serpents.  ^^Long,  smooth,  subtle,  clasping  their 
victim  in  an  embrace  from  which  he  cannot  escape"  (Milligan). 
As  one  of  the  innumerable  fantasies  of  Apocalyptic  exposition 
may  be  cited  that  of  Elliott  (*^  Horse  Apocalyptics")  who  finds 

Vol.  a— «8 


r>14  WOBD  BTDDIES  IH  THB  ITBW  TESTAMBKT. 

a  reference  to  the  horse  tails,  the  sj-mbols  of  authority  of  the 
Turkish  pashae. 

20.  Repented  not  of  the  works  (oSre  iieTevAtftrav  tK  rat 
epyrov).  Lit.,  **<iu(  ^the  works,"  The  preposition  etc  oviof 
with  repent,  denotes  a  moral  ciiange  involving  an  abandoomeiit 
of  evil  works.     See  on  Hatt.  iii.  2 ;  xzi.  29. 

Works  of  their  hands.  Kot  their  course  of  life,  but  the 
idols  which  their  hands  had  made.  Compare  Deut  iv.  28 ;  Ps. 
cxxsiv.  15  ;  Acta  vii,  4. 

Devils  (^u/MCMi).  More  properly,  demons.  See  on  Mark 
i.  34.     Compare  1  Cor.  x.  20 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1. 

S«e,  hear,  walk.    Compare  Dan.  t.  23. 

21,  SorceriQS  (^ap\MKtiMiv).  Only  here,  ch.  zviii.  23 ;  and 
Gal.  V.  20,  where  ^pfuucela  sorceries,  A.  V.,  witekcraft,  is  enum- 
erated among  the  "  works  of  the  flesh."  Used  in  the  Septuagiot 
of  tlie  Egyptian  sorceries  (Exod.  vii,  22.  Of  Babylon,  Isa.  xlvii, 
9,  12).  From  ^dpfuiKov  a  drug,  and  thence  a  jmson,  an  en- 
ehantinent.  Plato  says  :  "There  are  two  kinds  of  poisons  used 
among  men  which  cannot  clearly  be  distinguished.  There  is 
one  kind  of  poison  which  injures  bodies  by  the  use  of  other 
bodies  according  to  a  natural  law  .  .  .  but  there  is  an- 
other kind  which  injures  by  sorceries  and  incantations  and 
magic  bonds,  as  they  are  termed,  and  induces  one  class  of  men 
to  injure  anotlier  as  far  as  tliey  can,  and  persuades  others  tiiat 
they,  above  all  persons,  are  liable  to  be  injured  by  the  powers 
of  the  inngicians.  Now  it  is  not  easy  to  know  the  nature  of 
all  these  things;  nor  if  a  man  do  know  can  he  readily  persuade 
others  of  his  belief.  And  when  men  are  disturbed  at  the  sight 
of  waxen  images,  fixed  either  at  the  doors,  or  in  a  place  where 
three  ways  meet,  or  in  the  sepulclireB  of  parents,  there  is  no  use 
of  trying  to  persuade  them  that  they  should  despise  all  such 
things,  because  they  have  no  certain  knowledge  about  tlieni. 
But  we  must  have  a  law  in  two  parts  concerning  poisoninp,  in 
whichever  of  the  two  ways  the  attempt  is  made ;  and  we  must 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  515 

entreat  and  exhort  and  advise  men  not  to  have  reconree  to  snch 
practices,  by  which  they  scare  the  mnltitnde  ont  of  their  wits^ 
as  if  they  were  children,  compelling  the  legislator  and  the  jndge 
to  heal  the  fears  which  the  sorcerer  arouses,  and  to  tell  them, 
in  the  first  place,  that  he  who  attempts  to  poison  or  enchant 
others  knows  not  what  he  is  doing,  either  as  regards  the  body 
(unless  he  have  a  knowledge  of  medicine)  or  as  regards  his 
enchantments,  unless  he  happens  to  be  a  prophet  or  diviner" 
("  Laws,"  xL,  988). 


OEAPTER  X. 

1.  A  cloud.  The  expression  occurs  seven  times  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  in  all  of  them  is  connected  with  the  Son  of 
Man. 

Rainbow.    See  on  ch.  iv.  8. 

Pillars  of  fire.    Compare  ch.  i.  15. 

2.  In  his  hand  {jtif).  The  toU  of  Ch.  v.  was  <m  the  hand 
{^l^  see  ch.  v.  1),  being  too  large  to  be  grasped  unthin  it.  The 
roll  was  on  tAe  right  hand;  the  little  book  is  in  the  l^  See 
on  ver.  5. 

8.  Cried  {hcpafyp).    See  on  Mark  v.  5. 

As  when.    The  w?ien  of  A.  Y.  is  unnecessary. 

Roareth  (juvKaraC).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament  Peter 
uses  mpvofuu  for  the  voice  of  the  lion.  See  on  1  Pet  v.  8.  Tlie 
verb  here  is  originally  applied  to  the  lowing  of  cattle,  expressing 
the  sound,  moo-ka-omai.  Both  Aristophanes  and  Theocritns  use 
it  of  the  roar  of  the  lion,  and  the  former  of  thunder.  Homer, 
of  the  rmg  of  the  shield  and  the  hissing  of  meat  on  the  spit. 

Seven  thunders.  The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  speak  of 
thunder  as  ^^  the  seven  voices."  Compare  the  sevenfold  '^  voice 
of  the  Lord,"  Ps.  xxix. 


516 


WORD  STDDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAJTENT. 


Ab  usual,  interpretation  has  run  wild  ae  to  the  seven  thnndOTtl 
Aa  a  few  illustratious  may  be  cited  Vitringa,  the  seven  crusades; 
Daiibiiz,  the  seven  kiugdome  which  received  the  Reformation; 
Elliott,  the  bull  fulminated  against  Luther  from  the  seven-hilled 
city,  etc.  J 

4.  To  write.     According  to  the  injunction  in  ch.  L  11.  ^ 

5.  His  hand.  Add  r^i'  Se^iiv  the  right,  and  see  on  ver.  S. 
On  lifting  the  hand  in  swearing,  see  Gen.  xiv.  23 ;  £xod.  tl  8 
(margin) ;  Deut.  zzzii.  40. 

6.  Sware  by  (£/uKm>  iv).  Lit.,  "  sware  in,"  a  HebreM 
idiom. 

Should  be  time  no  longer  {■xpovo^  ovk  lariu  eri).  Kev., 
conectly,  skail  he,  etc.  The  moaning  is  not,  ae  popularly  an- 
derstood,  that  time  shall  cease  to  exist,  but  that  there  shall  be 
no  more  delay  (so  Rev.,  in  margin)  before  the  fulfilment  of  the 
divine  purposes  respecting  the  Church  on  earth.  Possibly  with 
allusion  to  the  cry  how  long  (ch.  vi.  10). 

7.  Shall  begin  to  sound  (/mXXi;  vaKir^tv).  Wrong.  Bar.J 
correctly,  mjA^w  he  is  about  to  sound. 

The  mystery  (to  fivtrr^piov).    See  on  Matt,  xiil  11. 

Declared  (evrrriiXurev).  The  word  used  of  declaring  the 
good  news  of  salvation.  Here  of  declaring  the  mystery  of  the 
kingdom. 


8.  Spake  unto  me. 
ipeakittg." 


Render,  as  Rev.,  "I  heard  it  agaia 


9.  I  went  (air^XSov).     The  preposition  airo  has  the  force  of 
itoag.     I  went  away  from  the  place  where  I  was  standing. 

Eat  it  up.    Compare  Ezek.  iii.  1-3 ;  Jer.  xv.  18. 


I 

4 


BEVELATION  OF  JOHN.  617 


CHAPTER  XL 

1.  A  rod.    See  on  ch.  ii.  27. 

And  the  angel  stood.  Omit.  The  inBertion  of  these  words 
famishes  a  subject  for  the  agreement  of  the  participle  Xeyoiv^ 
which  is  irregular  in  construction.  Literallj  the  correct  text 
reads,  *Uhere  was  given  me  a  reed,  wiyingP  Accordingly 
Wordsworth  refers  the  speech  to  the  reed  as  an  inspired  med- 
ium of  speech.    Bev.,  better,  a/nd  one  said. 

The  temple  {rbv  vaov).    See  on  Matt.  iv.  5, 

The  altar.  Of  incense,  as  that  alone  stood  in  the  sacred 
place. 

Them  that  worship.  Note  the  peculiar  expression,  meas- 
uring the  worshippers  with  a  reed. 

2.  The  court  which  is  without  the  temple.  Not  merely 
the  outer  court,  or  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  but  including  all  that 
is  not  within  the  vao9,  the  Holy  and  Most  Holy  places. 

Leave  out  {itcfioKe  i^).  lit.,  throw  autj  i.e.,  of  the  meas- 
urement 

Unto  the  Gentiles  (tok  i^ve<nv).  See  on  Luke  iL  82. 
Bev.,  natiana. 

Forty  and  two  months.  A  period  which  appears  in  three 
forms  in  the  Apocalypse :  forty-two  months  (ch.  xiii.  5) ;  twelve- 
hundred  cmd  sixty  days  (ver.  3,  ch.  xii.  6) ;  a  time^  times  and 
half  a  time^  or  three  years  and  a  half  (xii.,  14,  compare  Dan. 
vii.  25 ;  xii.  7). 

3.  Power.    Omit. 


518  WORD  BTDDIBB  IN  THB  HHW  TK8TAKBHT. 

Two  witnesses.  The  reader  may  profitably  consult  on  thti  1 
point  the  lectures  of  Professor  Milligan  on  the  Revelation  of  1 
St.  John.  lie  maintains  that  the  conception  o£  the  Apocalypse  ( 
is  powerfully  moulded  by  John's  recollections  of  the  life  of  ' 
Jesus;  that  there  is  a  close  parallelism  between  the  Apocalypsa 
and  the  delineation  of  the  life  of  Ciirist  contained  in  the  fourth 
Gospel ;  and  that  the  Apocalypse  is,  in  the  deeper  conceptions 
which  pervade  it,  a  repetition  of  the  Gospel.     See  pp.  59-( 

They  shall  prophesy  {irpo<lyr]TeviTov(rip).    See  on  pr<>phet, 
Luke  vii.  26.     Commonly  explained  of  preaching  repentance, 
though  some  take  it  in  the  later  sense  of  foretelling  future  i 
events. 

Clothed  in  sackcloth.  The  garb  of  preachers  of  repent* 
ance.  Compare  Isa.  xxii.  12;  Jer.  iv.  8;  Jonah  iii.  5 ;  Matt 
iii.  4.     For  sackcloth  see  on  Luke  x,  13. 

4.  Two  olive  trees.    Bee  Zech.  ir. 
Candlesticks.    See  Zech.  iv.,  and  note  on  Matt.  r.  15. 
The  God.    Read  mplov  the  Lord  .    Compare  Zech.  it.  14. 

5.  Fire  procaedeth.    Compare  2  Kings  i.  10;  Jer.  ▼.  14^ 

6.  To  shut  up  the  heaven.  As  Elijah,  t  Kings  xviLl; 
Luke  iv.  25  ;  Jas.  v.  17. 

That  it  rain  not  {tva  n^  ^p^  urri?).  Lit.,  that  the  rain 
may  not  wet. 

To  turn  them  into  blood.    Compare  Exod,  vii.  19. 

To  smite  (iraTofoi),  Used  by  John  only  in  the  Apocalypse, 
here  and  xix.  15.  Compare  Matt.  xxvi.  31;  Mark  xiv.  27; 
Luke  xxii.  49,  50;  Acts  xii.  7,  23. 

With  all  plagues  {ira<rri  irXrff^).  Singular  nnmber.  Rct., 
correctly,  with  evert/  jtlaffue.  See  on  Mark  iii.  10.  Not  merely 
with  the  plagues  with  whiuh  Mosea  smote  Eg^pt. 


I 

I 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  519 

7.  The  beast  {Stfplov).  Wild  beast  See  on  eh.  iv.  6.  A 
different  word  from  that  wronglj  translated  heast^  ch.  iv.  6,  7 ; 
v.  6,  etc.    Compare  ch.  ziiL  1 ;  xviL  8,  and  see  Dan.  vlL 

Bottomless  pit  (ifiwraov).    See  on  ch.  ix.  1. 

8.  Dead  bodies  (irmi/Mira).  Bead  wr&fia  carcase.  See  on 
Matt  xxiv.  28 ;  Mark  xv.  45. 

In  the  street  (M  r^?  TrXarelai).  Lit,  ^^vpan  the  street" 
See  on  Lake  xiv.  21. 

The  great  city.  Jerusalem  is  never  called  bj  this  name. 
Different  expositors  refer  it  to  Bome  or  Babylon.  Milligan 
to  Jernsalem. 

Spiritually  (9rv«i//AarMM»9).  TyP^^^J ^'^  ^%^^<^7*  C!om« 
pare  1  Cor.  x.  8,  4. 

Our  Lord.    Bead  airr&v  their  for  i^/idy  our. 

9.  Shall  see  OSXi^roueriy).  Bead  pkhnvai^  do  men  look 
(Bev.),  and  see  on  John  i.  29. 

Shall  not  suffer  {obic  ii^fi^ovaw).    Bead  iy^lovaiv  do  not 

euffer. 

To  be  put  in  graves  {reStjiiHu  Mk  /M^/Mira).  Bead  /m^/mi 
a  tanibj  as  Bev.    Compare  Qen.  xxiiL  4 ;  Isa.  xiv.  19,  20. 

10.  Shall  rejoice  (xafyoSo-fty).  Bead  ^^aZ/Muo-M^,  present  tense^ 
refaice. 


Shall  make  merry  {ivil>pa»SiiaopTai).  Bead  eb^fMbfovra^ 
present  tense,  make  merry;  and  for  the  word  see  note  on  fared 
ewnjpttunulyj  Lnke  xvL  19. 

Shall  send  gifts.    As  on  a  day  of  festivaL    See  KeL  viii 

10, 12. 


520  WORD  8TUDIB8  DT  THB  KSW  TESTAMENT. 

Tormented  {ifiaaimaav).  See  on  vexed,  2  Pet  iL  8^  and 
on  Matt.  iv.  28,  24. 

11.  Spirit  of  life  (iryeOfia  {S99).    liev^lreaiL    See  on  John 

m.  8. 

Entered  into  them.    Compare  Ezek.  xzxviL  1-IOl 

Saw  {Sec^povvTOi).    See  on  John  L  18. 

13.  Earthquake.    See  on  ch.  yL  12. 

Of  men  {ovofAara  ioApmrmp).  lit,  namee  of  mm.  See  on 
ch.  iii.  4. 

Gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven.  The  phrase  signifies 
not  conversion,  nor  repentance,  nor  thanksgiving,  bnt  recognir 
iionj  which  is  its  nsnal  sense  in  scripture.  Compare  Josh.  viL 
19  (Sept).    John  ix.  24 ;  Acto  xii.  23 ;  Kom.  iv.  20. 

15.  The  kingdoms— are  become  {iyhfovro  ai  fiamKuai^ 
Bead  iyipero  ^  ficuriXeia,  the  kingdom — is  become. 

Of  our  Lord,  etc.     Compare  Ps.  ii.  2-9. 

17.  O  Lord  God,  etc.     See  on  ch.  iv.  8. 
And  art  to  come.    Omit 

Hast  taken  to  Thee.    Omit  to  Thee. 

18.  Were  angry  {ofrflaBfiaav).  See  on  wrath,  John  iii.  86 
Compare  Ps.  ii.  1. 

The  time  (o  tuupb^).    See  on  Matt.  xii.  1. 

Reward  (fuaSop).    See  on  2  Pet  ii.  13. 

Destroy  {Buuf)S€ip<u).    Also  to  corrupt. 

Which  destroy  (tov9  Suuf^l^Lpovraf;).    Or,  the  deebroyere. 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  521 

19.  The  temple  (o  voov).  The  sanctuary.  Compare  ver.  1^ 
and  see  on  Matt  iv.  5. 

In  heaven.  Join  with  temjple  of  Chdj  as  Bev.,  instead  of 
with  openedj  as  A.  Y. 

The  ark  of  His  covenant  {i  Kifiwro^  7%  &a3i^4ci79  aimA). 
Kificrro^  ark,  meaning  generally  (my  wooden  box  or  ohett 
Used  of  the  ark  in  the  tabernacle  only  here  and  Heb.  ix.  4 
Elsewhere  of  Noah's  ark.  See  Matt  xxiv.  38 ;  Luke  xvii.  27 ; 
Heb.  xi.  7 ;  1  Pet  iii.  20.  For  covenant,  see  note  on  testa- 
ment. Matt.  xxvL  28.  This  is  the  last  mention  in  scripture  of 
the  ark  of  the  covenant  It  was  lost  when  the  temple  was  de- 
stroyed by  the  ChaldsBans  (2  Kings  xxv.  10),  and  was  wanting 
in  the  second  temple.  Tacitus  says  that  Pompey  ^*  by  right  of 
conquest  entered  the  temple.  Thenceforward  it  became  gen- 
erally known  that  the  habitation  was  empty  and  the  sanctuary 
unoccupied,  no  representation  of  the  deity  being  found  within 
it "  ("  History,"  v.,  9).  According  to  Jewish  tradition  Jeremiah 
had  taken  the  ark  and  all  that  the  Most  Holy  Place  contained, 
and  concealed  them,  before  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  in  a 
cave  at  Mount  Sinai,  whence  they  are  to  be  restored  to  the 
temple  in  the  days  of  Messiah. 

Lightnings  and  voices,  etc.  ^^The  solemn  #a2tHM,  so  to 
speak,  of  the  artillery  of  heaven,  with  which  each  series  of 
visions  is  oondnded*" 


CHAPTER  XIL 

1.  Wonder  (cfifmfw).    Better,  as  Bev.,  dgn.    See  on  Matt 
xxiv.  24. 

Clothed  {wMpiffefiXaffAhni).    Bev.,  better,  arrayed.    See  on 
ch.  iii.  5. 

The  moon  under  her  feet.    See  Cant  vi  10.    The  symbol 
is  usually  taken  to  represent  the  Church. 


WORD  STL'DIEa  IK  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


I  gorrouv,  M»rk  | 


2.  Travailing  in  birth  (i}Slifova-a).     See  i 
xiii.  9,  and  j>ains.  Acta  ii.  24. 

In  pain  (fiatravt^ofUini).    Lit.,  hmnff  tormejUed.    See  on  ch.  I 
xi.  10,  and  references.     For  the  imagery  compare  Isa.  btvi  7,  8  ; 
John  xvi.  21. 

3.  Red  {trvppoit).     See  on  ch.  vi.  4. 

Dragon  (Bptwcwc).     Satan.    See  ver.  9,    The  word  ie  fonnd 
only  in  the  Apocalypse.     In  the  Septuagint,  of  the  serpent  into  I 
M-liicli  Moses'  rod  was  clianged.     In  Isa.  xxvii.  1 ;  Kzek.  xxlx.  3,  . 
of  tlie  crocodile  or  leviathan  of  Job  xli.  1,     In  Jer.  U.  34,  of  »  I 

dragon. 

Crowns  (Bta&^fMiTa).  The  kijigly  crown,  not  the  chaplet 
(trri^vo^).     See  on  ch,  ii.  10. 

4.  Of  the  stars  of  heaven.  Some  expositors  find  an  allus- 
ion to  the  fallen  augela  (Jiide  6). 

Did  cast  them  to  the  earth.    Compare  Dan.  viii.  10. 

To  devour  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born  {tvaSrav 
riicff  TO  TeKvov  avTijii  KaTatf>arf>})-  Kev.,  more  literally,  tAat 
when  she  was  delivered  he  might  devour  her  child.  Profeaaor 
Milligan  says :  "  In  these  words  we  have  the  dragon  doing  what 
Pharaoh  did  to  Israel  (Exod.  i.  15-22),  and  again  and  again,  in 
the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets,  Pharaoh  is  spoken  of  as  the 
dragon  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  13 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  1 ;  Ii.  9 ;  Ezek.  ssix.  3).  Nor 
is  it  without  intereet  to  remember  that  Pharaoh's  crown  was 
wreathed  with  a  dragon  (the  asp  or  serpent  of  Egypt),  and  that 
just  as  the  eagle  was  the  ensign  of  Rome,  80  the  dragon  was 
that  of  Egypt.  Hence  the  significance  of  Moaes'  rod  being 
turned  into  a  serpent," 

5.  A  man-child  (i/iov  app€va).  Lit.,  a  son,  a  male.  The 
correct  reading  is  dpaev.  the  neuter,  not  agreeing  with  the  mas- 
culine individual  (vIop  son)  but  witii  the  neuter  of  the  genua. 


t 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  523 

The  object  is  to  emphasize,  not  the  9eXj  but  thej)eouliar  guali- 
ties  of  Tfuuoidinity — power  and  vigor.  Bev.,  a  Mm,  a  man- 
child.     Compare  John  xvi.  21 ;  Jer.  xx.  15. 

To  rule  {voifuUveuf).  lit,  to  aliepherd  or  tend.  See  on 
Matt.  ii.  6. 

A  rod  of  iron.    Compare  Ps.  ii  9,  and  see  on  eh.  iL  27. 

Was  caught  up  (fifyirdaBfi).  See  on  Matt  xiL  12.  Compare 
Acts  xxiii.  10 ;  Jnde  23. 

6.  Of  God  (&ir^  rov  Omov).  Lit.,  from  Oody  the  preposition 
marking  the  source  from  which  the  preparation  came.  For  a 
similar  nse,  see  Jas.  i.  13,  *^  tempted  ^God." 

7.  There  was  (iyevero).    Lit,  there  ofroee. 

War  in  heaven.  Compare  1  Kings  xxii;  Job  L,  iL;  Zeeh. 
iii. ;  Luke  x.  18. 

Michael.    See  Dan.  x.  13,  21 ;  xii.  1 ;  and  on  Jnde  9. 

Fought  (^oXi/bM/o-oy).  The  correct  reading  is  rot)  iro\e/^a« 
tofigkt.  So  Bev.,  *^  going  forth  to  war  against  the  dragon  {/carii 
Tov  SpdKovTo^).    The  correct  reading  is  fierd  wUh. 

8.  Prevailed  (Jaywratf).  See  on  Lnke  xiv.  80 ;  xvL  8 ;  Jaa. 
V.  16. 

9.  The  great  dragon  (o  hpdicmv  o  i^irt^).  Lit,  the  dragon^ 
the  great  (dragon). 

That  old  serpent  (o  S^  o  ipxaSo^).  Lit,  the  serpent^  the 
old  (serpent).  For  this  habitnal  constmction  in  John,  see  on 
1  John  iv.  9.  For  dpxaio^  oldj  see  on  1  John  ii.  7,  and  com- 
pare ^  he  was  a  mnrderer  iw*  ofyxft^froni  the  heginning^^^  John 
viii.  44 ;  ip^  beginning  being  etymolog^cally  akin  to  apxoSo^ 
old. 


534  WORD  eTimiBe  m  thb  mew  testahbnt. 

The  Devil.    See  on  Matt.  iv.  1. 
Satan.     See  on  Luke  x.  18. 


See  OR    ^H 


The  deceiver  (6  vXavoiv).  Lit.,  he  thai  deoewetL  See  or 
1  John  i.  8. 

World  (oUovfUviiv).  See  on  Loke  ii  1.  The  world  with  all 
its  inhabitautfi. 

Down  to  (ety).     Lit,  into. 

10.  Saying  in  heaven  (X^oiwoi' tcr^  ou/wu^).  The  coi^ 
rect  reading  joins  in  hea/ven  with  great  voice.  So  Kev.  / 
iteard  a  ffreat  voice  in  heaven. 

Now  (oprt).     See  on  John  xiii.  33. 

Is  come  (iyeveTo).  Lit.,  came  to  pass.  Alford  Baya :  "  It  ii 
impoBBible  in  Englieh  to  join  to  a  particle  of  present  time,  such 
SB  a/)T*  n(ni\  a  verb  in  aoristie  time.  We  are  driven  to  the  per- 
fect in  siicli  caeee. 

Salvation,  power,  the  kingdom.  All  have  the  article :  the 
salvation,  etc.  So  Itev,  The  phrase,  now  is  come  the  salvation^ 
etc.,  nieana  that  th^e  are  realized  and  established.  Some,  less 
correctly,  render,  now  is  the  aaiuatum,  etc.,  become  our  God's. 
Compare  Luke  iii.  6. 

Power  (i^ovcia).    See  on  Mark  ii.  10.     Rev.,  authority. 

The  accuser  of  our  brethren  {o  xaTijyopo'i  r&v  a£eX<^i' 
ffftup).  The  correct  form  of  the  Greek  for  accuser  is  a  tran- 
script of  the  Rabbinical  Hebrew,  KaTi^ymp.  The  Rabbins  had 
a  corresponding  term  trw^ytop  for  Michael,  as  the  advocate  of 
God's  people.  The  phrase  is  applied  to  Satan  nowhere  else  in 
the  New  Testament. 

Is  cast  down  (xarc/SXifSi]).  Tlie  aoriet  tense.  Once  and  for 
all.    Compare  John  xii.  31;  xvi.  8,  11. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  525 

Which  accuseth  (o  KaTrjyop&p).  Lit.,  the  one  cuxmsing.  The 
iirticle  with  the  present  participle  expresses  what  is  habituaL 

11.  Overcame  (hUcqaav).    See  on  1  John  iL  18. 

By  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  (S«^  r6  aXfia  rov  apvtov).  The 
preposition  hid  with  the  aceasative  signifies  an  account  of. 
Hence  Rev.,  correctly,  because  of:  in  virtne  of  the  shedding  of 
that  blood.  Similarly  in  the  succeeding  clause,  ^^  becckuee  of  the 
word  of  their  testimony."    For  lambj  see  on  ch.  v,  6. 

Testimony  (jiapTvpCa^).    See  on  John  L  7. 

They  loved  not  their  life  even  unto  death.  Alford,  cor- 
rectly, ^^they  carried  their  not^ove  of  their  life  even  unto 
death." 

12.  DweW  {a-fofpovpre^).  See  on  John  L 14.  Compare  oh.  viL 
15 ;  xiii.  6  ;  xxi.  3. 

To  the  inhabiters  {rok  Karoucowrai).  Omit  Bead^as  Bev., 
woe  for  ike  earth  and  for  the  sea. 

Wrath  {Ih/fAhv).    See  on  John  iu.  36. 

Time  {tcaipbv).    See  on  Matt  ziL  1 ;  Mark  L 15 ;  Acts  L  7. 

14.  Two  wings.  The  definite  article  ai  the  should  be  ad* 
ded :  '^  the  two  wings."  Compare  Exod.  ziz.  4 ;  Dent  xzzii. 
11 ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  7. 

The  great  eagle.  The  article  does  not  point  to  the  eagle  of 
ch.  viii.  13,  but  is  generic. 

A  time  and  times  and  half  a  time.  Three  years  and  a 
half.     See  on  ch.  xi.  2. 

15.  Cause  her  to  be  carried  away  of  the  flood  {ratrnip 
mnofio^pflTov  iroiiioTf).    Lit,  might  make  her  one  carried  away 


526  WORD   STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

h/  the  gtrecmi :  a  ri/ver-hame  one.    The  word  occurs  onlj  here 
in  the  New  Testament. 

17.  Jesus  Christ.    Omit  Christ 

The  best  texts  add  to  this  chapter  the  opening  words  of  ch« 
xiii.  (A.  y.),  ^'  And  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea."  Some, 
however,  change  iar^Aqv  I  stood,  to  i<rrdSii  he  etood,  referring 
to  the  dragon.    So  £ev. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1.  Beast  {Sfiplop).  Properly  rendered.  See  remarks  on  {ifta 
Umnff  oreat^resj  ch.  iv.  6. 

Rise  up  {audfiaSvov).  Bev.,  better,  coming  up,  thns  giving 
the  force  of  the  participle. 

Ten  horns.    Compare  Dan.  vii.  7. 

Crowns  (SusSi^fiara).    Compare  ch.  xii.  8.    See  on  eh.  ii.  10. 

The  name  {Svofia).  Sead  ov6fjLara  namee.  On  each  head  a 
name. 

2.  A  leopard  {irapSdKei).  The  ancients  do  not  seem  to 
have  distinguished  between  the  leopard,  the  panther,  and  the 
ounce.  The  word  stands  for  either.  Leopard  is  leo-pardj  the 
liaii'pa/rdy  which  was  supposed  to  be  a  mongrel  between  a 
panther  and  a  lioness.     Compare  Dan.  vii.  6. 

Bear.    Compare  Dan.  vii.  5. 

Lion.    Compare  Dan.  vii.  4. 

3.  I  saw  {eEbov).    Omitted  in  the  best  texts. 

Wounded  (ia'<f}ayfihniv).  Lit.,  slain.  See  on  ch.  v.  6.  The 
Rev.  smitten  is  questionable.     The  word  occurs  eight  times  in 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  527 

the  Apocalypse,  and  in  seven  of  these  it  must  be  rendered  slain 
or  slaughtered.  Professor  Milligan  rightly  observes  that  the 
statement  is  the  counterpart  of  that  in  ver.  6,  where  we  read  of 
the  Lainh  as  though  it  had  been  slaughtered.  In  both  cases 
there  had  been  actual  death,  and  in  both  revival  The  one  is  a 
mocking  countei*part  of  the  other. 

Deadly  wound  (ttXi^t^  tov  Savdrov).  Lit,  stroke  of  death. 
Bev.,  death-stroke. 

After  the  beast  (drr^w  rov  Briplov).  A  pregnant  oonstmct- 
iou  for  wondered  at  amd  followed  after. 

4.  Which  gave  (69  <S^k^\  The  correct  reading  is  fri  ^*  ia* 
cause  he  gave." 

Who  is  h'ke  unto  the  beast?  A  parody  on  a  similar 
ascription  to  Ood.  See  Isa.  xl.  18,  25 ;  xlvi.  5 ;  Ps.  cxiii.  5 ; 
Micah  vii.  18 ;  Jer.  xlix.  19.     Compare  ch.  xviii.  18. 

5.  To  continue  forty  and  two  months  (Troi^o-oi  yJqvwi 
reccepilKovTa  Bvo).  Lit.,  to  make  forty  and  ttvo  months.  Sim- 
ilarly, Acts  XV.  33,  iroii^avTe^  ypovov  having  tarried  a  space/ 
lit.,  hamng  made  a  time.  See  on  continue  there  a  year^  Jas. 
iv.  13.  The  best  expositors,  however,  render  iroitqaa^  absolutely^ 
to  work^  and  the  following  accusative  as  the  accusative  of  dura- 
tion, ^^ during  forty  and  two  months."  Bev.,  margin,^  dohia 
works  during^  etc.     See  Dan.  xL  28. 

6.  In  blasphemy  (efe  pkaur^fUav).  Bead  fiXMrt^fua^ 
hlasphejnies.  Bev.,  giving  the  force  of  ek  more  correctly,  ^^for 
blasphemies." 

And  them  that  dwell  in  heaven  (koX  roi^  iv  rfS  ovpav^ 
aierfvovvTiK).  Tlie  best  texts  omit  xaX  cmdy  making  the  following 
words  in  apposition  with  Spofia  and  atcrfv^p  name  and  taber- 
nacle. Thus  the  literal  sense  would  be  to  blaspheme  the  name 
and  tabernacle  which  dwell  in  heaven.  ^^  The  meaning  is  to  en- 
hance the  enormity  of  the  blasphemy  by  bringing  out  the  lofty 


538  WORD  STDDIES  HT  THB  IfBW  TB8TAHHNT. 

nature  of  God'a  holy  name  and  dwelling-place  "  (AlEord).    Tha  , 
word  dwell  is,  literally,  tohernaole.     See  oa  ch.  xiL  12. 

7.  The  saints  {rmv  ariuov).     See  on  Acts  xxvi.  10. 

All  kindreds  (Tra^ran  ^uXiiv).  Xtev.,  more  literally  and  cor- 
rectly, eijery  tribe.  See  on  ch.  i.  7 ;  v.  9,  After  tribe  insert 
KoX  \aov  and  people.     See  on  1  Pet,  iL  9. 


Nation  (?3v(«).     See  on  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 

8.  From  the  foundation  of  the  world.    These  words  may  ] 
be  construed  witli  slain  or  with  loriUen.     In  favor  of  the  latter  \ 
ia  ch,  xviii.  8  ;  of  the  former,  1  Pet.  i.  19,  20.     Alford,  pertin- 
ently as  I  think,  urges  the  poBitioii  of  the  words  in  favor  of  i 
the  connection  with  slain,  and  says  that  had  it  not  been  for  Uie 
apparent  difficulty  of  the  sense  thus  conveyed,  no  one  would   ' 
have  thought  of  going  so  far  back  as  to  hatK  been  written  for  a 
oonaection.     Render,  as  Rev.,  the  Lamb  that  hath  been  slain 
from,  the  foundation  of  the  -world.     Kara^oXij  foundation  is 
literally  a  throwing  or  laying  doion,  from  xaTa^aXKn  to  throia 
down;  \ieaix  a  laying  down  of  a  foundation. 

10.  He  that  leadeth  into  captivity  shall  go  into  cap- 
tivity (€?  Tt!  ai-jQUiKaiaiav  avvarfet,  eli  at](/Mi\aio'iav  VTrdyei), 
Lit.,  if  any  one  assemble  captiviti/  (i.e.,  bring  together  captives) 
into  oaptwity  he  goeth  aiaay.  The  best  texts  insert  e«  inia  be- 
fore the  first  eaptvoity,  and  omit  assemble,  thus  reading  if  any 
man  is  for  activity  into  activity  he  goeth.  So  Rev.  See  on 
dispersion,  John  vii.  35.  Compare  Jer.  xv.  2;  xliii.  11,  The 
persecutors  of  the  Chnrch  shall  suffer  that  which  they  inflict  I 
on  the  saints. 

Sword  (jMxaipy).    See  on  ch.  vi.  4. 

Here.    In  the  thought  that  God  judgeth  in  the  earth. 

14.  An  image  to  the  beast  {elKova  tw  ^plrp).     EIkvv  is  a 
Jigwre  or  likeness.   Thus  Matt.  xxu.  20,  of  the  likeness  of  Ceesax  J 


RBVKLATIOII  OF  JOHIT. 

on  the  coin.  Rom.  i.  21,  aa  image  of  men,  birds,  beasts,  etc. 
Col.  iii.  10,  "  the  i-mage  of  Ilim  that  created  him ; "  i.e.,  the 
moral  likeness  of  renewed  men  to  (rod.  Christ  is  called  cAe 
image  of  God  (Col,  i.  15 ;  2  Cor,  iv.  4).  Besides  the  idea  of 
lik^ieas,  the  word  involves  the  idea  of  repreaentation,  though 
not  of  perfe-d  representation.  Thus,  man  is  said  to  be  the 
image  of  God  (1  Cor.  \\.  7).  In  this  it  resembles  -yapaiCT^p 
image  in  Ileb.  i.  3.  Csesar's  image  on  the  coin,  the  reflection 
of  the  Bun  in  the  water  (Plato,  "  Plisedo,"  99) ;  and  the  statue 
or  image  of  the  beast  in  this  passage,  are  eUcwv. 

The  word  also  involves  the  idea  of  man^estaiion.  Thus, 
Col.  i.  15,  where,  in  the  image  there  is  an  implied  contrast 
with  the  invisible  God.  Hence  Philo  applied  the  term  to  the 
Logos.     See  on  John  i.  1. 

The  word  played  an  important  part  in  the  Arian  controversy, 
in  which  the  distinction  was  sharply  emphasized  between  euemv 
image  as  aaauming  a  prototj-pe,  and  therefore  as  properly  rep- 
resenting the  relation  of  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  o/ioiapM 
likeness,  as  implying  mere  similitude,  and  not  embodying  the 
esaential  verity  of  the  prototype.  Tlie  image  involves  the  like- 
nesa,  but  the  likeness  does  not  involve  the  image.  The  latter 
may  imply  only  an  accidental  resemblance,  while  the  former  is 
a  veritable  repreaentation.    Christ  is  therefore  the  elimv  of  God. 

77ie  image  of  the  beast  occurs  ten  times  in  the  Apocalypse; 
four  times  in  this  chapter,  and  in  xiv.  9, 11 ;  xv.  3 ;  xvi,  2 ;  xix. 
20 ;  XX.  4. 

15.  Speak.  This  is  snppoBed  by  some  to  refer  to  the  tricks  of 
pagan  priests  in  making  pictures  and  statues  appear  to  speak. 

16.  A  mark  (;^apa7>w»).  The  word  occurs  frequently  in  the 
Apocalypse,  and  only  once  elsewhere  (Acts  xvii.  29)  on  which 
see  note.  Commentators  find  illustrations  in  the  brand  set 
upon  slaves  by  their  masters,  or  upon  soldiers  by  their  mon- 
archs,  and  in  the  branding  of  slaves  attached  to  certain  temples, 
Herodotus  describes  a  temple  to  Hercules  at  the  Canopic  month 
of  the  Nile,  and  says :  "  IE  a  slave  runs  away  from  his  master, 
and  taking  sanctuary  at  this  shrine  gives  himself  up  to  the  god, 

Vol.  1L--34 


530 


WORD  STT'DIES  IN  THE  NEW  TE8TAMEBT. 


and  receives  certain  Bacred  marks  upon  his  person,  whosoever  li] 
master  may  be,  he  cannot  lay  liand  on  hitn  "  (ii.,  113).  In  the 
treatise  "concerning  tlie  Syrian  goddess"  falsely  attributed  to 
Lucian,  it  is  said  of  the  slaves  of  the  temple,  '*  all  are  branded, 
some  upoQ  the  wrist  and  some  upon  the  neck."  Paul,  in  Gal., 
vi.  1 7,  applies  the  word  for  these  brands,  arlrfiuiTa.  to  the  m. 
of  Christ's  service  which  he  bears  in  bis  body.  In  3  Maccal 
ii.  29,  we  read  that  Ptolemy  Philopator  required  all  the  Jews 
of  Alexandria  to  be  registered  among  the  common  people;  and 
that  those  wiio  were  thus  registered  were  to  be  7naried  {xapda- 
trea^at)  on  their  persons  by  the  ivy-leaf  symbol  of  Dionysus 
(Bacchus).  Id  Lev.  xix.  28,  the  Israelites  are  forbidden  to 
make  cuttings  in  their  flesh  for  the  dead  and  to  pn'nt  markt 
{ypafifiara  oTixra)  upon  themselves. 


17.  The  number.  The  method  of  mystic  numbering  oV 
tained  alike  among  pagan  Greeks,  Gnostics,  Christian  Fathers, 
and  Jewish  Cabbalists.  Jupiter  was  invoked  under  the  number 
717  contained  in  the  letters  'fl  'APXH  the  beginning.  Tlie 
Gnostics  affixed  to  their  gems  and  amulets  the  mystic  wordj 
a^patra^  or  a^pa^<K,  under  the  idea  of  some  virtue  attaching  tl 
its  number,  365,  as  being  that  of  the  days  of  the  solar  cycle 
Barnabas  and  Clement  of  Alexandria  speak  of  the  virtue  of  the  " 
□umber  318  as  being  that  of  IHT,  the  common  abbreviation  for 
Jesus  crucified.  In  the  pseudo-Sybilline  verses,  written  by 
Christians,  about  the  end  probably  of  the  second  century,  are 
found  versified  enigmas  giving  the  number  and  requiring  the 
name.  The  translation  of  one  of  these  on  the  word  Jemtt  is  as 
follows:  "lie  will  come  upon  earth  clothed  with  flesh  like 
mortal  men.  His  name  contains  four  vowels  and  two  conso- 
nants :  two  of  the  former  being  sounded  together.  And  I  will 
declare  the  entire  number.  For  the  name  will  exhibit  to  in» 
credulous  men  eight  units,  eight  tens,  and  eight  hundreds." 

18.  Here  is  wisdom.    Directing  attention  to  the  challenj 
which  follows. 


ueo, 

.hee^^^ 


Count  (-^^(^tirai).     See  on  Luke  x 


BBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  531 

The  number  of  a  man.  It  is  counted  as  men  usually  count. 
Compare  ch.  zxi.  17,  and  a  marCBjpea^  Isa.  viii.  1.  Some  explain, 
a  symbolical  number  denoting  a  person. 

Six  hundred  threescore  and  six  (x*  f«  ?')•  £&ch  letter 
represents  a  component  of  the  whole  number :  ;^  =  600 ;  ^  =  60 ; 
9'  =  6.  In  the  earlier  MSS.  it  is  written  in  full,  I^amcoo-um 
i^icopra  i^.  The  method  of  reading  generally  adopted  is  that 
known  as  the  Ohematria  of  the  Rabbins,  or  in  Greek,  lao^i^la 
numerical  equaliiyy  which  assigns  each  letter  of  a  name  its 
usual  numerical  value,  and  gives  the  sum  of  such  numbers  as 
the  equivalent  of  the  name.  Thus,  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas, 
we  are  told  that  the  name  ^Itfajov^  Jestu  is  expressed  by  the 
number  888.  1  =  10;  iy  =  8;  <r=200;  o  =  70;  i;  =  400; 
o-  =  200.  The  majority  of  tlie  commentators  use  the  Greek 
alphabet  in  computation ;  others,  however,  employ  the  Hebrew ; 
while  a  third  class  employ  the  Roman  numerals. 

The  interpretations  of  this  number  form  a  jungle  from  which 
escape  is  apparently  hopeless.  Reuss  says :  "  This  famous  num- 
ber has  been  made  to  yield  almost  all  the  historical  names  of 
the  past  eighteen  centuries:  Titus,  Vespasian,  and  Simon  Gioras ; 
Julian  the  Apostate  and  Genseric;  Mahomet  and  Luther;  Ben- 
edict IX.  and  Louis  XY. ;  Napoleon  I.  and  the  Duke  of  Reich- 
stadt ;  and  it  would  not  be  difficult,  on  the  same  principles,  to 
read  in  it  one  another's  names."  Some  of  tlie  favorite  names 
are  Aareivo^f  Latinua^  describing  the  common  character  of  the 
rulers  of  the  former  pagan  Roman  Empire :  Nero  Csdsar ;  Dio- 
cletian ;  ys!  the  name  of  Christ  abridged,  and  f  the  emblem  of 
the  serpent,  so  that  the  sublimated  sense  is  the  Messiah  of  Satan. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  A  lamb.    Read  "  the  lamb."    See  ch.  v.  6. 

Stood  (ion/Ko^).     The  participle,  stcMding^  as  Rev. 

His  Father's  name.    Add  avrov  koX  to  Bpofia  Uis  and  the 
natne^  and  render  as  Rev.,  His  name  and  the  name  qfHis  Father. 


532  WORD  STUDIBS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  Adoration  of  the  Lamb  is  the  enbject  of  the  great  altar 
piece  in  the  church  of  St.  Bavon  at  Ghent,  hy  John  and 
Hubert  Van  Eyck.  Tlie  acene  is  laid  in  a  landscape.  The 
background  is  formed  by  a  Flemish  city,  probably  intended  to 
represent  Jenisaleui,  and  by  churches  and  monasteries  ia  the 
early  Netherland  style.  The  middle  ground  is  occupied  by 
trees,  meadows,  and  green  slopes.  In  the  very  centre  of  the 
picture  a  square  altar  is  hung  with  red  damask  and  covered  with 
a  white  cloth.  Here  stands  a  Iamb,  from  whose  breast  a  stream 
of  blood  issues  into  a  crystal  glass.  Angels  kneel  round  the  altar 
with  parti-colored  wings  and  variegated  dresses,  many  of  them 
praying  with  joined  hands,  others  holding  aloft  the  emblems  of 
the  passion,  two  in  front  waving  censers.  From  the  right,  be- 
hind the  altar,  issues  a  numerous  band  of  female  saints,  all  in 
ricli  and  varied  costumes,  fair  hair  floating  over  their  shoul- 
ders, and  palms  in  their  hands.  Foremost  may  be  noticed  Sta. 
Barbara  and  Sta.  Agnes.  From  the  left  advance  popes,  card- 
inals, bishops,  monks,  and  minor  clergy,  with  crosiers,  crosses, 
and  palms.  In  the  centre,  near  the  base,  a  small  octagonal 
fountain  of  stone  projects  a  stream  into  a  clear  rill.  Two 
groups  are  in  adoration  on  eacli  side  of  the  fountain, — on  the 
right,  the  twelve  apostles  kneeling  barefoot,  and  an  array  of 
popes,  cardinals,  and  bishops,  with  a  miscellaneous  crowd  of 
church-people;  on  the  left,  kings  and  princes  in  various  cos- 
tumes. They  are  surrounded  by  a  wilderness  of  flowering 
sbrubs,  lilies,  and  other  plants.  On  the  wings  of  the  picture 
Rumerons  worshippers  move  towai-d  the  place  of  worship, — 
crusaders,  knights,  kings,  and  princes,  including  the  figures  of 
the  two  artists  on  horseback.  "  Here,  approaching  from  all 
sides,  are  seen  that  '  great  multitude  of  all  nations  and  kindreds 
and  people  and  tongues ' — the  holy  warriors  and  the  holy  pil- 
grims, coming  in  solemn  processions  from  afar — with  other 
throngs  already  arrived  in  the  celestial  plain,  clothed  in  white 
robes,  and  holding  palms  in  their  hands.  Their  forms  are  like 
unto  onrs ;  the  landscape  around  them  is  a  mere  transcript  of  the 
sweet  face  of  our  outer  nature ;  tlie  graceful  wrought-iron  foun- 
tain iti  the  midst  is  such  an  one  as  still  send^  foi-th  its  streams 
in  ati  ancient  Flemish  city;  yet  we  feel  these  creatures  to  be 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  533 

beings  from  whose  eyes  God  has  wiped  awaj  all  tears — who  will 
hunger  and  thirst  no  more;  our  imagination  invests  these  flow- 
ery meads  with  the  peace  and  radiance  of  celestial  precincts, 
while  the  streams  of  the  fomitain  are  converted  into  living 
waters,  to  which  the  Lamb  Himself  will  lead  His  redeemed. 
Here,  in  short,  where  all  is  hnman  and  natnral  in  form,  the 
spiritual  depths  of  our  nature  are  stirred"  (Mrs.  Jameson, 
"History  of  Our  Lord,"  ii.,  339). 

2.  And  I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  (/col  ^<k>i^i^  i^icovaa 
xiSapfpS&v).  The  correct  reading  is,  seal  17  ^vtf  tjv  ijtcovaa  w 
KiSaptpSAv  and  the  voice  which  I  hea/rd  (was)  ob  (the  voice)  of 
ha/rpers.  KiSap^So^  is  from  K^^apa  a  ha/rp  (see  on  ch.  v.  8)  and 
fltfSo^  a  singer.  Properly,  one  who  sings,  accompanying  himself 
on  the  harp. 

3.  Beasts  ((Tcmvi/).     Bev.,  living  creatwreB.     See  on  ch.  iv.  6. 
Redeemed  {^ffopcuryJkvoi).    Bev.,  correctly,  j?urcAa«M2^ 

4.  Were  not  defiled  {pvK  ifjMXvv^riaaii).  The  verb  means 
properly  to  besmear  or  besmirch^  and  is  never  used  in  a  good 
sense,  as  fualvetv  (John  xviii.  28 ;  Jude  8),  which  in  classical 
Greek  is  sometimes  applied  to  staining  with  color.  See  on  1 
Pet.  i.  4. 

Virgins  {irapSivoi).  Either  celibate  or  living  in  chastity 
whether  in  married  or  single  life.  See  1  Oor.  viL  1-7,  29 ;  2 
Cor.  xi.  2. 

First-fruits  (o^a/^).     See  on  Jas.  i.  18. 

5.  Guile  (&(Xo9).     Read  ^^^vSo^  He. 

Without  fault  {ifuafMoi).    Bev.,  blemish.    See  on  1  Pet  i.  19. 
Before  the  throne  of  God.    Omit. 

6.  In  the  midst  of  heaven  {iv  fAeaoupat^/uiTt).  Bev.,  in 
midrhea/oen.    See  on  ch.  viii.  13. 


WORD  STODIGS  IN  THB  NKW  TESTAHEST. 

The  everlasting  Gospel  {tva/f^eKtov  atiuvtov).  No  article. 
Hence  Uev.,  an  eternal  Gospel.  Milligan  thioke  this  is  to  be 
nntierstood  in  the  same  sense  as  proph^»ying  (ch.  x.  11).  A'lm- 
VMP  indiides  more  than  mere  duration  in  time.  It  is  applied  to 
that  of  whicii  time  is  not  a  meaeuro.  As  applied  to  the  Gospel 
it  marks  its  likeness  to  Him  whose  being  is  not  bounded  hy 
time. 


To  preach  unto  {eiayyeXiTai  eiri).  'Rev., proclaim,  which  is 
lietter,  because  more  general  and  wider  in  meaning.  'Ewt  which 
is  omitted  from  the  Ilec.  Tex.  is  ewer,  throughout  the  extent  of. 
Compare  Matt,  xxiv.  14. 

That  dwell  (xaTotxoCvTiK).  Read  Ka3i}/iip<m<t  thai  aii.  So 
Bev.,  in  margin.     Compare  Matt.  iv.  16;  Luke  i.  79.  h 

8.  Another.    Add  SeureptK  a  eeamd.  \ 

Is  fallen  {eiretrev).  Lit,^«^  The  prophetic  aorist  ezpreee- 
ing  the  certainty  of  the  fall.     Compare  Isa.  xxi.  9 ;  Jer.  li.  7,  8. 

ft.  The  third  angel  (rp/ros  ayye\o<t).  Add  aU«t  another. 
Kev.,  another  angel,  a  third. 

10.  Poured  out  without  mixture  {K^KepturfUvov  oKparov). 
Lit.,  which  is  mingled  unmiaxil.  From  the  universal  custom 
of  mixing  wine  with  water  for  drinking,  the  word  mingle  came 
to  be  used  in  the  general  sense  of  prepare  by  putting  into  M« 
CMp.     Hence,  to  ^uj- om/. 


Cup  of  His  anger.    Compare  Fs.  Ixxv.  8. 


Brimstone  (^eiy).  Commonly  taken  as  the  neuter  of  3«bt 
divine;  that  is,  divine  incense,  since  burning  brimstone  was 
regarded  aa  having  power  to  pnrify  and  to  avert  contagion.  By 
others  it  is  referred  to  3ua>  to  hum,  and  hence  to  sacrijice. 


M 


11.  Torment  {ffavavKr/iov). 
vexed,  2  Pet.  ii.  8. 


!  on  Matt  iv.  23,  24 ;  sea 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  535 

Goeth  up-    See  Isa.  zxxiv.  9,  10;  Qeu.  xix.  28. 

Rest  {ivdiravaiv).  See  on  give  rett^  Matt  xi.  28,  and  resteth, 
1  Pet.  iv.  14. 

12.  Here  are  they.  Omit  here  are^  and  read,  as  Bey.,  the 
jxUience  of  the  saifUSj  they  that  keep. 

The  faith  of  Jesus.    Which  has  Jesns  for  its  object 

13.  Blessed  (juucdp&o$).    See  on  Matt  v,  3. 

From  henceforth  {cnr  iprri).  See  on  John  xiii.  33.  To  be 
joined  as  in  A.  V.  and  Bev.,  with  die  in  the  preceding  clanse, 
and  not  with  blessed^  nor  with  the  following  danse.  Not  /ram 
henceforth  saith  the  Spirit.  The  meaning  is  variously  explained. 
Some,  from  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  age  and  onward  to 
the  end ;  others,  from  the  moment  of  death,  connecting  hence- 
forth  with  hleased;  others  from  the  time  when  the  harvest  of 
the  earth  is  about  to  be  reaped.  Sophocles  says :  ''  Show  all 
religions  reverence  to  the  gods,  for  all  other  things  Father 
Zens  counts  secondary ;  for  the  reward  of  piety  follows  men 
in  death.  Whether  they  live  or  die  it  passeth  not  away" 
("  Philoctetes,"  1441-1444). 

That  they  may  rest  (iiw  iofonrawrwirrai).  See  on  Matt  xL 
28.    The  ha  that  gives  the  ground  of  the  Heseed. 


Labors  {/ciTnov),  From  tcoirm  to  strike.  Hence  to  beat  the 
breast  in  grief.  K&n^  is,  therefore,  primarily,  a  smiting  as  a 
sign  of  sorrow,  and  then  sorrow  itself.  As  labor^  it  is  labor 
which  involves  weariness  and  sorrow. 

Follow  them  (<LcoXouSe!  ^mt*  am&v).  Bather,  aocompamiy. 
Bev.,  foUow  with  them.  Compare  Matt  iv.  25  *  Mark  iiL  7| 
etc.    See  on  John  i.  43. 

15.  Thrust  in  {iriiir^v).    Lit,  send.    Bey.,  send  forth. 

Harvest  {Sepur^i^).    See  on  Luke  x.  2. 


536  WORD  STODTES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT, 

Is  ripe  {i^pdvSi}).    Lit,  was  dri^.    Compare  Mark  zi.  ! 
John  XV.  6.     Rev.,  is  over-ripe. 


16.  Thrust  in  ( 


3dKep).     Lit.,  cast. 

v).      Properly,  sanctuary.     See  on  Matt. 


17.  Temple  (w 
iv.  5. 

18.  Altar  {^vauumiplov).     See  on  Acts  xvii.  23. 

Which  has  power  {eyatv  e^owlav).  Lit.,  haaing  jx»o«r. 
Some  texts  add  the  article  o.     So  Rev.,  "  he  that  hath  power." 

Fire.     In  the  Greek  with  the  article,  the  fire. 

Cry  (lepairffi).     See  on  Luke  i.  42. 

Thy  sharp  sickle.     Lit,  thy  sickla,  the  sharp. 

Gather  {rpvyrfaov).  From  rpvyri  drynesSy  inclnded  in  the 
notion  of  rJjieness,  and  hence  t/ie  vintage,  harvest.  The  verb 
means  therefore  io  gather  ripe  fruii.  It  occurs  only  in  this 
chapter  and  in  Lnke  vi,  44. 

Grapes  (cmn^vXal).     The  noun  in  the  singular  means  also  a 

hunch  of  grapes. 

Are  fully  ripe  {^Kfuurav).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
From  oK/iij,  tranecribed  in  acme,  the  highest  point.  Hence  the 
verb  means  to  reach  the  height  of  growth,  to  be  ripe. 

19.  The  great  wine-press  {-rvv  \tjvov  rhv  ftiyav).  The 
Greek  student  will  note  the  masculine  adjective  with  the 
feminine  nonn,  posBibly  because  the  gender  of  the  nona 
is  doubtful.  The  Rev.,  in  rendering  more  literally,  is  more 
forcible:  the  wine-press,  the  great  wi?ie-press.  See  on  Matt, 
xxi.  33. 


20.   Furlongs  (crraSian 
English  feet 


The  furlong  or  Btadiura  was  C06J 


J 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  5tS7 


CHAPTER  Xr. 

1.  The  seven  last  plagues  {irknyit^  hrri^  r^  icxdra/^). 
Lit.,  sevenjilagues  the  last.  Bev.,  "  which  a/re  the  last"  See 
on  Mark  iil  10 ;  Luke  x.  30. 

Is  filled  up  {ireXka^).  More  correctly,  brought  to  €mi  end 
(riXjosi).  Kev.,  Jinished.  Lit,  toaa  fished,  the  prophetic  ao- 
rist,  which  speaks  of  a  thing  foreseen  and  decided  as  if  already 
done. 

2.  A  sea  of  glass  {SdXeuraop  voKivfiv).  Rev.,  better,  a 
glassy  sea.     See  on  ch.  iv.  6. 

Had  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast  {vik&vtcu;  itc  rw 
Sffplov).  The  expression  is  pecnliar.  Lit,  conquered  out  of, 
Tlie  constmction  is  nniqne  in  the  New  Testament  The  phrase 
signifies,  not  as  A.  Y.,  victory  over^  bnt  coming  tritunphant  oiU 
of  {ix).    So  Bev.,  that  come  victorious  from  the  beast. 

Over  his  mark.    Omit 

Standing  on  (^0-  Better,  as  Bev.,  Sy;  on  the  shore  of  aa^ 
did  the  Israelites  when  they  sang  the  song  alluded  to  in  ver.  8. 

The  harps  of  God.  Omit  the.  Instruments  devoted  wholly 
to  His  praise.    Compare  ch.  v.  8 ;  xiv.  2. 

3.  The  song  of  Moses.  See  Exod.  xv.  Compare  Deut 
zxxii. ;  to  which  some  refer  this  allusion. 

The  servant  of  God.  See  Exod.  xiv.  31 ;  Nam.  xii.  7; 
Ps.  cv.  26 ;  Heb.  iii.  6. 

The  song  of  the  Lamb.  There  are  not  two  distinct  songs. 
The  song  of  Moses  is  the  song  of  the  Lamb.  The  Old  and 
the  New  Testament  churches  are  one. 


5S8  WOBD  STUDIES  IS  THE  HEW  TBSTAHSNT. 

Great  and  marvellous  are  Thy  works.  Pa.  cxi.  2; 
cucxix.  14;  1  Cbroii.  xvi.  9. 

Just  and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Rev.,  riff/Ueoua  for  ju«t. 
See  Deut.  xxxii.  4. 

King  of  saints  {^atrikeim  r&v  a^iav).  The  readinga  differ. 
Some  read  for  saints,  i^vatv  of  the  nations ;  others  awvcav  of 
the  ages.     So  Rev.    Compare  Jer.  x.  7. 

4.  Who  shall  not  fear  Thee  ?    See  Jer.  x.  7.    Omit  ths*. 

Holy  (o<rM>v).  See  on  Luke  i.  75.  The  term  is  applied  to 
Chriat  in  Acta  ii.  27,  35 ;  Eeb.  vii.  26.  To  God  only  here 
and  cli.  xvi.  5,  where  the  correct  reading  is  o  2<rio«  thou  holy 
one,  instead  of  o  eaofievo^  whinh  shaU  be. 

All  nations  shall  come.  Compare  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  9 ;  laa.  ii. 
2-4  ;  Ixvi.  23  ;  Mic.  iv.  2. 

Judgments  (StKOMd^iara).  Not  merelj  divine  decisions,  but 
w«a  acte  generally.     So  Rev.     Primarily,  the  word  eigni- 

s  that  which  has  been  deemed  right  so  as  to  have  the  force 
of  law.  Hence  an  ordinance  (Luke  i.  6 ;  Heb.  ix.  1  ;  Rom.  i. 
32).  A  judicial  decision  for  or  against  (liom.  v.  16j.  A  right- 
eous deed.     See  ch.  xix.  8. 

5.  Behold.    Omit. 

The  temple  of  the  tabernacle  (o  vooe  r^f  incijp^).  The 
sanctuary  of  the  tabernacle.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  5. 

Of  the  testimony.  See  AcCh  vii.  44.  The  tabernacle  was 
called  "the  Tabernacle  of  the  TcBtimony"  becauee  it  contained 
the  ark  with  the  law  of  God  which  testifiee  against  ein.  See 
Exod.  XXV.  16,  21 ;  xxx,  36;  xxxiv.  29  ;  xxxviii.  21.  Com- 
pare ch.  xi.  19. 

G.  Linen  (\ivov).  The  Rev.  follows  the  reading  "tUSop  ^ons, 
after  the  analogy  of  Ezek.  xxviii.  13,  "  Every  precious  stune 


BEVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  539 

was  tlij  cohering."    The  idea  is  that  of  raiment  studded  with 
precious  stones.     See  on  ch.  iL  17. 

White  {7s4ifA'!rp6p).  Mostly  applied  in  the  New  Testament  to 
clothing^  as  Luke  xxiii.  11 ;  Acts  x.  30  ;  Jas.  ii.  2.  Also  to  the 
water  of  life  (ch.  xxii.  1),  and  the  marning-etar  (ch.  xxiL  16). 
Rev.y  bright. 

Girt  round  their  breasts.  As  the  Lord  in  the  vision  of 
i.  13  ;  where,  however,  fuurroif  jXMpa  is  used  instead  of  <rn^ 
breasts. 

7.  Vials  {<l>u£Ka/9).    Rev.,  bawls.    See  on  ch.  y.  8. 

8.  Smoke.  Compare  Exod.  xl.  34 ;  1  Kings  viiL  10 ;  Ps. 
xviii.  8  ;  Isa.  vi.  4 ;  Ezek.  x.  2-4. 

None  was  able  to  enter.  *'  God  cannot  be  approached  at 
the  moment  when  He  is  revealing  Himself  in  all  the  terrors  of 
His  indignation  "  (Milligan).     See  £xod.  xix.  21. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

1.  The  vials.    Add  seven. 

2.  And  the  first  went.  Each  angel,  as  his  turn  oomes,  with- 
draws {inrAferep  see  on  John  vi.  21 ;  viii.  21)  from  the  heavenly 
scene. 

There  fell  {iyivero).  Lit,  there  came  to  pass.  Rev.,  U 
became.    Elliott,  very  aptly,  there  broke  out. 

Noisome  and  grievous  {xaKov  koI  irovffpop).  Similarly  the 
two  cognate  nouns  fcatUa  and  irovffpla  malice  and  wickedness 
occur  together  in  1  Cor.  v.  8.  Ilovrfpa^  emphasizes  the  activity 
of  eviL    See  on  Luke  iiL  19. 

Sore  {ikjco^).  See  on  Luke  xvi.  20.  Compare  the  sixth 
Egyptian  plague,  Exod.  ix.  8-12,  where  the  Septnagint  uses 


540 


WORD  STTTOIBS  IN  THB  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


this  word  eXxo;  boil.  Also  of  the  hoU  or  scab  of  leprosy,  Levit 
siii.  18;  king  Hezekiah's  boil,  2  Kings  xx.  7;  the  botch  of 
Effypt,  Dent  xxviii.  27,  35.  In  Job  ii.  7  (Sept.)  the  boils  are 
deBCribed  as  here  by  ttoi^^  aore. 

3.  It  became  (^y^vero).     Or  there  came. 
Blood.     Compare  £xod.  vii.  19. 
As  of  a  dead  man.     Thick,  corrnpt,  and  noisome. 

Living  soul  {"^vx^  fwiro).     The  beat  texts  read  ^i^vjc^  5*>^ 

soul  of  life. 

4.  The  third  angel.     Omit  cmgel. 

They  became  (eyivero).  There  is  no  necessitj  for  rendering 
the  singular  verb  in  the  plural.  We  may  say  either  ii  became 
or  titere  came. 

5.  The  angel  of  the  waters.  Set  over  the  waters  as  other 
angels  over  the  winds  (ch.  vii.  1)  and  over  the  fire  (eh.  xiv.  18). 

O  Lord.     Omit. 

And  shalt  be.  Following  the  reading  d  iaofievot.  Bead 
d  offtos  Thou  Holy  One. 

Thou  didst  thus  judge  {-raxna  eicpivai).     Lit.,  Thou  didst 

judge  these  things. 

6.  For  they  are  worthy.    Omit /or. 

7.  Another  out  of  the  altar.     Omit  another  out  of,  and 
read,  as  Rev.,  J  heard  the  altar.     The  altar  personified. 
pare  eh.  vi.  9,  where  the  souls  of  the  martyrs 
the  altar  and  cry  how  long. 


Almighty.     Add  the  article  :  the  Almighiy. 
8.  The  fourth  angel.    Omii  angd. 


nified.     Com-  I 

re  seen  under  I 


BBVELATION  OF  JOHN.  54] 

Power  was  given  (iBoSrf).    Kev.,  ti  was  given. 

With  fire  {hf  irvpi).    lit.,  *'  in  fire."    The  element  in  which 
the  scorching  takes  place. 

9.  Repent  to  give  Him  glory.  Glorify  Him  by  repentance. 

His  kingdom  was  darkened.    Compare  Exod.  x.  21,  22. 

They  gnawed  {ifuuraAvTo).    Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment 

For  pain  {itc  rov  ir6vov).    Strictly,yfw?i  their  pain.    Iheitp 
the  force  of  the  article  rov. 

12.  Euphrates.    See  on  ch.  ix.  14. 

Of  the  east  {airb  r&v  aparoK&v  ijiKlov).     lit,  as  Itev.,yK>fi» 
the  sunrisinff.    See  on  Matt.  iL  2 ;  and  dayepring^  Lnke  i.  78. 

13.  Frogs.     Possibly  with  reference  to  Exod.  viii.  1-14. 

14.  Of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole  world.    Omit  of  the 
earth  and. 

World  {oUovfUvff^).    See  on  Luke  iL  1. 

The  battle  {mSkefAOp).    Be^.,  more  literally,  toar.    BatUe  is 

That  great  day  (^4^).    Omit    Bead,  as  Bof.,  "Md  great 
day.'' 

15.  Behold— shame.    These  words  are  parenthetical. 

As  a  thief.    Compare  Matt  xxIf.  43 ;  Lake  xii.  89 ;  1  Thess. 
▼.  2,  4 ;  2  Pet  iii.  10. 

Watch eth  (ypnyopAp)-    See  on  Mark  xiii.  35 ;  1  Pet  v.  8. 

Keepeth  his  garments.    ^^  During  the  night  the  captain 
of  the  Temple  made  his  rounds.     On  his  approach  the  guards 


S43  WORD  STODIEB  IN  TBH  KHW  TBBTAMBNT. 

]iad  to  rise  and  ealute  him  in  a  particnlar  manner.  Any  gnard 
found  aaieep  when  on  duty  was  beaten,  or  hia  garments  were  eet 
on  fire.  The  confession  of  one  of  the  Rabbins  ie  on  record  tliat, 
on  a  certain  occasion,  his  own  maternal  uncle  had  actually  nn- 
dergone  the  punishtnent  of  having  bis  clothes  set  on  tire  by  the 
captain  of  the  Temple"  (Edersbeim,  "  The  Temple,"  etc.). 

Shame  (off^/wxrui^n).  Only  here  and  Rom.  i,  27.  From 
d  not  and  tryfiii^  fashion.  Deformity,  ungeemlineaa;  nearly 
answering  to  the  phrase  Tiot  in  good  form. 

16.  Armageddon.  The  proper  Greek  form  w'^ApiiarithMt. 
The  word  is  compounded  of  the  Hebrew  liar  nuntntain,  and 
Megiddon  OT  Me<fiddo :  the  mountain  of  Megiddo.  On  Meguido 
standing  alone,  see  Judges  i.  27;  1  Kings  iv.  12;  ix.  15;  2 
Kings  ix.  27.  See  also  Jndges  v.  19 ;  Zech.  xii.  11 ;  2  Chron. 
XXXV.  22 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  30.  "  Bounded  as  it  is  by  the  bills  of 
Palestine  on  both  north  and  south,  it  would  naturally  become 
the  arena  of  war  between  the  lowlanders  who  trusted  in  their 
chariots,  and  the  Israelite  higblanders  of  the  neighboring 
heights.  To  this  cause  mainly  it  owes  its  celebrity,  as  the 
battte-tield  of  the  world,  which  has,  tlirongb  its  adoption  into 
the  language  of  the  Apocalypse,  passed  into  an  universal  prov- 
erb. If  that  mysterious  book  proceeded  from  the  band  of  a 
Galilean  fisherman,  it  is  the  more  easy  to  understand  why,  with 
the  scene  of  those  many  battles  constantly  before  him,  he  should 
have  drawn  the  figurative  name  of  the  final  conflict  between 
the  hosts  of  good  and  evil,  from  the  'place  which  is  called  in 
the  Hebrew  tongue  Harmagedon'" (Stanley,  "Sinai  and  Pales- 
tine "). 

Megiddo  was  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  "which  has  been  a 
chosen  place  for  encampment  in  everj-  contest  carried  on  in 
Palestine  from  the  days  of  Nabuchodonozor  king  of  Assyria, 
unto  the  disastrous  march  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte  from  Egypt 
into  Syria.  Jews,  Gentiles,  Saracens,  Christian  crusaders,  and 
anti  Christian  Frenchmen;  Egyptians,  Persians,  Druses, Tnrks, 
and  Arabs,  warriors  of  every  nation  that  is  under  heaven,  have 
pitched  their  tents  on  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  have  beheld 


eld^^ 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  643 

the  banners  of  their  nation  wet  with  the  dews  of  Tabor  and 
Hermon  "  ("  Clarke's  Travels,"  cit.  by  Lee).  See  Thomson's 
*'  Land  and  Book  "  (Central  Palestine  and  Phoenicia),  p.  208 
sqq. ;  and  Stanley,  **  Sinai  and  Palestine,"  ch.  ix. 

Two  great  slaughters  at  Megiddo  are  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament ;  the  first  celebrated  in  the  Song  of  Deborah  (Judges 
V.  19),  and  the  second,  that  in  which  king  Josiah  fell  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  29).  Both  these  may  have  been  present  to  the  seer's 
mind ;  but  the  allusion  is  not  to  any  particular  place  or  event. 
*'  The  word,  like  Euphrates^  is  the  expression  of  an  idea ;  the 
idea  that  swift  and  overwhelming  destruction  shall  overtake  all 
who  gather  themselves  together  against  the  Lord"(Milligan). 

17.  Temple  of  heaven.    Omit  ofhecnmh. 

21.  Hail.     See  Exod.  ix.  18. 

Every  stone  about  the  weight  of  a  talent  {w  rdKatrrlaia). 
The  adjective,  meaning  of  a  talenfs  weigfUy  agrees  with  hml; 
hail  of  a  talents  weigfU;  i.e.,  having  each  stone  of  that  weight. 
Every  stone  is  therefore  explanatory,  and  not  in  the  text.  Hail- 
stones are  a  symbol  of  divine  wrath.  See  Isa.  xxx.  80 ;  Ezek. 
ziii.  11.    Compare  Josh.  x.  11. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

1.  Sitteth  upon  many  waters.  Said  of  Babylon,  Jer.  li.  13 ; 
the  wealth  of  Babylon  being  caused  both  by  the  Euphrates  and 
by  a  vast  system  of  canals.  The  symbol  is  interpreted  by  some 
commentators  as  signifying  Babylon,  by  others  pagan  Rome, 
Papal  Rome,  Jerusalem.  Dante  alludes  to  this  passage  in  his 
address  to  the  shade  of  Pope  Nicholas  lU.,  in  the  Bolgia  of  the 
Simonists. 

''  The  Byangelist  j<m  pMton  had  in  mind. 
When  she  who  sitteth  npon  many  waters 
To  fornioate  with  kings  bjr  him  was  seen. 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  TH8  NBW  TBSTAHEHT. 

The  same  vho  vith  the  seven  heiuls  iru  bom. 

And  paver  uiA  BtrDDglh  fropi  the  ten  horuB  leofllTsd, 

So  long  u  virtue  to  her  ipouM  wu  pleuing." 

"  Inferno,"  sia.,  lOft-llO. 

5.  Have  committed  fornication.  Tlie  Ggure  of  a  liarlot 
committing  fornication  with  kings  and  peoples  occurs  f  requeutly 
in  the  propliets,  rept-eseDting  the  defection  of  God's  Church  and 
its  attachment  to  others.  Sec  Isa.  i.  21 ;  Jer.  ii.  20;  Hi.  1,  6,  & ; 
Ezek.  xvi.  15, 16,  28,  31,  35,  41 ;  xxiii.  5, 19,  44 ;  Hos.  ii.  5 ;  iiL 
3 ;  iv.  14.  The  word  is  applied  to  heathen  cities  in  three  places 
only:  to  Tyre,  Isa.  xxiii.  15, 16, 17;  to  Nineveh,  Nahum  iiL 4; 
and  here. 

3.  Sitting.    To  manage  and  guide  the  beast. 

A  scarlet.colorad  beast.  The  same  as  in  ch.  idii.  1.  This 
beast  is  ever  after  mentioned  as  to  S^jpiov  the  boast.  For  aoarla, 
see  ou  Matt,  xxvii.  6. 

4.  Purple  {■7rop<fnipovp).     See  on  Luke  xtI.  19. 
Decked  {Ke-j^va-ufiivri).     Lit.,  gilded. 

Precious  stones  (A-tS^  t(>^).     lAt., preounu  ^ont. 

Golden  cup.     Compare  Jer.  Ii.  7. 

Abominations  (fiSeXvyfidTiav).    See  on  Matt.  xxit.  15. 

6.  Upon  her  forehead  a  name.  As  was  customary  with 
harlots,  who  had  their  names  inscribed  on  n  ticket.  Seneca,  ad- 
dressing a  wanton  priestess,  "Nonien  tunm  pependit  a  fronte," 
tAy  name  hung  from  thy  forehead.  See  Juvenal,  Satii-e  vi., 
123  sqq.,  of  the  profligate  Mesealina,  "  having  falsely  assumed 
the  ticket  of  Lycisca." 

Mystery.  Some  understand  this  as  a  part  of  the  name, 
others  as  implying  that  the  name  is  to  be  interpreted  symboli- 
cally. 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  645 

Babylon.  See  on  1  Pet.  v.  13.  Tertnllian,  IrenaeuB,  and 
Jerome  use  Babylon  as  representing  the  Roman  Empire.  In 
the  Middle  Ages  Borne  is  frequently  styled  the  Western  Babylon, 
The  sect  of  the  Fraticelli,  an  eremitical  organization  from  the 
Franciscans  in  the  fourteenth  century,  who  carried  the  vow  of 
poverty  to  the  extreme  and  taught  that  they  were  possessed  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  exempt  from  sin — first  familiarized  the 
common  mind  with  the  notion  that  Rome  was  the  Babylon,  the 
great  harlot  of  the  Apocalypse  (see  Milman,  '<  Latin  Chris- 
tianity," Book  xii.,  ch.  vi.).  On  the  passage  cited  from  Dante 
(ver.  i.),  Dean  Plumptre  remarks:  ^^The  words  have  the  inter- 
est of  being  a  medisaval  interpretation  of  Revelation  xvii.  1-15, 
in  wiiich,  however,  the  harlot  and  the  beast  seem  somewhat 
strangely  blended.  The  harlot  is  the  corrupted  Church  of  Rome ; 
the  seven  heads  are  the  seven  hills  on  which  the  city  is  built ; 
or  perhaps,  with  an  entirely  different  exegesis,  the  seven  gifts 
of  the  Spirit,  or  the  seven  sacraments  with  which  that  Cliurch 
had,  in  its  outset,  been  endowed :  the  ten  horns  are  the  ten  com- 
mandments.  As  long  as  the  Church  was  faithful  to  her  spouse, 
she  had  the  moral  strength  which  came  from  those  gifts,  and 
the  divine  law  which  she  represented.  When  that  failed,  she 
became  as  a  harlot,  and  her  whoredom  with  kings  was  the  sym- 
bol  of  her  alliance  with  secular  powers  for  the  oppression  of  the 
nations"  (On  "Inferno,"  xix.,  110). 

6.  Saints— martyrs.  The  saints  include  the  martyrs  or 
witnesses,  but  the  latter  word  emphasizes  the  iestiimony  ci  tha 
saints  which  has  beeo  the  cause  of  their  death.  For  nuKrtyr^ 
see  on  1  Pet  ▼.  1. 

8.  To  go  into  perdition  {yw&^af).  Some  good  texts  rsid 
iitiff€%  ffoeA.    For  the  verb,  see  oo  John  vL  21 ;  riiL  31* 

In  thebo(A:(M).    lit^upan. 

From  tha  foundation  of  tha  world.  In  ordinary  New 
Testement  Greek  these  words  would  belong  to  are  written. 
Construe  with  the  words  immadiataly  preoadiog.  Compsri 
ch.  ziiL  8,  and  Matt  aw.  M. 


646  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  HEW  TBBTAMSNT. 

And  yet  is  {icaiirep  iarlv).  Itead  Koi  irapcarai,  and  shall 
eome.    Lit,  shall  bejn-esent. 

9.  Here  is  (wSe).  Beepeaklng  attention  and  epiritual  dis- 
cemment  for  that  wbicb  follows.     See  on  cli.  xiii.  18. 

The  mind  {opovt).  I.  Now  is  the  organ  e^ mental  perc^ 
tion  and  appre/iejiaion — of  consciouB  life,  the  mind,  comprising 
the  faculties  of  perceiving  and  underatanding,  of  feeling,  jadg. 
ing,  determining. 

(o)  27*^  intellecti/oe facuUy  or  understanding  (Luke  xiiv.  45). 
So  here,  according  to  eome. 

(J)  77i£  reason,  regarded  as  the  faculty  of  perceiving  divine 
things:  of  recognizing  goodness  and  hating  evil  (Rom.  i.  2S; 
vii.  23  ;  Eph.  iv.  17). 

(o)  The  power  of  calm  and  impartial  judgment  (2  These, 
ii.  2). 

II.  fiovf  is  a  particular  mode  of  thinking  and  Judging: 
moral  conscioitsneas  as  a  habit  of  mind  or  opinion.  Hence 
Uu)ughU,fedings, purposes  (Rom.  xiv.  5  ;  1  Cor.  i.  10).  Some 
render  here  meaning. 

Seven  mountains.  Many  interpreters  regard  this  as  con- 
clusively defining  the  reference  of  the  woman  to  Rome,  which 
wae  built  upon  seven  biile.  Others  deny  the  local  reference, 
and  understand  the  principle  of  worldly  greatness  and  ambi- 
tion. Others  again  claim  that  many  cities  besides  Rome  can 
boast  of  their  seven  hills,  as  Constantinople,  Bruseels,  and 
especially  Jerusalem. 

Upon  them.  Redundant,  the  idea  being  already  expreeeed 
by  -where.     A  Hebraism. 

10.  Are  fallen  {hr&rav).  I,i%.,f6ll.  Constantly  used  in  the 
Septuagint  of  the  violent  fall  or  overthrow  of  kings  or  king- 
doms.    See  Ezek.  xxix,  S;  xxx.  6;  Isa.  xxi.  9;  Jer.  1.  15: 


A 


KBVELATION  OP  JOHN.  547 

12.  Kings  which  {ohivesi).  The  compound  relative  classify- 
ing :  "  of  the  kind  which." 

13.  Mind  (Tve&fM/y).  Meaning  primBnl j  the  faoiUiy  of  hnotD- 
ififfj  tndndy  reason/  then  that  which  is  thoicght  or  known  • 
opinion^  jmrpose.  See  Acts  xx.  3 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  25 ;  Philem. 
14. 

Shall  2*^6  (SioSi&Mroua'iy).  Bead  SiJockr^y,  the  present 
tense,  gvoe.     The  force  of  hid  is  over ;  gvoe  over. 

Power  and  authority  (SiWfuy  §cai  i^ovalav).  For  the  dis- 
tinction, see  on  2  Pet.  ii.  11. 

15.  The  waters.  The  explanation  of  the  symbol  given  here 
is  in  accordance  with  Isa.  viii  7 ;  Ps.  xviii.  4,  16 ;  cxxiv.  14. 

Peoples  and  multitudes,  etc.  See  on  1  Pet  iL  9;  Mark 
xii.  37. 

16.  Upon  the  beast  (^/).  Bead  koL  amd:  ^^the  ten  horns 
— <md  the  beast." 

Desolate  {fiprnAmiAimpf).  lit,  desolatedj  the  verb  being  in  the 
perfect  participle. 

Shall  eat  her  flesh.  A  token  of  extreme  hostility.  See 
Ps.  xxvii.  2 ;  Mic.  iii.  3.  Xenophon,  speaking  of  the  hatred 
between  the  pure  Spartans  and  the  Helots,  says  that  no  one  of 
the  pore  Spartans  coold  conceal  his  readiness  to  eat  the  Helot 
raw.     Notice  the  plural  adpica^  fleshy  and  see  on  Jas.  v.  3. 

Burn  {KarajcaxHTowTOf),  Bev.,  giving  the  force  of  xard  doton^ 
bum  tUterly,  According  to  some  interpreters  the  figure  is 
changed  from  the  woman  to  a  city  ;  but  this  is  unnecessary,  as 
the  language  is  probably  taken  from  the  punishment  of  forni- 
cation on  the  part  of  a  priest's  daughter  (Lev.  xxL  9 ;  com* 
pare  Lev.  xx.  14). 


548  WOBD  BTITDIBB  IK  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

17.   Hath  put  (e&iMcei').    Rev,,  with  stricter  rendering  of  the 
aoriBt,  did  put.     Lit.,  dui  give. 

To  fulfil  His  will  {iroiftaat  rf/v  tiw/mjc  avrov).      See  on  ver. 
13.     Rev.,  more  literally,  io  do  hia  mind. 


Lit.,  to  make  one  mind. 


yuo-iot  the  propkdut 
37. 


To  agree  {■n-onqa-cu,  filav  yvvf^riv). 
Rev.,  cotne  to  one  m.ind. 


The  words  (ri  fi^fMra).     But  read  o. 
vjords.     For  the  distinction,  see  on  Luke  i 


18.   Reigneth  {ej(pva-a  ffatTiKeiati).     Lit.,  /mth  a  kingdom. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

1.  Was  lightened.     Compare  Ezek.  xliii.  3. 

2.  Mightily  with  a  strong  voice  {iv  urxyi  <^i^  fueyaku). 
Lit.,  in  atrength  with  a  great  voice.  Omit  fitydXji  great,  and 
read  layypa  (fxov^  with  a  mighty  voice.     So  Rev, 

Babylon — is  fallen.  The  Rev.  improves  on  the  A.  V.  by 
placing^t^^n  in  the  emphatic  position  of  the  Greek:  "Falleo, 
fallen  ia  Babylon."     Compare  Isa.  xxi.  9. 

Is  become  (ey^i/ero).     Lit.,  he<xifn£. 

Devils  (8(u/iow»i').  Properly,  demons,  which  Rev.,  etrangelf 
commits  to  the  margin.  See  on  Mark  i,  34.  See  Isa.  xiii.  20^ 
22;  xxxiv.  13-15.     Also  on  Luke  xi.  24. 

Hold  {^vKa^\   See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  19,  and  Acts  v.  21.    Rev., 

in  margin,  j;>mtm. 

Cage  (0uXa«^).     The  word   rendered  above  liald.     Rev., 

hold.     Some,  however,  explain  it,  not  ae  a  cage  where  they  are 
kept,  but  as  a  place  of  safety  to  which  they  reaort. 


* 


J 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  549 

Bird  {opveov).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse,  here,  xix.  17,  21. 
Compare  Jer.  i.  39. 

3.  Have  drunk  {viimKev  or  irimoieav).  Some,  however, 
read  irhrrmtcav  have  fallen.     So  Be  v. 

Of  the  wine  {iic  rot)  aXvov).  Thus  if  we  read  h(we  drunk. 
If  we  adopt  ha/oe  fallen^  etc  is  instrumental,  hy.     So  Bev. 

Of  the  wrath.  The  wine  of  fornication  has  tmned  to 
wrath  against  herself. 

Merchants  {Ifuropoi).  The  word  originally  means  one  an  a 
journey  by  sea  or  land,  especially  for  tra£Sc.  Hence  a  mer- 
cha/nt  as  distinguished  from  tednniKo^  a  retailer  or  hucketer. 

The  abundance  of  her  delicacies  (r^  Swdfiem^  rov  arpii' 
vov^  ainry:).  Lit.,  as  Rev.,  the  power  of  her  luxury .  Xrprjvo^ 
is  akin  to  arepeo^  firm^  hard^  etvhbom  (see  on  steadfast^  1  Pet 
V.  9).  Hence  over-strength^  luxury^  vHmtonness.  Only  here  in 
the  New  Testament  The  kindred  verb  arprividw  to  live  de- 
UdovsVy  occurs  ch.  xviii.  7,  9. 

4.  Come  out  of  her.  Compare  Jer.  li.  6,  45 ;  Isa.  xlviii. 
20 ;  lii.  11 ;  Num.  xvi.  26. 

Have  fellowship  with  {<njyicoiv(ovii<rriT€).  This  compound 
verb  is  not  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  New  Testament.  It 
is  found  only  in  Eph.  v.  11,  Philip,  iv.  14,  and  here.  On  the 
kindred  noun  <rvy/coiPtovo^  companion^  see  on  ch.  i.  9. 

5.  Have  reached  (i^KoXovStfaav).  Lit,  followed.  But  the 
best  texts  read  itcdXXi^Srfa'ai;  dave.  Compare  Jer.  li.  9.  For 
different  applications  of  the  verb  see  on  Matt.  xix.  5  ;  Luke  xv. 
15  ;  Acts  V.  13.  Compare  the  classical  phrase  for  following 
up  closely  a  fleeing  foe,  hcerere  in  terga  hostium^  to  clea/oe  to  the 
backs  of  the  enemy.  See  also  2fech.  xiv.  5  (Sept.),  "  The  valley 
of  the  mountains  shall  reach  (ey/coXXi/di/o'erai)  unto  Azal." 
Tlie  radical  idea  of  the  metaphor  is  that  of  following  or  reach- 
ing after  so  as  to  be  joined  to. 


550  WORD   STUDIEW   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 

fi.  Double  (StTrXiiiiroTe).  Only  here  in  the  New  TeBtament. 
Compare  lea.  xl.  2  ;  Jer,  xvi.  18  ;  Zech.  ix.  12.  The  LePitical 
law  insisted  on  the  double  recompense.    See  Exod.  xxii.  4,  7,  9, 

7.  Lived  deliciously  (iirrpriv^ev).     See  on  ver.  3. 

Torment  (^aa-avur/iov).  Only  in  the  Apocalypse.  On  the 
kindred  word  ^aa-avos  torment,  see  on  Matt.  iv.  23,  24. 

I  sit  a  queen  and  am  no  widow.  See  laa.  xlrii.  8 ;  Zeph. 
ii.  15. 


8.  Therefore    shall    hei 

xlvii.  8,  9. 


plagues   come,   etc.       See  lao. 


Who  judgeth  {i  xplva 


Itead  Kpivw  jtidged. 


11.  Merchandise  (yopoc).  Only  here,  ver.  12,  and  Acts 
xxi.  3.  From  7€/*(o  to  hefuU.  Hence,  literally,  lading  or  Gar</o. 
So  Rev.,  in  margin. 

The  main  features  of  the  following  description  are  taken 
from  that  of  the  destruction  of  Tyre,  Ezek.  .ixvi.,  xxvii. 

12.  Fine  Linen  (/Swro-ou).     See  on  Luke  xvi.  19. 
Purple  (TTop^ii/jo?).     See  on  Lnke  xvi.  19. 

Silk  (ffTjpiKoO).  Properly  an  adjective,  meaning  jjsrtdmifii^ 
to  the  Seres.  From  S^peq  Set'es,  a  people  of  India,  perhaps  of 
modern  China. 

Before  the  time  of  Justinian,  when  silkwormB  were  first 
brought  to  Constantinople,  it  was  thought  that  the  Seres  gath- 
ered or  combed  the  downy  substance  woven  by  the  worms 
from  the  leaves  of  certain  trees.  Hence  Virgil  speaks  of  the 
Seres,  how  theycomi  {depectaiit)  the  fine  fleeces  from  the  leaves 
("Georgics,"  ii,,  121). 

Silk  was  a  costly  article  of  luxury  among  the  Komans,  so  that 
Tacitus  relates  that  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  a  Isiw  was  passed 
against  "  men  disgracing  themselves  with  silken   garments " 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  551 

("  Annals,"  ii.,  33).  "  Two  hundred  years  after  the  age  of 
Plinj,"  says  Gibbon,  ^'  the  nse  of  pare  or  even  of  mixed  silks 
was  confined  to  the  female  sex,  till  the  opalent  citizens  of 
Rome  and  the  provinces  were  insensibly  familiarized  with  the 
example  of  Elagabalus,  the  first  who,  by  this  effeminate  habit, 
had  snllied  the  dignity  of  an  emperor  and  a  man.  Aorelian 
complained  that  a  pound  of  silk  was  sold  at  Rome  for  twelve 
ounces  of  gold  ''  ("  Decline  and  Fall,"  ch.  xl.).  At  the  time  of 
Justinian  the  Persians  held  a  monopoly  of  this  trade.  Two 
missionary  monks  residing  in  China  imparted  to  Justinian  the 
project  of  introducing  the  eggs  of  the  silkworm  into  Europe, 
and  returning  to  China  concealed  the  eggs  in  a  hollow  cane  and 
so  transported  them. 

Scarlet.    See  on  Matt  xxvii.  6. 

Thyine  wood  {^vKov  Svluov).  Only  here  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. From  Svla  or  Sva  the  citrus,  a  North-African  tree,  a 
native  of  Barbary,  used  as  incense  and  for  inlaying.  Pliny 
speaks  of  a  mania  among  the  Romans  for  tables  made  of  this 
wood.  The  most  expensive  of  these  were  called  orhes,  circleSj 
because  they  were  massive  plates  of  wood  cut  from  the  stem  in 
its  whole  diameter.  Pliny  mentions  plates  four  feet  in  diameter, 
and  nearly  six  inches  thick.  The  most  costly  were  those  taken 
from  near  the  root,  both  because  the  tree  was  broadest  there, 
and  because  the  wood  was  dappled  and  speckled.  Hence  they 
were  described  by  different  epithets  according  as  the  markings 
resembled  those  of  the  tiger,  the  panther,  or  the  peacock. 

Vessel  {ateeiw).  See  on  1  Pet.  iii.  7,  and  Acts  ix.  15.  Also 
on  goodsy  Matt.  xii.  29 ;  Mark  iii.  27 ;  and  sirake  saily  Acts 
xxvii.  17. 

Of  ivory  {iKe^6vTUfov),  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
References  to  ivory  are  frequent  in  the  Old  Testament.  The 
navy  of  Tarshish  brought  ivory  to  Solomon  with  apes  and 
{seacocks  (1  Ejngs  x.  22).  His  great  throne  was  made  of  it 
(1  Kings  X.  18).    Ahab's  ivory  palace  (1  Kings  xxii.  39)  was 


552 


WORD  STDDIB8  IN  THE  NEW  TBSTAMBNT. 


probably  &  house  witb  ivory  panels.  "  Ivory  palaces  "  are  men- 
tioned in  Pa.  xlv.  8,  and  "honsefl  of  ivory"  in  Amos  iii.  16. 
The  Afiflyrians  carried  on  a  great  trade  in  this  article-  On  the 
obeliBk  in  the  British  Museum  the  captives  or  tribute-bearers 
are  represented  as  carrying  tusks.  The  Egyptians  early  made 
use  of  it  in  decoration,  bringing  it  mostly  from  Ethiopia,  where, 
according  to  Pliny,  ivory  was  so  plentiful  that  the  natives  made 
of  it  door-poets  and  fences,  and  stalls  for  their  cattle.  In  the 
early  ages  of  Greece  ivory  was  frequently  employed  for  orna- 
mental purposes,  for  the  trappings  of  horses,  the  handles  of 
kegs,  and  the  bosses  of  shields.  Homer  represents  an  Asiatic 
woman  staining  ivory  with  purple  to  form  trappings  for  horses, 
and  describes  the  reins  of  chariot-horses  as  adorned  with  ivory. 
The  Btatne  of  Jupiter  by  Phidias  was  of  ivory  and  gold.  In 
the  "  Odyssey  "  of  Ilonier,  Telemachus  thus  addresses  hie  com- 
panion, the  eon  of  Nestor,  as  they  contemplate  tlie  splendor  of 
Menelaus'  palace: 

"  See,  Boa  of  Neator,  my  b«loved  friend, 
In  all  Iheae  echoing  rooms  llie  Bheen  oC  braes, 
Of  gold,  of  amber  and  ot  Jvorjri 
Snch  U  the  palace  of  Oljmpian  Jove." 

"OdyBaaj,"  it,,  71-74. 

Marble  (jutp/idpav).     From  fiapfiaipoi  to  sparkle  or  gUsten, 

13.  Cinnamon  {Kivdnto/Mv).  Mentioned  as  one  of  the  in- 
gredients of  the  holy  oil  for  anointing  (Kxod.  xxx.  23),  and  as  a 
perfume  for  the  bed  (Prov,  vii.  17). 

And  spice  {ical  afitafu>v).  Theee  words  are  added  by  the  best 
texts.  A  fragrant  Indian  plant,  with  seed  in  grape-like  cliteters, 
from  which  ointment  was  made.  Preparations  for  the  hair  were 
made  from  it.  Virgil,  deeciibing  the  coming  golden  age,  saye : 
"  The  Assyrian  amomuin  ehaU  spring  up  as  s  common  plant" 
("  Eclogue"  iv.,  25;  compare  "Eclogue"  iii.,  89),  Forbiger, 
(Virgil)  saye  tliat  the  beet  was  raised  iu  Armenia,  a  poorer 
quality  in  Media  and  Pontus. 

Fine  flour  {ffefiCSaXtp).     Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 


RBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  553 

Cattle  («m^).     See  on  Lake  x.  34. 

Merchandise  of  horses.  Merchanddse  is  not  in  the  text. 
It  resames  the  conetraction  of  yoiiov  mercAandise  with  the 
genitive  in  ver.  12. 

Chariots  {peS&v).  A  Latin  word  though  of  Gallic  origin, 
rkeda.    It  had  four  wheels. 

14.  The  fruits  (17  oTrnipa).  Originally,  the  late  summer  or 
early  avi/umn;  then,  generally,  nsed  of  tiie  rvpe  frmte  ofiflreee. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Compare  the  compound 
^vmmfopwk  autumn  (trees).  See  on  whose  fruit  wUherethj 
Jude  12,  and  compare  stmhrner-fruitSj  Jer.  xl.  10. 

That  thy  soul  lusted  after  (r^  hriSv^ila^  r^  V^'VX^  ^^)* 
lit,  of  the  desire  of  thy  sovl. 

Dainty  Oairapii),  From  X/iro?  grease.  Hence,  literally,  fat. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament.  Homer  uses  it  once  in  the 
sense  of  oiLy  or  shiny  with  oil,  as  the  skin  anointed  after  a  bath. 
"Their  heads  and  their  fair  faces  shining "("  Odyssey,"  xv., 
332).  So  Aristophanes  ("  Plutus,"  616),  and  of  0%,  tmctiuyus 
dishes  ("  Frogs,"  163).  Of  the  oily  smoothness  of  a  calm  sea^ 
as  by  Theocritus.  The  phrase  Xvirapol  irob&;  shining  feet^  i.e., 
smooth^  vrUhout  wri/nJde^  is  frequent  in  Homer.  Thus,  of  Aga- 
memnon rising  from  his  bed :  *'  Beneath  his  shining  feet  he 
bound  the  fair  sandals  "  ("  Iliad,"  ii.,  44).  Also  of  the  condition 
of  life;  richj  oomfortatle:  so  Homer,  of  a  prosperous  old  age, 
"  Odyssey,"  xi.,  136.  Of  things,  brightj  fresh  Of  soil,yrMt^ 
ful.  The  city  of  Athens  was  called  XiirapaX,  a  favorite  epithet. 
Aristophanes  plays  upon  the  two  senses  bright  and  greasy^  say- 
ing that  if  any  one  flatteringly  calls  Athens  bright^  he  attaches 
to  it  the  honor  of  sardines — oiliness  ("  Achamians  "  638,  9). 

Goodly  (Xa/iATT/)^).  A  too  indefinite  rendering.  Better,  Kev., 
sumpUwvs.  See  on  Luke  xxiii.  11 ;  Jas.  ii.  2.  Mostly  in  the 
New  Testament  of  dothing.     See  on  ch.  xv.  6. 


S54  WORD   STUDIES   IN  THB  NEW   TESTAHENT. 

16.  Decked  {Kej(pvfr<i)fi4inf).     See  on  cb.  xvii.  4. 

17.  Shipmaster  {Kv^epv^rrt^).  From  Kvffepvdnt  to  govern. 
Strictly,  steersman.     Only  here  and  Acta  xxvii.  11, 

All  the  company  In  ships  ivai  eVi  ratv  -rkoiav  6  S/iiXjK). 
Tlie  best  texta  siibetitutB  6  iwi  tottov  ttX^wi',  that  aaiieik  any- 
ii'/iere,  lit.,  saileiA  to  aplace.     So  Rev. 

Trade  by  sea  (T^f  BaKaaaau  epyd^vrtu).  Lit.,  work  ike 
sea,   like  tlie   Latin   inare  exeroent,  live  by  seafaring.     Rev., 

gain,  their  living  hy  sea. 

19.  Cast  dust  on  their  heads.  Compare  Ezek.  sxvii  30. 
See  on  Luke  .x.  13. 

20.  Hath  avenged  you  on  her  {sKpivev  to  Kpl^ut  v^lCsv  ef 
ouT^).  Rev.,  more  literally,  hath  judged  your  judgment  on  hsr, 
or  from  her.  The  idea  is  that  of  exacting  judgmeiit_/rom  (^f). 
Compare  tlie  compound  verb  ckSmcek  avenge,  or  exacA  vengeance 
from  (ch.  vi.  10).  The  meaning  is  either,  that  judgment  which 
is  your  due,  or  what  she  hath  judged  eonceming  you. 

21.  A    mighty   angel   (els  oTYeXo?  ir^pof).      Lit.,    "one 

atrong  angel." 

A  great  millstone.     See  on  Hatt.  xviii.  6. 

With  violence  (opfttj/MTi).  Lit.,  vrith  an  impulse  or  rush. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Teetament. 

22.  Harpers.     See  on  ch.  xiv.  2. 

Musicians  {fwviriicav).  Only  here  in  the  New  TestamenL 
There  seenia  to  be  no  special  reason  for  changing  the  render- 
ing to  minstrels,  ae  Rev.  The  term  m^isic  had  a  much  wider 
signification  among  the  Greeks  than  that  which  we  attach 
to  it.  "  The  primitive  education  at  Athene  consisted  of  two 
branches:  gymnastics  for  the  body,  music  for  the  mind.  Mi 
comprehended  from  the  beginning  everything  appertainin| 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  555 

the  province  of  the  nine  Muses ;  not  merely  learning  the  nse  of 
the  lyre  or  how  to  bear  part  in  a  chorus,  but  also  the  hearing, 
learning,  and  repeating  of  poetical  compositions,  as  well  as  the 
practice  of  exact  and  elegant  pronunciation — which  latter  ac- 
complishment, in  a  language  like  the  Greek,  with  long  words, 
measured  syllables,  and  great  diveraity  of  accentuation  between 
one  word  and  another,  must  have  been  far  more  di£Scult  to 
acquire  than  it  is  in  any  modern  European  language.  As 
the  range  of  ideas  enlarged,  so  the  words  muaic  and  musical 
teacheTB  acquired  an  expanded  meaning,  so  as  to  comprehend 
matter  of  instruction  at  once  ampler  and  more  diversified. 
During  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  b.g.  at  Athens,  there 
came  thus  to  be  found  among  the  musical  teachers  men  of  the 
most  distinguished  abilities  and  eminence,  masters  of  all  the 
learning  and  accomplishments  of  the  age,  teaching  what  was 
known  of  Astronomy,  Geography,  and  Physics,  and  capable  of 
holding  dialectical  discussions  with  their  pupils  upon  all  the 
various  problems  then  afloat  among  intellectual  men  "  (Grote, 
^*  History  of  Greece,"  vi.,  ch.  Ixvii.). 

Pipers  {omKiytShv),  ^Bj^v.^  Jhtie-playera.  Only  here  and  Matt. 
ix.  23.  The  female  flute-players,  usually  dissolute  characters, 
were  indispensable  attendants  at  the  Greek  banquets.  Plato 
makes  Eryximachus  in  *'  the  Symposium,"  say :  "  I  move  that 
the  flute-girl  who  has  just  made  her  appearance,  be  told  to  go 
away  and  play  to  herself,  or,  if  she  likes,  to  the  women  who 
are  within.  To-day  let  us  have  conversation  instead  "  ("  Sym- 
posium," 176).  Again,  Socrates  says:  ^'The  talk  about  the 
poets  seems  to  me  like  a  commonplace  entertainment  to  which 
a  vulgar  company  have  recourse;  who,  because  they  are  not 
able  to  converse  and  amuse  one  another,  while  they  are  drink- 
ing, with  the  sound  of  their  own  voices  and  conversation,  by 
reason  of  their  stupidity,  raise  the  price  of  flute-girls  in  the 
market,  hiring  for  a  great  sum  the  voice  of  a  flute  instead  of 
their  own  breath,  to  be  the  medium  of  intercourse  among  them  " 
("  Protagoras,"  347).     Compare  Isa.  xxiv.  8 ;  Ezek.  xxvi.  13. 

Millstone.    Compare  Jer.  xxv.  10;  Matt.  xxiv.  41. 


556  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  KEW  TESTAMENT 

23.  Bridegroom — bride.    Compare  Jer.  xxt.  10. 

Great  men  QAeyurrave:).     RdY.yprinoei.    See  on  ch.  vi.  15. 

By  thy  sorceries  {hr^  ^xtpficuceli}  aov).  See  on  ch.  ix.  21. 
Bev.,  more  literally,  wUh  thy  sorcery. 

Were  deceived  (^Xom/Si^a-ai/).  Or  led  €utray.  See  on 
Mark  xii.  24. 

•  CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  Hallelujah  {ahXTjKovia).  Hebrew.  Praiee  ye  the  Lord, 
Only  in  the  Apocalypse  and  in  this  chapter.  Fifteen  of  the 
Psalms  either  begin  or  end  with  this  word.  The  Jewish  an- 
them  of  praise  (Ps.  civ.-cix.),  sang  chiefly  at  the  feasts  of  the 
Passover  and  of  Tabernacles,  derived  its  title  of  the  Oreat  Hair 
lei  from  the  frequent  use  of  that  phrase. 

Honor.  Omit.  On  the  doxologies  in  the  Apocalypse,  see 
on  ch.  i.  6. 

2.  True  {oKf^^tvaX).     See  on  John  i.  9. 

Did  corrupt  {ei^ipev).  The  imperfect  tense  denoting* 
habit. 

Avenged  {i^eBi/crjaev).    Exacted  vengeanceyr{>7/i  (^f). 

At  ber  hand  (^#c).  Lit.,  ''from  her  hand."  See  on  ch.  ii.  7 ;. 
xviii.  20. 

3.  Her  smoke,  etc.     Compare  Isa.  xxxiv.  10. 

5.  All  ye  His  servants — small  and  great.  Compare  Ps. 
exiv.  13;  cxxxiv.  1. 

7.  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb.  For  the  figure,  compare 
Isa.  Hv.  1-8;  Ezek.  xvi.  7-14;  Hos.  ii.  19;  Matt.  ix.  15;  John 
iii.  29 ;  Eph.  v.  25. 


REVELATION  OF  JOHN.  557 

8.  Fine  linen  ifiwraivov).  See  on  Luke  xvL  19.  The  four 
yestments  of  the  ordinary  Jewish  priest  were  made  of  linen  or 
hyssvs.  Their  symbolic  meaning  depended  in  part  on  the  white- 
ness and  lustre  of  their  substance  {ica^api^v  koI  XafivpSv  jntre 
and  bright). 

Righteousness  {SucamfMra).  More  strictly,  as  Rev.,  righ^ 
eovs  acta, 

10.  See  thou  do  it  not  {ipa  fji/Zi).    See  not  (to  do  it). 

The  testimony  of  Jesus  (^  fiaprvpla  rov  'Itfaov).  Some 
explain  as  the  testimony  which  proceeds  from  Jesus.  Jesus,  by 
imparting  this  testimony  to  believers  imparts  to  them  the  spirit 
of  prophecy.  Others,  the  witness  which  is  borne  to  Jesus.  The 
way  of  bearing  this  witness,  the  substance  and  essence  of  this 
testimony  is  the  Spirit  of  prophecy. 

11.  A  white  horse.    Compare  ch.  vi.  3. 

12.  Crowns  (Siofiij/Aara).     See  on  1  Pet.  v.  4  ;  Jas.  i.  13. 

13.  Dipped  {fiefiofjLfiivov).  The  readings  differ ;  some  giving 
pepairnafievov  sprinkledj  others  '/repipepafifjUvov  sprinkled  round. 
Bev.,  aprvnJded.     Compare  Isa.  Ixiii.  2, 3. 

The  Word  of  God  (o  Ai^yo^  rov  OeoO).  This  name  for  our 
Lord  is  found  in  the  New  Testament  only  in  the  writings  of 
John.  It  is  one  of  the  links  which  connects  the  Apocalypse 
with  John's  other  writings.  Compare  John  i.  1-14 ;  1  «fohn 
i.  1.  Some  object  to  this  on  the  ground  that,  in  the  Gospel  of 
John,  the  term  is  used  absolutely,  the  Word^  whereas  here  it  is 
qualified,  the  Word  of  Ood^  which  the  Evangelist  nowhere  em- 
ploys, and  in  1  John  i.  1,  the  Word  of  life.  But,  as  Alford 
observes :  "  It  may  be  left  to  any  fair- judging  reader  to  decide 
whether  it  be  not  a  far  greater  argument  for  identity  that  the 
remarkable  designation  o  Avyo^  the  Word  is  used,  than  for  diver- 
sity, that,  on  the  solemn  occasion  described  in  the  Apocalypse, 
the  hitherto  unheard  adjunct  of  Ood  is  added."    The  idea  of 


r 


» 


558  WORD  STUDIES  IN   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

God  which  is  reprcBented  here,  nnderlies  tlie  absolute  term  th« 
Word  in  John  i.  1.  It  ie  further  urged  that  in  the  Gospel  o 
A6yo<i  IB  applied  to  the  prehistoric  Chriat,  while  in  tliifi  passage 
it  IB  applied  to  the  historic  Christ.  Bnt  the  name  of  the  his- 
toric Christ  is  that  referred  to  in  ver.  12,  not  in  ver.  13.  It  is 
the  name  "  which  no  one  knoweth  bnt  lie  Himself,"  expressing 
the  character  of  His  whole  redeeming  work.  The  name  in  ver. 
13  is  that  which  belongs  originally  and  essentially  to  Him. 

14.  Followed  (^Ko\ov.&et).  Note  the  imperfect  tense  denot- 
ing progression,  and  thus  describing  the  advancing  movemeiit 
of  the  liost. 


15.  Sword.     See  on  ch.  i.  16. 
Smite  (7r«Ta'(T-(rij).     See  on  eh.  xi.  6. 
Shall  rule  {-n-oi/iaveV).    See  on  ch.  ii.  27. 
Wine*pres8.    See  on  ch.  xiv.  19. 


4 


Of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  {to5  Sv/tov  koI  7%  op-y^). 
Omit  and,  and  render,  as  Rev.,  tlte  Jiercenf^s  of  the  wraih.  See 
on  John  iii.  36. 

Of  Almighty  God  (tov  Seov  tov  -Tram-oKpaTopo';).  Lit.,  of 
God  the  aU-nUer.     See  on  ch.  i.  8. 

16.  On  His  thigh.  Some  explain,  on  the  garment  where  it 
covers  the  thigh  to  which  the  sword  is  bonnd.  Compare  Ps. 
xlv.  3.  Otliers,  partly  on  the  vestnre,  partly  on  the  thigh  itself, 
where,  in  an  equestrian  figure,  the  robe  drops  from  the  thigh. 
According  to  the  former  explanation  tcai  and  is  to  be  taken  as 
explanatory  or  definitive  of  the  words  on  His  vesture.  Others 
again  snppose  a  sword  on  the  hilt  of  which  the  name  is  in- 
scribed. Expositors  refer  to  the  custom  of  engraving  the 
artist's  name  on  the  thigh  of  a  statue.  Thus  Cicera  says :  "  A 
most  beaatifnl  statue  of  Apollo,  on  the  thigh  of  which  the 


li  of  which  the  I 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  559 

name  of  Myron  had  been  graven  in  tiny  letters  of  silver" 
("  Against  Verres,"  iv.,  43).  Ilerodotas  describes  a  fignre  of 
Sesostris,  bearing  across  the  breast  from  shoalder  to  shoulder 
the  inscription  written  in  the  sacred  character  of  Egypt:  ^'With 
my  own  shoalders  I  conquered  this  land"  (ii.,  106).  Rawlin- 
son  says  tliat  Assyrian  figures  are  found  with  arrow-headed  in- 
scriptions engrav^  across  them,  and  over  the  drapery  as  well 
as  the  body. 

17.  An  angel  (&a  &fyeXop).    Lit,  ^'on^  angel." 

Fowls  {opviov;).     See  on  ch.  xviii.  2.    Rev.,  birds. 

of  heaven.    See  on  ch.  viii.  13. 


Gather  yourselves  together  (crvpdfYea-Se).  The  best  texts 
read  avpdx^^e  he  gathered  together^  as  Rev.  Compare  £zek. 
xxxix.  17  sqq. 

The  supper  of  the  great  God  (to  Betwov  rov  fieydKov 
Oeov).  Read  ro  fiiya  rov  for  rod  fA^ydKov,  and  render  the  great 
supper  qf  God. 

18.  Captains  (j(fXi4ipx»^)'    See  on  Mark  vi.  21 ;  Lake  vii  2. 

20.  Was  taken  {hruiaSff).    See  on  Acts  iii.  7. 
Mark.    See  on  ch.  xiii.  16. 

Lake  (Xi/Ai^y).     See  on  Lnke  v.  1. 
Brimstone.    See  on  ch.  xiv.  10. 

21.  Were  filled  {ixpprdaSffaap).    See  on  Matt  t.  8. 


660  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  NEW  TBSTAMBNT. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  Of  the  bottomless  pit.  See  on  ch.  ix.  1.  This  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  lake  of  fire.     Compare  ver.  10. 

Chain  {iKwriv).    See  on  Mark  t.  4.    Only  here  in  John's 

writings. 

in  his  hand  (^0-    ^^j  tfpon  /  resting  on  or  hanging  upon. 

2.  He  laid  hold  {iKpdrffaev).  See  on  Mark  viii.  3 ;  Acts 
iii.  11. 

The  dragon  {rov  Spd/covra).  See  on  ch.  xii.  3.  The  word 
is  commonly  derived  from  ISpoicop,  the  second  aorist  tense  of 
Sep/cofuu  to  see  dearly,  in  allusion  to  the  sharp  sight  of  the 
fabled  dragon. 

Old  {apx^^y    See  on  1  John  ii.  7. 

The  Devil.  Note  the  three  epithets :  the  Old  SerperUj  the 
Devilj  Satcm.     See  on  Matt.  iv.  1 ;  Luke  x.  18. 

3.  Sealed.    See  on  John  iii.  33. 

Must  (Sei).  According  to  Ood's  purpose.  See  on  Matt.  ztL 
21 ;  Luke  ii.  49 ;  xxiv.  26. 

4.  Thrones.    See  on  ch.  ii.  13. 

They  sat.  All  the  faithful  members  of  Christ's  Church. 
Compare  they  reigned  wUh  Christ. 

Beheaded  {ireTreXeKia'fUvwv).  From  iriXetev^  an  aa>e.  Only 
here  in  the  New  Testament. 

They  lived.    Equivalent  to  lived  offom.    Compare  ver.  5. 

5.  Lived — again  (dvil^rfa-ap).     Head  eliqaav  Ivvedy  as  in  ver.  4. 


RBYRLATION  OF  JOHN.  561 

6.  Hath  part  (^a>y  fiiposi).  A  phrase  peculiar  to  John  as 
referring  to  a  person.     Compare  John  xiii.  8. 

Second  death.    See  on  ch.  ii.  11. 

8.  Gog  and  Magog.  See  Ezek.  xxxviiL,  xxxix.  Compare 
Gen.  X.  2,  where  Magog  appears  as  a  son  of  Japhet  Magog  is 
a  general  name  for  the  northern  nations,  and,  according  to 
Ezekie),  Gog  is  their  prince.  Josephus  says  that  the  descendants 
of  Magog  were  the  Scythians. 

9.  On  the  breadth  {hr\  r&  7rXaro9).  Lit.,  aver  {M),  As 
distinguished  from  the  "  four  corners*'  of  ver.  8.  They  over- 
spread the  earth. 

The  camp  {riiv  irape^ufiokifv).  See  on  casUe^  Acts  xxL  34. 
Encompassing  and  defending  the  city.    Compare  Ps.  xxxir.  7. 

The  beloved  city.    Compare  Ps.  Ixxviii  68. 

From  God.    Omit 

12.  Before  God.  Bead  ^vav  throne  for  Oeov  God.  So 
Bev.,  before  the  throne. 

The  books  (J3i/3kla).  No  article.  Bead  booke.  Compare 
Dan.  vii.  10. 

Book  of  life.    See  on  ch.  iii.  5. 

13.  The  sea.  As  commonly  understood,  the  sea  means  the 
literal  sea,  and  the  passage  signifies  that  the  dead  contained  in 
it  shall  rise.  So  Alford.  Other  interpreters,  however,  say  that 
it  cannot  mean  the  literal  sea.  Thns  Milligan  argaes  that  the 
symbols  of  the  Apocalypse  must  always  be  interpreted  in  the 
same  way.  "Symbols,"  he  says,  "are  a  form  of  speech,  and 
therefore  subject  to  the  rules  that  regulate  the  interpretation  of 
all  speech.  .  .  .  The  power  of  that  convention  which  links 
a  certain  sense  to  a  certain  sound  in  ordinary  terms,  is  not  less 
binding  in  the  presence  than  in  the  absence  of  metaphor  of  any 

Vol.  n.~M 


5fi2 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THB  HBW  TBSTAMBWT. 


I 


kind  wliatever.  Thtie  when  we  read  in  tlie  Apocalvpee  of  '  tlie 
?ea'as  anemblemof  the  tronbledaiid  BiTifiil  nations  of  the  earth, 
we  are  bound,  unless  forbidden  hy  the  context,  to  cairy  that  in- 
terpretation through,  and  to  understand  the  sea  of  the  trottbUd 
and  etftful  totfrld." 

Hell  (o  3iij?).     Rev.,  Bodes.    See  on  Matt.  xvi.  18. 

14.  This  is  the  second  death.     Add  even  the  lake  of  fire. 

15.  And  whosoever  (e?T«).     Lit,  if  any.    SoBev. 


CHAPTER  XXL 

1.  New  {natvov).  See  on  Matt.  xxvi.  39.  Compare  Zaa. 
liT.  17. 

There  was  no  more  sea  (4  SoXoo-tra  ouk  i^rtv  irt).  Lit,,  ae 
Rev.,  the  sea  is  no  more.  Here  aa  in  xx.  13.  Some  explain  the 
eea  as  the  ungodly  world.  I  cannot  help  thinking  this  interpre- 
tation forced.  According  to  this  explanation,  the  passage  is  in 
the  highest  degree  tautological.  The  jirst  earth  was  ^ataed 
away,  and  the  ungodly  vxrrld  was  no  more, 

2.  I  John.     Omit  John. 

New  Jerusalem.  Others  join  n»w  with  coming  dtnen,  and 
render  corning  down  new  out  of  heaven. 

A  bride.     Compare  lea.  Ixi.  10;  Ixii.  6, 

No  longer  with  an  ieolated 


3.  With  men.    Men  at  large, 
people  lilie  Israel. 

He  shall  dwell  (o-mjiwret).  Lit.,  tabernacle.  Only  in  the 
Apocalypse  and  John  i.  14.  The  word  "denotes  much  more 
than  the  mere  general  notion  of  dwelling.  There  lies  in  it  one 
of  the  particulars  of  that  identification  of  Christ  and  His  people 


REVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  663 

which  is  fundamental  to  the  seer."  See  on  John  i.  14.  Com- 
pare Ezek.  xxzvii.  27,  28. 

People  (Xool).  Notice  the  'plnr9lyj>eoples  (bo  Eev.),  becaaee 
many  nations  shall  partake  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise. 
Compare  ver.  24. 

And  God  Himself  shall  be  with  them  and  be  their  God. 
And  he  is  inserted.    The  Oreek  is  shall  he  with  them  their  God. 

4.  And  God  shall  wipe  away.  Omit  Ood.  Bead,  as  Rev., 
and  He  shaU  vnpe  away. 

All  tears  (Troy  iiicpvov).  lit,  ei>ery  tear.  Compare  Isa. 
XXV.  8. 

There  shall  be  no  more  death  (6  3cbaT09  ov/c  jforiu  IFri). 
Bender,  as  Bev.,  death  shall  he  no  more. 

Sorrow  (7r^i^9o9).  Better,  as  Bev.,  m^yammg^  since  the  word 
signifies  manifested  grief.  See  on  Matt.  v.  4 ;  Jas.  iv.  9.  Com- 
pare Isa.  Ixv.  19.  ^^  That  soul  I  say,"  observes  Socrates,  ^^  her- 
self invisible,  departs  to  the  invisible  world — to  the  divine  and 
immortal  and  rational :  thither  arriving,  she  is  secure  of  bliss, 
and  is  released  from  the  error  and  folly  of  men,  their  fears  and 
wild  passions,  and  all  other  human  ills,  and  forever  dwells,  as 
they  say  of  the  initiated,  in  company  vdth  the  gods "  (Plato, 
^  Ph»do,"  81).    So  Sophocles : 

**  Borrow  touohei  sot  the  dead.** 

*«  (BdipuB  GoloneQa,"  M6. 

''  How  thrice  happy  those  of  mortals,  who,  having  had  these 
ends  in  view,  depart  to  Hades ;  for  to  them  alone  is  it  given 
there  to  live ;  bnt  to  others,  all  things  there  are  evil "  (^^  Frag- 
ment ^    And  Earipides : 

**  The  dead,  tearleM,  forgeta  his  paina.** 

*«Troadea,''«OS. 


564  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

5.  True  and  faithful  (aXi^ivol  xal  irurrol).  The  proper 
order  of  the  Greek  is  the  reverse,  as  'ELey.jJmthful  and  true. 

6.  It  is  done  {yiyovey).  The  correct  reading  i&yiyova^tA&f 
are  oame  to  paw;  i.e.,  these  words. 

Alpha  and  Omega.  Both  hare  the  article,  ^^ths  alpha," 
etc.     See  on  ch.  L  8. 

Unto  him  that  is  athirst.    Compare  Isa.  Iv.  1. 

Fountain  (^nf/^?).    See  on  John  iv.  6. 

Of  the  water  of  life.  See  John  iv.  10, 14.  Compare  Isa. 
xii.  3. 

7.  All  things  (irciyra).  The  correct  reading  is  rwra  the9$ 
things.     So  Rev. 

His  God  {auT^  0e^).    lit.,  GodurUo  him. 

My  Son  (poi  6  1/109).  Lit,  the  San  to  me.  See  on  John  L 
12.  This  is  the  only  place  in  John's  writings  where  vlk  9on 
is  used  of  the  relation  of  man  to  God. 

8.  The  fearful  (SeiXoU),  The  dative  case.  Hence,  as  Rev., 
far  the/earful.     Only  here,  Matt  viii.  26,  and  Mark  iv.  40. 

Abominable  (i/SBcXvyfiiuoLs:).  See  on  abarnvnaiion^  Matt, 
xxiv.  15.     Properly,  defiled  with  abominations. 

Whoremongers  {ir6pvoi^).  Much  better,  as  Bev.,  fbmi' 
cato7*s. 

Sorcerers.     See  on  sorceries^  ch.  ix.  21. 

Shall  have  their  part  (to  fiipo^  airr&v).  Lit.,  the  whole  pas- 
sage reads  :  to  ihefea/rfuL^  etc.,  their  part.    Shall  he  is  supplied. 

9.  Unto  me.    Omit 


REVELATION   OF  JOHN.  565 

Vials.     Properly  howU.     See  on  ch.  v.  8. 

10.  In  the  Spirit.     See  on  ch.  i.  10. 

Mountain.     Compare  Ezek.  xl.  2. 

That  great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem.  Omit  greoL 
Render  the  article  as  nsaal,  and  not  as  a  demonstrative  pro- 
noun, and  constrae  Jioly  with  city.  So  Bev.,  the  holy  city 
Jerusalem. 

11.  Glory  of  God.  Not  merely  divine  brightness,  but  the 
presence  of  the  God  of  glory  Himself.     Compare  Exod.  xl.  34. 

Light  {(f^wrrijp).  Strictly,  luminary  ;  that  with  which  the 
city  is  illumined,  the  heavenly  Lamb.  See  ver.  23.  The  word 
occurs  only  here  and  Philip,  ii.  15. 

Jasper.     See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 

Clear  as  crystal  {KputrrcCKKOiovTi).  lit.,  shinvng  like  crys- 
Ud. 

12.  And  had  {^kymxr&if  re).  Eev.,  more  simply  and  literally, 
hamng. 

Gates  i^irvK&vofi).  Properly  large  gates.  See  on  Luke  xvL 
20 ;  Acts  xii.  13.     Compare  Ezek.  xlviii.  30  sqq. 

13.  East  (ioHiTohJffi).  See  on  Matt  ii.  2,  and  on  day-eprvng^ 
Luke  i.  78.  See  the  tribes  arranged  by  gates  in  Ezek.  xlviii. 
31-34. 

West  (Svafi&v).    Lit,  the  goings  down  or  settings. 

14.  Foundations  (^efieXlovsi),  See  on  the  kindred  verb 
B^^jLeKuoaet  shall  settle^  1  Pet  v.  10. 

in  them  the  names  {hf  ainov;  ovofuira).  The  correct  read- 
ing is  iir  avT&v  ScoSexa  6v6/iara,  on  them  twelve  namtes. 


566  WORD  STUDIES  IS  THB  KKW  TBSTAMENT. 

15-  A  golden  reed.  Add  fierpov  a*  a  msaguT-e.  See  ch. 
id.  I.     Compare  Ezek.  xl.  5. 

16.  Four  square  (tct;m7(»w>9).  From  T^Tpa_/(jur  and  Towia 
an  angle.  Only  here  io  the  New  Testament.  Compare  Kzek. 
xlviii.  16,  20. 

Twelve-thousand  furlongs  {ivX  aroBimv  ha>SfKa  xt^^^Suv). 
Strictly,  to  the  length  of  (cTri)  twelve,  etc.  For  tlie  collective 
term  ^^tXiiiSt?  ihouaatide,  see  on  ch.  v.  11.  Yor furlongs  itee  on 
ch.  .\v.  20.  Tlie  twelve-thouaand  furlonga  would  be  1378.97 
English  miles.  Interpretations  vary  hopclesely.  The  descrip- 
tion seems  to  he  that  of  a  vast  cube,  which  may  haire  been  sug- 
gested by  tlie  Holy  of  Holies  of  the  tabernacle,  which  was  of 
that  shape.*  But  opiuions  differ  as  to  whether  the  twelve- 
thousand  furlongs  are  the  measure  of  the  four  sides  of  the  city 
taken  together,  in  which  case  each  side  will  measure  three- 
thousand  furlongs;  or  whether  the  twelve- thou  sand  furtouga 
are  intended  to  represent  the  length  of  each  side.  The  formef 
explanation  is  prompted  by  the  desire  to  reduce  the  vast  dimen* 
sions  of  the  city.  Another  difficulty  is  raised  about  the  height. 
Diisterdieck,  for  example,  maintains  that  the  houses  were 
three-thousand  stadia  in  height.  The  question  arises  whether 
the  vertical  surface  of  the  cube  includes  the  hill  or  rock  on 
which  the  city  was  placed,  a  view  to  which  Alford  inclines. 
These  are  enough  to  show  how  utterly  futile  are  attempts  to 
reduce  these  symbolic  visions  to  mathematical  statement.  Pro- 
fessor Milligan  aptly  remarks  :  "  Nor  is  it  of  the  smallest  mo- 
ment to  reduce  the  enormous  dimensions  spoken  of.     No  re- 


*  Thli  cubical  plnn,  applied  not  only  to  the  Tab«ni»olB,  bat  io  the  Aric  of 
the  Flood,  the  Temple  ot  .Solomon  aod  the  "  King's  House,"  is  minnlel; 
worked  oot  in  "The  Holy  Houioe"  by  Dr  Timothy  O lis  r»ine ;  »  book  (uti 
of  curioaB  erudition,  in  vbiah  the  Tabernacle,  the  Ark  of  Noik,  the  Temple, 
■nd  ihH  Capitol  or  Kinii'n  House,  are  treated  as  developmentfl  from  ■  comiaon 
type  ;  bot  irhioh  prooeeds  on  the  utterly  untenable  hypotheaie  that  the  tem- 
ple of  Eiekiels  »i«ion  waa  ftolomon'a  :  and  that,  •coordingly,  from  the  two 
boohfl  of  Kinga  and  the  prophecleH  of  Jeremiah  and  Giekiel  all  the  data  ■ 
rurniehed  for  a  complete  restoration  of  the  Temple  ;  the  prophetic  vision 
Ezekiel  snpptying  the  details  umitted  io  the  historic  reooid  of  Kinga. 


REVELATION  OP  JOHN.  667 

duction  brings  them  within  the  bonnds  of  verisimilitade ;  and 
no  effort  in  that  direction  ia  required.  The  idea  is  alone  to  be 
thought  of." 

17.  Cubits  (^n^xdy).  The  word  originally  means  that  part 
of  the  arm  between  the  hand  and  the  elbow-joint,  the  forearm. 
Hence  a  cvbil  or  ell^  a  measare  of  the  distance  from  the  joint 
of  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger,  t.^.,  about  a  foot 
and  a  half.  The  precise  length,  however,  is  disputed.  Cull>ii 
is  from  the  Latin  cubitus  the  elbowy  on  which  one  reclines  (cth 
bat).  Some  take  the  one  hundred  and  forty-four  cubits  as  rep- 
resenting the  height  of  the  wall ;  others  the  thickness.  If  the 
height,  then  they  must  be  interpreted  as  equal  to  the  twelve- 
thousand  furlongs,  since  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the 
height  of  the  city  are  equal  (ver.  16).  It  is  to  be  noted,  how- 
ever, that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the  measure  of  the  cify 
and  the  measure  of  the  toall.  ^  The  most  inconsiderable  wall " 
remarks  Dusterdieck,  ^^  is  sufficient  to  exclude  all  that  is  im- 
pure." 

The  measure  of  a  man,  that  is,  of  the  angel.  ^  It  is  to 
be  the  dwelling-place  of  men ;  and  even,  therefore,  when  an 
angel  measures  it,  he  measures  it  according  to  the  measure  of  a 
man  "  (Milligan). 

18.  The  building  {ipS6fMff(ns).  Only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. From  iw  in  and  S»fjtdm  to  build.  Lit.,  that  which  is  buili 
in.  Hence  the  building  of  the  wail  is  the  material  built  into 
the  wall ;  of  which  the  wall  was  composed. 

Glass  {vaKip).  Only  here  and  ver.  21.  For  the  kindred  ad- 
jective voKavo^  of  glasSy  see  on  ch.  iv.  6. 

19.  All  manner  of  precious  stones.  Compare  Isa.  liv.  11, 
12  ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  2. 

Sapphire  {aair^ipo^).  Compare  Isa.  liv.  11 ;  Ezek.  i.  26. 
Probably  lapis  laztdi.  Our  sapphire  is  supposed  to  be  repre- 
sented by  the  Jacinth  in  ver.  20.     Pliny  describes  the  adii^ipoq 


I 


668  WOBD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

as  opaque  and  sprinkled  with  specks  of  gold,  and  states  tlmt  it 
came  from  Media  {i.e.,  Persia  and  Uokhara)  whence  the  snppln 
ia  brought  to  this  day.  King  ("  Precious  Stones  and  Gems," 
cited  by  Lee),  says:  "  Before  the  true  precious  stones  were  in- 
troduced from  India,  tiie  lapis  lasuii  held  the  highest  place  in 
the  estimation  of  the  primitive  nations  of  Asia  and  Greece ;  iu 
fact  it  was  almost  the  only  stone  known  to  them  having  beauK 
of  color  to  recommend  it." 

Chalcedony  (;^aXKfj&di').  From  Chalcedon,  where  the  stone 
was  found  in  the  neighboring  copper  mines.  It  was  probably 
an  inferior  species  of  emerald,  as  crystal  of  carbonate  of  copper, 
which  is  still  popularly  called  "  the  copper  emerald."  Pliny 
describes  it  as  small  and  brittle,  changing  its  color  when  moved 
about,  like  the  green  feathers  in  the  necks  of  peacocks  and 
pigeons. 

Emerald.     See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 

20.  Sardonyx  (o-opSovuf).  The  most  beautiful  and  rarest 
variety  of  onyx.  Pliny  defines  it  as  originally  signifying  a 
white  mark  in  a  sard,  like  the  human  vmt  (Sw^)  placed  xqxm 
fiesh,  and  both  of  them  tranapfweni.  Onyx  is  called  from  tlie 
resemblance  of  its  white  and  yellow  veins  to  the  shades  iu  the 
human  finger-nail.  The  early  Greeks  make  no  distinction  be- 
tween the  onyx  and  the  sardonyx. 

Sardius.     See  on  ch.  iv.  3. 

Chrysolite  (;y>iwoXt3os).  From  ^wrw  gold  and  W9o?  utone. 
Lit.,  gold-stone.  Identified  by  some  with  our  topaz,  by  others 
with  amber.  Pliny  describes  it  as  "  translucent  with  golden 
lustre." 

Beryl  (^ij/ivXXof).  Pliny  says  that  it  resembled  the  green- 
ness of  the  pui'e  sea.  It  has  been  supposed  to  be  of  the  same 
or  similar  nature  with  the  emerald. 

Topaz  (roTra^iov).  Compare  Job  xxviii.  19.  The  name  was 
derived  from  an  island  in  the  Red  Sea  where  the  gem  was  first 


RBVSLATION  OF  JOHN.  569 

discovered.  The  stone  is  oviT  peridot  The  Roman  lapidaries 
distinguished  the  two  varieties,  the  chrysopteroriy  oar  chryaoliUj 
and  the  jprasoideSj  oxir  peridot.  The  former  is  much  harder, 
and  the  yellow  color  predominates  over  the  green.  The  modem 
topaz  was  entirely  unknown  to  the  ancients. 

Chrysoprasus.  Rev.,  chrysopraee.  From  ^uerck  gold  and 
wpdaov  a  leek;  the  color  being  a  translucent,  golden  green,  like 
that  of  a  leek.  According  to  Pliny  it  was  a  variety  of  the 
beryl. 

Jacinth  (y6xiv^).    See  on  ch.  iz.  17. 

Amethyst  {aiii^wnwi).  From  h  not  and  fieSwo  to  he  drunken 
with  winej  the  stone  being  supposed  to  avert  intoxication.  Pliny 
distinguishes  it  from  the  jacinth,  in  that,  in  the  latter,  the  vio- 
let hue  of  the  amethyst  is  diluted.  The  stone  is  the  amethyst- 
ine quartz,  or  rock-crystal,  colored  purple  by  manganese  of  iron. 

21.  Pearls  {fJLopfyctplrcu).  The  pearl  seems  to  have  been 
known  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  Asiatic  Greeks,  in  conse- 
quence of  their  intercourse  with  the  Persians.  Among  the 
motives  which  impelled  CsBsar  to  attempt  the  conquest  of 
Britain,  was  the  fame  of  its  pearl-fisheries.  Pearls  held  the 
highest  rank  among  precious  stones.  The  Latin  term  unio 
{unity)  was  applied  to  the  pearl  because  no  two  were  found 
exactly  alike ;  but  the  word  became  in  time  restricted  to  the 
fine,  spherical  pearls,  while  the  generic  name  was  margarita. 
Shakespeare  uses  union  ioT pearl  in  Hamlet,  Act  v.,  Sc.  2. 

**  The  king  shall  drink  to  Hamlet's  better  health : 
And  in  the  oup  an  union  shall  he  throw 
Richer  than  that  which  four  saccessiye  kinga 
In  Denmark's  crown  have  worn." 

And  again: 

*«  Drink  of  this  potion  :  is  thj  union  here  ?  " 

Every  several  gate  {avh  eh  iKoaros  r&v  TrvXd>vo»v).  Rev., 
each  one  of  the  several  gateSj  thus  bringing  out  the  force  of  the 


670  WORD  STUDIES  IN  THE  NBW  TE9TAMBUT. 

genitive  irvKmvtov  of  gates.  The  idea  seooral  is  couvejed  by 
avd,  as  Luke  ix.  3,  anA  Svo  ^trwi'as  "two  coats  apiece:"  Joliii 
ii.  6,  Of  A  /ierpfp-is  Swo  17  Tpew  "  two  or  three  firkins  apiece." 

Street  {TrXarela).     See  on  Lake  xW.  21.    From  TrXarw  broad. 
Hence  the  h 


22.  No  temple.    The  entire  city  is  now  one  holy  temple  of 
God.     See  on  ch.  i.  6. 


.  The  glory  of  God  did  lighten  rt.     Compare  lea.  Ix. 


The  light  (o  Xv^yov).  Rev,,  better,  lamp.  See  on  John 
V.  35. 

24.  Of  them  which  are  saved.    Omit. 

In  the  light  {iv  t^  ^hotI).  Read  Std  rov  <pmTo%  "  amidst  the 
light"  or  '"hy  the  light." 

Do  bring  (<pipov<Tiv).     The  present  tense,  denoting  habit. 

Glory  and  honor.     Omit  and  honor.     Compare  Isa.  Ix.  3. 

27.  That  defileth  {kmvovv).  The  participle.  But  the  cor 
rect  reading  is  the  adjective  Kotvov  commofi,  hence  unhallowed. 
Rev.,  uncletMi. 

Worketh  (Trotoiif).     Lit.,  maketh  or  doeth. 

"In  this  present  life,  I  reckon  that  we  make  the  neareet 
approach  to  knowledge  when  we  have  the  least  possible  corn- 
iniinion  or  fellowship  with  the  body,  and  are  not  infected  with 
the  bodily  nature,  hut  remain  pure  until  the  hour  when  God 
hiin.'^elf  is  pleased  to  release  us.  And  then  the  foolishness  of 
the  body  will  be  cleared  away,  and  we  ehall  be  pure  and  hold 
converse  with  otiier  pure  souls,  and  know  of  ourselves  the  clear 
light  everywhere,  which  is  no  other  than  the  light  of  truth. 
For  no  impure  thing  ia  allowed  to  approach  the  pure"  {Plato, 
"  Phtedo,"  67). 


BBVBLATION  OF  JOHN.  571 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

1.  Pure.    Omit. 

Clear  (^^jnfi/irphv).    See  on  Lnke  xxiii.  11.    Rer.,  hrigJU. 

2.  In  the  midst  of  the  street  thereof.  Some  comiect 
these  words  with  the  preceding.     So  Eev. 

On  either  side  {ivrev^  icdi  ipreHBev).  For  the  latter  ^ 
T€u9ey  read  itceiSev,  and  render,  as  Rev.,  on  this  side  and  on 
that. 

Tree  (^Xoy).     See  on  Lnke  xxiii.  31,  and  Apoc.  ii.  7. 

Twelve  manner  of  fruits  {KopTrov^:  ScoSe/iea).  Lit.,  ttodve 
fruits.  Some  render  crops  or  harvests  of  fruit.  On  these 
two  verses  compare  Ezek.  xlvii.  1-12 ;  Joel  iii.  18;  Zech.  xiv.  8. 

3.  Shall  serve  (Karpewrova-w).  See  on  Lnke  i.  74.  Eev., 
do  Him  servioe.  The  word  originally  means  to  serve  for  hire. 
In  the  New  Testament,  of  the  worship  or  service  of  God  in  the 
use  of  the  rites  intended  for  His  worship.  It  came  to  be  used 
by  the  Jews  in  a  very  special  sense,  to  denote  the  service  ren- 
dered to  Jehovah  by  the  Israelites  as  His  peculiar  people.  See 
Rom.  ix.4;  Acts  xxvi.  7;  Heb.  ix.  1,  6.  Hence  the  significant 
application  of  the  term  to  Christian  service  by  Paul  in  Philip. 
HI.  3. 

4.  See  His  face.  Compare  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Matt.  v.  8;  Exod. 
xxxiii.  20 ;  Ps.  xvii.  15. 

5.  No  night  there  {i/ceZ).  Substitute  in  any  more.  Bev., 
there  shall  be  night  no  more. 

6.  The  Lord  God  (Kvpto^  6  Oeo^).  Rather,  as  Rev.,  the 
Zordj  the  God. 


673  WORD   rXUDIES  IN  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT. 

Of  the  holy   prophets  {t€iv  wyitnv  Trpotf»)TO)v).     For  arjmv 

holy  substitute  TrvevfiaTap  spirits,  and  render,  as  Rev.,  lAe  God 
of  the  spirits  of  t/i^  jrrop/iMs. 

Be  done  (yeviir^ai).     Better,  as  Rev.,  come  tojioBs. 

I.  Keepeth  {Tijpav).    A  favorite  word  with  John,  occurring 

in  his  writings  more  frequently  than  in  all  the  rest  of  the  Kew 
Testament  together.     See  on  reset-vecl  1  Pet.  i.  4. 

Book  (ffiffkiov).  Diminutive,  properly  a  little  hook  or  scroll. 
See  on  writing,  Matt.  xix.  7  ;  hill,  Mark  x.  2  ;  book,  Luke  iv,  17. 

8.  I  John  saw  {e-yat  'I<i>awTj9  o  ySX^Troc).  The  A.  V.  over- 
looks tiie  article  with  the  participle — the  one  seeimj.  Hence 
Ilev.,  correctly,  I  John  am,  he  that  heard  and  saw. 

Had  heard  and  seen  {^Kowra  xal  IffKei^).  Aoriat  tense. 
There  is  no  need  of  rendering  it  aa  a  phiperfect.  Rev.,  rightly, 
I  heard  and  saw.  The  appeal  to  hearing  and  seeing  is  com- 
mon to  all  John's  writings.  See  John  i.  14 ;  xix.  35 ;  xxi,  14 ; 
I  John  i.  1,  2 ;  iv.  14. 

9.  See  thou  do  it  not  {opa  fiij).     Lit.,  see  not. 

Thy  brethren  the  prophets.  The  spiritual  brotherhood 
of  John  witli  the  prophets  is  exhibited  in  the  Apocalypse. 

10.  Seal  (<rtf>pwyl<r^^).  Rev.,  seal  up.  This  word  occurs 
eighteen  times  in  the  Apocalypse  and  twice  in  the  Gospel,  and 
only  five  times  elsewhere  in  tlie  New  Testnirieiit.  It  means  to 
confirm  or  attest  (John  iii.  33) ;  to  close  -up  for  stcxrity  (Matt. 
xxvii.  &&  \  Apoc.  XX.  3) ;  to  hide  or  Acep  secret  f  Apoe.  x.  4;  xxii. 
10) ;  to  mark  a  person  or  thing  (Apoc.  viL  3 ;  Eph.  i.  13 ;  iv.  30). 

Time  {leaipiK).     See  on  Matt.  xii.  1. 

II.  Unjust  (o^tucwf).     Rev.,  better,  unrighteoua. 


BHVELATION  OF  JOHN.  573 

Let  him  be  unjust  (aSi«n7<r^ra>).  The  verb  means  to  do 
tffickedly.    Hence  Bev.,  correctlj,  le6  him  do  unrighteaumen. 

He  which  is  filthy  (o  puir&v).  Onlj  here  in  the  New  Testar 
ment.  On  the  kindred  noun  pvira^  fi^  see  on  1  Pet.  iii.  2L 
'PtnrapCa  JiUhiness  occurs  only  in  Jas.  i.  21 ;  and  the  adjective 
jnnrapo^jUthy^  only  in  Jas.  ii.  2. 

Let  him  be  filthy  {ptnrmadTu).  The  best  texts  read  jnnraih 
Sqrw  let  him  be  made^Uhy.    So  Rev. 

Let  him   be   righteous  (SmmuoiSi^).    Read  Bueeuoavvify 

^ovriadrw  let  him  do  righteattenees.     So  Rev. 

« 
Let  him  be  holy  (arfuurSifroBl).    Rev.,  giving  literally  the 

force  of  the  passive  voice,  let  him  he  made  holy, 

12.  My  reward  is  with  me  (o  fuaSd^  fiov  yyef  iyMv).  Mur- 
-909  reward  is  strictly  toagee.  Compare  Isa.  xL  10;  Ixii.  11. 
See  on  2  Pet.  ii.  13. 

To  give  {airoSoSpoi).  Lit,  to  give  hack  or  in  return  for^ 
thns  appropriate  to  ^uaSo^  reward.  Hence  Rev.,  better,  render. 
See  on  give  an  aooountj  Luke  xvi.  2 ;  and  gave^  Acts  iv.  33. 

Shall  be  (jforiu).     Read  iirriv  is. 

14.  That  do  His  commandments  (oi  iromwre^  r^  ivro\M 
uvTov).  Read  oi  irXwotnre^  r^  oroX^  avrw  they  that  wash 
their  robes.    Compare  ch.  vii.  14. 

That  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life  (&a  Ifrra^  fi 
i^vaia  avr&v  iirl  to  ^vKop  rry;  (fo)^).  Lit,  in  order  that  theirs 
shaU  he  a^hority  over  the  tree  of  life.  For  i^ovala  right, 
atUharity,  see  on  John  i.  12.  ^Eiri  may  be  the  preposition  of 
direction:  ^^may  have  right  to  ooms  to ^  (ao  Rev.)  or  may  be 
rendered  over. 

15.  Dogs  {oi  tcvpe^).  The  A.  Y.  omits  the  article '^^A«  dogs." 
Oompare  Philip,  iii.  2.     This  was  the  term  of  reproach  with 


574 


WORD  STUDIES  IN  THH  KBW  THBTAM8RT. 


wbich  the  JndaizerB  stigmatized  the  Gentiles  &b  impnre.  In 
the  Mosaic  law  the  word  is  Dsed  to  denounce  the  moral  profli- 
gacies of  heathen  worBhip  (Dent,  xxiii.  18).  Compare  Matt. 
XV.  26.  Here  the  word  is  used  of  tliose  whose  moral  impurity 
excludes  them  from  the  New  Jerusalem.  "As  a  term  of  re- 
proach, the  word  on  the  lipa  of  a  Jew,  eignified  chiefly  im- 
jmrity ;  of  a  Greek,  impudefice.  The  lierds  of  dogs  which 
prowl  about  Eastern  cities,  without  a  home  and  without  an 
owner,  feeding  on  the  refuse  and  filth  of  the  streets,  quarrelling 
among  themselves,  and  attacking  the  passer-by,  explain  both 
applications  of  the  image  "  (Lightfoot,  on  Philip,  iii.  2). 

Sorcerers.     See  on  ch.  ix.  21,  and  compare  cb.  zxi.  8. 

Whoremongers  {v6pvot).     Rev.,  better, yomioaiort. 

Maketh  (Trotuv).  Or  doetk.  Compare  doeih  the  truth,  John 
iii.  21 ;  I  John  i.  6.     See  on  John  iii.  21. 

16.  The  root.  Compare  Isa.  xi.  1,  10.  See  on  IfoBarene, 
Matt.  ii.  23. 

The  morning-star.     See  on  ch.  ii.  28. 

17.  The  Spirit.     In  the  Church. 
The  Bride.     The  Church. 
Heareth.     The  voice  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride. 

19.  The  Book  of  Life.    Bead  tov  fvXov  thetne.    So  Ber. 

20.  Even  so  (miI).     Omit. 

21.  Our  Lord  (^/wnK).     Omit. 

With  you  all  {ji^ra  inivTav  vfi£>v).  The  readings  differ. 
Some  read  fifrct  trdiTiov  tmth  ail,  omitting  ymi.  Others,  fi^rk 
rStv  arjliov  with  the  sainta. 


UBT  OF  OBBBK  W0BD6  AND  PHRASES  USED  BY  JOHN  ONLY. 


Words  peenllAr  to  th«  Qoqpel,  the  BpisUei,  or  tho  Apooalypae  sre  marked  G., 
1  Ep.,  3  Ep.,  8  IBp.,  Apoe.  Also  worda  oommon  to  tho  Qoqpel  with  either  of  the 
other  writing!. 

*'AX<^,  )  Alpha,  ) 

roAKmroQf)  Alpha  and  Omega,  ) 
*Ai3aM«r,  Abaddon, 

oyytXio,  message, 

oyycXXfltf,  to  annonnce, 

al^fMtkt^ffioy        captiyitj, 
dcfui^M,  to  be  fully  ripe, 

dXifMi,  to  go  a  fishing, 

oXXaxcfScy,  some  other  waj, 

aXX^Xoi^  hallelnjah, 

oXoiy,  aloe, 

6f»apriap  ^X"^*     ^  haTe  SUly 


o^'SivoTOf ,  amethjst, 

i  'AfujPf  the  Amen, 

dfifjpf  ofiijp,        Terilj,  Terilj, 

ilr(oontraoted )  -^ 

from  tap),    S 
api  tU  Mcurroff,    oTeiy  sereral  one, 

iSn^fAopripof,       without  sin, 

mpdarwrif  fi»^y,  rssorrection  of  life, 
opaimuns  Kfnif  resurrection  of  jiidg- 

ffitr,  ment,  Q.  t.,  29 

duOpoffia,  heap  of  burning  coals,    G.  xTiii.,  18 ;  zzi.,  9 

tu/Upwompos^    manslaver,  murderer,     G.,  1  Ep.         viii.,  44.   l£p.  ilL 

16 
awrixpioTot,        antichrist,  1  Ep.,  2  Ep.    1  Ep.  ii,  18,  22 ; 

iv.,  8.    2  Ep.  7 
mtXcm,  todraw (water QTwine),    G.  ii.,  8,  9;  iT.,  7, 15 


Apoc. 

( Apoa    i.,    8,    11 ; 
xxi.,  6;xxiL,  13 

Apoa 

Apoc.  ix.,  11 

lEp. 

1  Ep.  iii.,  11 

G. 

n.,  18 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xiii.,  10 

Apoc. 

Apoa  xiT.,  18 

G. 

xxi.,  3 

G. 

x.,1 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xix.,  1,3,4,6 

G. 

xix.,  39 

G.,  1  Ep. 

ix.,41;xY.,22,24; 

xix.,  11.    1  Ep. 

i.,  8 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xxi.,  20 

Apoa 

Apoc.  iii.,  14 

G. 

i.,  51;  iii,  3,5;  t., 

19,  etc. 

G. 

(xiiL,20;  xtL,  28; 
\     XX.,  28 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  21 

G. 

▼iii.,  7  (passage  re- 

jected) 

G. 

▼.,29 

576     GRBBK  WORDS  AND  PHBASB8  U8BD  BT  JOHN  ONLY. 


SpvkfifjM,             a  thing  to  draw  with,  G. 

<Sirf«cp«'9i7    Kcl   I  he  answered  and  said,  Q. 

ffiirfff  ) 

dwipxofuu    tit 

ra  oniaut        to  go  or  foUow  after,  G. 

'AiroXXvMy,         ApoUjon,  Apoo. 

dnoavvaytiyosf    oat  of  the  synagogue^  G. 


iipKOtf 

*Apfiaytb»pf 

Tov), 

/SoXXffir    aicdp- 
daXop  itwiT' 


without  seam, 
a  bear, 
Armagedon, 
mler  of  the  f  east^ 

V  prince  of  this  world, 


iOV. 


[ 


fiatop, 
fiaaupuriti&tf 


fiarpaxot, 
fiijpvXkost 
fiiPkapilkop, 

fiorpvff 
fipoPTfit 


wormwood, 

to  oast  a  stumbling* 
blook  before, 

branoh, 
torment, 


1 


G. 

Apoo. 
ApoOt 
G. 

G. 

Apoo. 
Apoa 
G. 

AjNM. 


frog, 

beryl, 

little  book, 

eat, 

cluster  (of  grapes), 

thunder, 


Apoc 

Apoc. 

Apoo. 

G. 

Apoc. 

G.,  Apoc. 


piSatriPOs, 


fine  linen. 


Apoo» 


(tov)     irv€v 
ytfxop, 


u-Vto 


be  bom  of  the  Spirit,   G. 


! 


i 


ToQ^alSa,  Gabbathft,  G. 

yiPtrfi,  birth,  G* 

yimnj^fjpoi  ipm-  to  be   bom  again,  or 

S'^f  from  above,  G. 

(roC)  e.oC,   [  to  b«  bom  of  God,  G.,  1  Ep.      { 


old  man, 


G. 


iy.,  11 

ii.,  19 ;  iii.,  3 ;  iy., 
10,  etc. 

xiL,  19 

Apoo.  ix.,  11 

ix.,  22;   ziL,  42; 

rvi,  2 
xix.,  28 
Apoc.  xiiL,  2 
Apoo.  xyi.,  16 
iL,  8,  9 

xiL,  81;   xiy.,  80; 
xvi.,  11 

Apoo.  yiiL,  11 

Apoc.  iL,  14 

xii.,  13 

Apoc.  ix.,  5 ;  xiy., 

11 ;  xviii.,  7,  10, 

16 
Apoc.  xvi.,  18 
Apoc.  xxL,  20 
Apoc.  X.,  2,  8, 9,  10 
vi.,13 

Apoc.  xiv.,  18 
xiL,  29.    Apoc.  iy., 

5;  vi.,  1,  etc.    In 

Mark  iii.,  17,  as  a 

translation 
Apoc.   xviiL,    16 ; 

xix.,  8,  14 
xix.,  18 
ix.,  1 

...    A 
ui.,  8 

L,  13.  lEp.iii.,  9; 

iv.,  7;  v.,  1,^  18 

iii.,  5,  6,  8 

...  M 

lu.,  4 


GRBEK  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  USED  BT  JOHN  ONLY.      577 


y\maa'6icoitopf 

bag. 

G. 

xii.,  6 ;  xiii.,  29 

d(ucpv*», 

to  weep, 

G. 

xL,  35 

dciXia«9 

tobeafhddy 

G. 

xiT.,  27 

^KoroSf 

tenth, 

G.,  Apoo. 

L,89.  Apoaxxi.,20 

t6  ^Koropf 

the  tenth  part^ 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  XL,  13 

diadfifio. 

orown. 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xii,  3;  xiii., 
1 ;  xix.,  12 

dia^MlVVMy 

to  gird, 

G. 

liii.,  4,  5  ;  xxi.,  7 

dcavy^ff, 

transparent, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxL,  21 

Aidv/AOff, 

DidjmuB  (twin). 

G. 

xi.,  16  ;  XX.,  24 ; 
ixi.,  2 

diir\6m, 

to  doable. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  6 

dpoKmP, 

dragon. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xii.,  3,  i,  7; 
xiii.,  2,  etc. 

d«tdc«ciroff| 

twelfth. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  20 

tyKoipuif 

feast  of  the  dedication. 

G. 

X.22 

hxt*^ 

anoint. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  iii,  18 

€iwu     cV    rov 

to  be  of  the  world. 

1  Ep.,  G. 

▼iii.,  23 ;   xt.,  19 ; 

XOOTflOVy 

• 

XTii.,  li,  16; 
xviii.,  36.  1  Ep« 

• 

ii.,  16 ;  iv.,  5 

«2MttfiKr«y^bf«*y 

to  be  from  aboTA, 

G. 

▼iii,  23 

ff&oi     cV     ritp 

«ir»| 

to  be  from  beneath. 

G. 

Tiii.,  23 

«ncffyrfQ», 

to  pieroe. 

G.,  Apoc. 

xix.,  37.  Apoo.  L,  7 

f#cprM0, 

to  withdraw, 

G. 

T.,  13 

f  ff  roi)  otMyof , 

since  the  world  began. 

G. 

ix.,  32 

Aff^arruwff, 

of  iTory, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xyiiL,  12 

'EXXi7M«<^, 

Gdeek, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  ix.,  11 

»      r 

to  spne, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  iii.,  16 

MlHWOptOPf 

merchandise. 

G. 

ii.,  16 

«/*^vcrait, 

to  breathe  npon, 

G. 

XX.,  22 

fpftM/M^Criff, 

bnilding, 

Apoc. 

Apoa  xxi,  18 

«£aicoo'4oi, 

six  hundred,       ' 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xiiL,  18 ; 
xiv.,  20 

**f 'PX*<''3ot 

) 

aird,  irap^  rot; 

(to  come   forth   from 

G. 

Tiii,  42;  xiii.,  3; 

6ffov, 

J     God, 

xvi.,  27,  30 

€(vfrvi(it, 

to  awake  one  ont  of 
sleep, 

G. 

xi.,  11 

/iraparoff. 

aocnrsed, 

G. 

Tii.,  49 

€ir€wovnjfy 

npper  garment, 

G. 

TTl.,7 

/irid«;(fOfuii, 

to  receiTe, 

3Ep. 

3  Ep.  9,  10 

«rtjfp/», 

to  anoint,          . ' 

G. 

ix.,  6, 11 

Vol.  11—87 

578  OBEBK  WORDS  AND  PURA8B8  USED  BT  JOHN  ONLY. 


rA  tpx6fU9af 

thingB  that  are  oomiiig, 

O. 

zvL,  18 

(fi)  f(rxoTti  fiiiifMj  the  last  day, 

G. 

Ti,  89,  40,  44,  64; 

TiL,  37;xi.,  24; 

xiL,  48 

(ffktV^t 

to  be  zealooBy 

Apoo. 

Apoa  iii.,  19 

(c(rr((ff, 

hot, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  iii.,  15, 16 

TjXot, 

nail, 

G. 

XX.,  25 

flfiinpop^ 

half  an  hour, 

Apoa 

Apoa  viiL,  1 

6^u, 

which  was  (epithet  of 
God), 

Apoo. 

Apoa  i,4,  8;  iv.,  8 

^ntp. 

than  at  all. 

G. 

xii.,  43 

Ttpos^ 

1 

the  second  death, 

1 

AjNMI. 

j  Apoc.  ii.,  11;  xx., 
)     14 ;  xii.,  8 

^avfuz     (jM*ya) 

)  to  wonder  with  great 
]      wonder, 

AjNM. 

a                           *  *         ^K 

davfuifffiy, 

Apoc.  xyu.,  6 

^tiMfftj 

brimstone, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  ix.,  17 

3f<Kr«/3^£, 

worshipper  of  God, 

G. 

ix.,  31 

3«»pf  ly  Sowiroi 

',  to  see  death. 

G. 

▼iii,  51 

S^icij, 

sheath. 

G. 

XYIU.,  11 

VMMOf 

catUe, 

G. 

!▼.,  12 

3l^iM>f, 

thyine  (wood)» 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xriii,  12 

ZaoiTiff, 

jasper, 

Apoo. 

Apoa  iv.,  8;  xxi^ 
11,  18,  19 

iXair/M>f, 

propitiation. 

lEp. 

lEp.  ii.,2;  iy.  10 

r6  farvuedy, 

osTahy, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  ix.,  16 

*|p*ff. 

rainbow, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  iv.,  8;  X.,  1 

KOdcU/MI, 

to  pnrge. 

G. 

XV.,  2 

iciira3fffui, 

curse. 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xxii.,  3 

«ara<r^payfft», 

to  seal. 

Apoa 

Apoc.  v.,  1 

itarTywp, 

aoonser. 

Apoa 

Apoa  xii.,  10 

xavfui, 

heat, 

Apoa 

Apoa  vii.,  16 ;  xvi^ 
q 

ffcdpor, 

cedar, 

G. 

9 
•  ■  .          ^ 

XVlll.,  1 

Mip(a, 

swathing  for  a  corpse : 
band, 

G. 

xi,44 

jcff/xtyyvfu, 

to  mix,  mingle. 

Apoa 

Apoc.    xiv.,    10 ; 
XVlll.,  6 

irrpfui, 

small  coin, 

G. 

ii,15 

money-changer, 

G. 

ii.,  14 

friTfroi/pdff, 

gardener. 

G. 

XX.,  15 

ici3ap^»ddff, 

harper. 

Apoa 

Apoc.xiv.,2;xviii9 
22 

irim^M*/ioy, 

cinnamon, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  18 

xXf/A/IO, 

theft. 

Apoa 

Apoa  ix.,  21 

GBKEK  WORDS  AKD  PH&ASSS  USED  BT  JOHN  ONLY.      579 


K^fUif 

bnmoh. 

G. 

XV.,  2,  4,  5,  6 

Koifafais, 

taking  reel. 

O. 

xL,  13 

Kokkovpu»f 

eje-aalye, 

Apoc. 

Apoa  ill.,  18 

KcXviififftpOf 

pool. 

O. 

v.,2,4,7;ix.,7.U 

ICOfl^6T€pOP 

^Xf^f 

to  amend. 

G. 

iv.,  62 

«/h94. 

barley, 

Apoc. 

ApoavL,  6 

KptiUfOSf 

barley, 

G. 

vi.,  9,  13 

upwrraXXi^m^ 

to  be  as  crystal. 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xxi.,  11 

KpvcrraXXoff, 

crystal. 

Apoc. 

Apoa  iv.,  6 ;  xxii.,  1 

KVitXttm, 

to  encircle. 

Apoc. 

Apoa  XX.,  9 

KWtk^P, 

round  about, 

Apoc. 

Apoa  iv.,  3,  4,  8; 

v.,  11 
Apoc.  i.,  10 

4  Kvpuucrl  ifupOi 

p  the  Lord's  day, 

Apoc. 

XfWioy, 

towel. 

G. 

xiii.,  4,  5 

Xi/3aM»r<{f, 

censer. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  viii.,  3,  5 

XMarpmrott 

pavement, 

G. 

lix.,  13 

\arap6tf 

dainty. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  14 

Xirpa, 

ponnd. 

G. 

xii.,  8;  xix.,  89 

^^rxn* 

spear. 

G. 

ill.,  84 

IMapfMopos, 

marble. 

Apoa 

Apoa  xviii.,  12 

fuuradofMmf 

to  gnaw, 

Apoa 

Apoa  xvi.,  10 

futrovpSniftaf 

mid-heayen. 

Apoa 

Apoa  viii.,  13;  xiv., 
6;  xix.,  17 

tua6m. 

to  be  midway, 

G. 

viL,  14 

MtaaiaSf 

Messiah, 

G. 

i.,  41 ;  iv.,  25 

fUTfniTflt, 

firkin. 

G. 

ii.,  6 

fAtrmfWimy 

forehead. 

Apoa 

Apoa  vii.,  8;   ix., 
4 ;  xiii.,  16,  eta 

MP^t 

thigh. 

Apoa 

Apoa  xix.,  16 

fuyiioy 

mixture, 

G. 

xix.,  89 

§umi, 

mansion,  abode. 

G. 

xiv.,  2,  28 

fM4nKriK6tf 

musician, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xviii.,  22 

/Avxaofuu, 

to  roar. 

Apoa 

Apoc.  X.,  3 

flvklPOS, 

made  of  millstones, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  21 

tnni. 

victory, 

lEp. 

1  Ep.  v.,  4 

NutoXairi7f, 

Nicolaitan, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  ii.,  6,  15 

Mim^Pi 

basin. 

G. 

xiii.,  5 

pvaaVf 

to  pierce, 

G. 

xix,  34 

«c-. 

to  stink, 

G. 

xi.,  39 

to6pwVf 

linen  bandage, 

G. 

xix.,40;xx.,  5, 6^7 

Skw^Off 

untimely  fig. 

Apoa 

Apoc.  vi.,  18 

^apcoir, 

young  ass, 

G. 

xii.,  14 

580     GRBBK  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  USED  BT  JOHN  ONLY. 


oirov  cicffiy 


f       >     / 
7  OVOl, 


ouoi  (with  ao- 
008.  of  per- 
Bon), 

ovpa, 
iy^dpioPf 

inudapior, 


wapdeiKit, 
ircfifrroff, 

Wtpi^€»f 

frtptnarup     cV 
oXi^dct^ 

TJ  aKori^  or 
cricdrfi, 
ircpiirorcty 


where  there, 
fruits, 

▼iflion,  sight, 
▼iolenoe, 
bird, 

the  woe. 


vwoe. 


Apoo. 
Apoo. 
Apoo. 
Apoo. 
Apoo. 

Apoo. 


Apoo. 


not  then  (intenogatiTe),  Q. 
tail,  Apoa 


fish, 
appearanoe, 


G. 

G.,  Apoo. 


hid,  G. 

Comforter,  Advooate,     G.,  1  Ep. 


leopard,  Apoc 

kill  with  an  axe,  behead,  Apoo. 


fifth, 

father-in-law, 
to  bind  abont, 


Apoo. 

G. 
G. 


Apoo.  xii.,  6,  14 
Apoc.  xriii.,  14 
Apoo.  iv.,  8;ix.,  17 
Apoo.,  xriii,  21 
Apoo.     XTiiL,     2 ; 

xix.,  17,  21 
Apoo.  ix.,  12;  xi., 

U 

J  Apoo.  TiiL,  18 ;  xii., 

XYiiL,  37 

Apoo.  ix.,  10,  19; 

xu.,4 
▼i.,  9,  11;  xxi.,  9, 

10,18 
viL,    24;   xL,    44. 

Apoo.  i,  16 
tL,9 
xiT.,  16,  26;   xt., 

26;xyi.,7.  lEp. 

11.,  1 
Apoo.  xiiL,  2 
Apoo.  XX.,  4 
Apoo.  vi.,  9 ;  ix.,  1 ; 

xvi.,  10;  xxi.,  20 
xriii,  18 
xi,44 


i  to  walk  in  the  tmth,       2Ep.,  8Ep.    2Ep.4.   8  Ep.  8,  4 


b 


walk  in  darkness. 


rvui.,  12;  xu.,  35. 
G.,  lEp.     <     1  Ep.  L,  6;  iL, 
(     11. 


<W'  *   [  *^  ^^^  ^  *^®  Hglit,       1  Ep. 

Apoc 
Apoc. 

f  spirit  of 


ircroftoi,  to  fly, 

nX^o'auy  to  smite, 

vptvfia    r^t 
frXan/r, 


error, 


lEp. 


vodfifiTft,  reaching  to  the  feet,       Apoc. 

''^i;,;^"^'- [  to  do  the  truth. 
wQfifPvpovft  purple, 


G.,  1  Ep. 
G.,  Apoo. 


1  Ep.  i.,  7 

Apoo.  xii.,  14 
Apoc.  viii.,  12 

1  Ep.  iv.,  6 

Apoo.  L,  18 

iii.,  21.     1  Ep.  L,  6 

xix.,  2,  5.    Apoo. 
xriii,  16 


581 


iroro^AO^opiyrofj 

»  oanied   awaj  of  the 
flood. 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xiLy  15 

w^rtpotp 

whether, 

G. 

viL,  17 

wpofiaruait 

pertaining  to  aheep^ 

G. 

▼..a 

wpofiAnaiff 

little  sheep, 

G. 

xxi.,  17 

wpoaairimf 

to  beg, 

G. 

ix.,  8 

wpoattvmjinity 

worshipper, 

G 

iv..  23 

wpoa^xtywiff 

food. 

G. 

xxi.,  5 

wiMnp6s, 

pertaining  to  morning, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  ii,  28 

6    wpmrot   JuU 
6  fa\aTos^ 

the  first  and  the  ]ast» 

Apoo. 

(Apoo.    L,    11,   17, 
1     xxu.,  18 

wnpv€if 

heel, 

G. 

xiii.,  18 

nrwrfiOj 

spittle, 

G. 

ix.,  6 

mifHPOf, 

of  fire, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  ix.,  17 

wvpp6s, 

red, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  Ti.,  4;  xii.,  8 

p«9rf  (pc'da), 

chariot, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xTiii.,  18 

to  flow, 

G. 

vii.,88 

^vfroiMi, 

to  defile. 

Apoc. 

Apoc  xxiL,  11 

pvw6mf 

to  be  filthy. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxiL,  11 

Po^fiaiarij 

in  Latin, 

G. 

xix.,  20 

aakniartitf 

trampeter, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  22 

aiiir<f>tipot, 

sapphire, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  19 

aapdioPf 

sardins  (stone), 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi,  20 

aapd6rv(, 

sardonyx. 

Apoo. 

Apoc  xxi.,  20 

atfudoKts, 

fine  flonr. 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  XTiii.,  18 

irrfpiK6s    {aipf 
"is), 

isilk. 

Apoc. 

Apoc  rnii,  12 

al^ripotf 

iron. 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xyiii.,  12 

axcXoffi 

leg, 

G. 

xix.,  31,  82,  88 

aKtiPotHfyiof 

feast  of  tabernadeay 

G. 

▼iL,2 

inai¥6^. 

to  dwell, 

G.,  Apoo. 

i.,  14.    Apoc.  Wi., 

15;  xiL,12;xiiLy 
6;  xxi.,  8 

afuip6y9ufOfp 

of  emerald. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  iT.  8 

afuipayiot^ 

emerald. 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  19 

OTprpnam, 

to  live  delioionsly. 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  7,  9 

arprjvotf 

revelry,  yolnptnoosness,  Apoc. 

Apoc.  xyiii.,  8 

(TVfAfM^iffT^ff 

fellow -disciple, 

G. 

xi.,  16 

trvifti(ripxoitaif 

to  accompany  into, 

G. 

tL,22;  xviiL,  15 

amfwraf 

slares  (lit.  bodies). 

Apoc 

Apoc  xyiii,  18 

raKawruuagf 

of  a  talent*s  weight, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xvi,  21 

TtKwUm^ 

little  child, 

G.,  1  Ep. 

xiii.,  88.  1  Ep.  ii, 
12,  28;  iii,  18; 
iT.,  4;  T.  21 

582     GREEK  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  USED  BY  JOHN  ONLY. 


T€Tafiraio€9 

of  the  foorih  day, 

G. 

•  xi.,  39 

rrrpaympos, 

fonr-sqnftre, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xxL,  16 

T9TpaiUI¥Ott 

of  four  months, 

G. 

iv.,36 

nSitni  ^X^^» 

to  lay  down  the  Uf e, 

G.,  1  Ep. 

X.,  11,  15,  17,   18; 
xiii.,37,  38;  xv., 
13.    lEp.iii,  16 

rtfuon^ff, 

coBtliness, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  xviii.,  19 

rirXoffy 

title, 

G. 

xix.,  19,  20 

t6(o», 

bow, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  yL,  2 

ToirdCiopf 

topaz, 

Apoa 

Apoc.  xxi.,  20 

rpixipot. 

of  hair, 

Apoo. 

Apoc.  yL,  12 

vcucit^ufos, 

of  jacinth. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  ix.,  17 

VOKlt^Otf 

jacinth, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  20 

vdKtvoSf 

of  glass, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  iv.,  6;  xv.,  2 

vaXoSf 

glass, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxL,  18,  21 

vdpiOf 

water-pot, 

G. 

iL,  6,  7 ;  iv.,  28 

Ufuunroff 

woTen, 

G. 

xix.,  28 

<f>ap6£, 

lantern. 

G. 

*  *  *       tf% 

xviii.,  8 

<f>dpfJLaKOPt 

dmg,  enchantment, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  ix.,  21 

<f>apfuu(6f, 

sorcerer, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.xxi.,  8;xxii., 

15 
Apoc.  v.,  8;  XT.,  7; 

^0X17, 

bowl  or  sancer, 

Apoc. 

xvi.,  1,  %  etc. 

ifHKoirpmTtim, 

to  loTc  pre-eminence. 

8£p. 

3Ep.  9 

<^vapcoo, 

to  prate, 

3£p. 

8  Ep.  10 

<l>OlVl(f 

palm-tree, 

G.,  Apoc. 

xii.,13.Apoc.vii.,9 

<l>payfXkiopf 

sconrge, 

G. 

IL,  15 

Xa^aCoy 

hail. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  viii.,  7  ;  xi., 
19 ;  xvi.,  21 

;(aX«ccoff, 

of  brass, 

Apoc 

Apoc.  ix.,  20 

Xa^KTidciP, 

chalcedony. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  19 

;(aXicoXt/3ayoy, 

fine  brass. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  i.,  15 ;  ii.,  18 

XOMOi, 

on  the  gronnd. 

G. 

ix.,  6;  xviii.,  6 

XapTTis, 

paper. 

2Ep. 

2  Ep.  12 

X*ipappos, 

brook, 

G. 

•  •  •        4 

XVIU.,  1 

xXiapos, 

lukewarm, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  ill.,  16 

Xoivt$, 

measure,  a  choenix, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  vi.,  6 

;(cXua), 

to  be  angry. 

G. 

vii.,  23 

Xpto-fJia, 

anointing,  unction, 

lEp. 

1  Ep.  ii.,  20,  27 

Xpv(r6Ki'5ioff 

chrysolite. 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxi.,  20 

XPva-6npa(rotf 

chrysoprasus, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.  xxL,  20 

Xpucrow, 

to  make  golden, 

Apoc. 

Apoc.     xvii.     4 ; 
xviii.,  16 

^mpioVf 

sop. 

G. 

xiii.,  26,  27,  30 

INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS. 


(Fiffurea  refer  to  the  pages.) 


Abaddon,  510 

Abide,  340 

Abideth,  110,  111.  829,  847 

Abominable,  564 

AboTe,  170 

Acoomplisl^,  286 

Accnsation,^  274 

Accuse,  141 

Accuser,  524 

Adultery,  455 

Advocate,  824 

Aenon,  104 

Afraid,  247 

Agree,  867,  548 

Alive,  448 

AU,  86,  835 

Alleluia,  556 

Almighty,  420 

Alone,  146,  219 

Alpha,  419 

Altar,  497,  505 

Altogether,  187 

Amen,  418,  469 

Amend,  180 

Amethyst,  569 

Andrew,  72,  217 

Angel,  408 

Angels,  76,  292,  488 

Angry,  159 

Anguish,  259 

Annas,  269 

Anointed,  182, 199 


Answered,  503 

Antichrist,  837,  895 

Antipas,  447 

Appear,  341,  344,  472 

Appearance,  160 

Appearing,  406 

Ark  of  the  covenant,  521 

Armageddon,  542 

Arose,  146 

Ascend,  154,  294 

Ascended,  96 

Ashamed,  342 

Asia,  412 

Ask,  202,  250,  259,  260,  299,  870 

Asked,  114 

Askest,  113 

Ass,  217 

Assure,  352,  877 

Avenged,  554,  556 

Awake  (verb),  200 

Babtlom,  545 
Backside,  487 
Bag,  212 
Balaam,  447 
Balances,  495 
Band,  268 
Bare  (verb),  213 
Barley,  144 
Baskets,  145 
Bason,  227 
Battle,  541 


HSi 


DTOKX  OF  BHOLIBH  WORDS. 


Bear  [verb),  256,  487 

Bear  reoord,  866,  408 

Be&r  witneM,  54,  866 

Beast,  619 

Beuta,  481 

Bed,  132,466 

Before,  66 

Beginning  (»ot«),  24,  85,  170,  804, 

469 
Begotten,  63,  69,  867,  872 
.  Beheaded,  660 
Beheld,  62,  73 
Behind,  426 

Behold,  66,  106,  286,  848 
Believe,  49,  148,  167,  187,  198,  266 
Believed,  63,  86,  87,  178,  323,  393 
Believeth,  109,  23S 
Believing,  296 
Belly,  163 
Belored,  868,  8U 
Beneath,  170 
Beryl,  668 
Besought,  289 
Bestowed,  848 
Bethany,  65 
Betheada,  132 
Bethsaida,  74 
Betray,  164,  228 
Betrayed,  268 
Bird,  649 
Birth,  181 
Bkwk,  496 
Blasphemy,  448 
Blessed,  216 
Bleeaing.  492 
Blew   147 
Blinded,  2U!.  833 
Blood,  60,  287,  864,  606 
Boat,  -s,  148 
Bondage,  178 
Book,  672 
Ba<ik  of  life,  463 
Bom,  60,  93,  276,  342,  343,  849 


Bom  again,  90 
Bosom,  60,  381 
Bottomless,  607 
Bow  (ftom),  494 
Bowels,  862 
Bnke.  286 
Bnnch,  249 
Braaa,  438 

Bread,  144,  149,  229,  398 
Breadth,  5C1 
Breast,  28],  333 
Breasts,  630 
Breastplates,  609 
Breathed,  294 
Bi«threa,  294,  360 
Bride,  105 
Bridegroom,  106 
Brimstone,  618,  684 
Bring,  198,  396 
Bring  forward,  403 
Broken.  134   198,  169 
Brook,  267 
Brother,  332,  362 
Buildiiip;,  6G7 
Burden,  458 
Bnrial,  213 
Bam,  647 
Bnming,  139 
Bniy,  290 
Buy,  234,  471 

Oa8ab,281 

Cage,  648 

Caiaphas,  210 

Calf,  462 

Called,  343 

Came,  68,  124,  136,  27S 

Gamp,  561 

Gano,  79 

OiinJloslick,  439 

CuiiUlesticks,  426 

Cannot,  167,  176 

Captain,  269 


IHDKZ  or  BSOMBB  WORDa 


Owetb,  192 

Omtj,  188 

Oast  {aetivaly),  4B5 

Out  forth.  249 

Oaat  out,  221,  861,  4t» 

Oatoheth,  192 

Caught,  29fl,  298 

Omim  (noun),  2U 

Chain,  660 

Chaloedonj',  568 

Changen,  88 

ChariotB,  66S 

Cheer  (nn,,n).  261 

Chief  captains,  COO 

Child,  130 

ChUdren,  1I^  286,  207, 891.  iS6 

Choaei),229 

Christ,  156 

ChiTsolite,  668 

Chrjaoprnms,  669 

Ohnrcfaea,  466 

Cinoamon,  5S2 

Citj,  111 

Clean  (of^scftm],  219 

Cleanseth,  317 

aoke,  264 

Clothed,  468,  4T9 

Cloud,  616 

Clouds,  418 

Goals,  270,  296 

Goat,  285 

Gock,272 

Cold,  470 

Come,  289,  265,  896 

Come  down,  149 

Come  npon,  221 

Cometh,  43,  108,  887,890 

Comforter,  243 

ComfortlesB,  246 

Coming.  342 

Command  (verb),  263 

CommfLndtnent,  386 

Gommit,  67 


Committed,  187 
Commitletb,  346 
Oompimioii,  420 
Com  pre  bended,  40 
Condemn,  100,  101,  863 
CondemnatioD,  137 
Confess,  222.  320.  894,  468 
Confidence,  341,  354,  869 
Containing,  81 
Oontinne,  178,  527 
Gonrerted,  222 
CoDTojed,  188 
Convinoeth,  178 
Coida,84 
Corn,  217 
Conncil,  210 
Connsel  {Mrb),  471 
CounteDance,  429 
Coontiy,  128 
Court,  517 
Creature.  493 
Cried,  276 
Crovn,  277,  446,  466 
Crowns,  479.  509 
Cried,  65,  161,  228 
CrTstAl,  480,  566 
CnbitB,  297,  667 
Cnp,  269 
Cured,  188 
CoTsed,  165 
Gostam,  276 

Daikti,  558 

Dsmael,  270 

Dark,  146,  291 

Darkness,  40,  101,  814,  881 

Dealings,  113 

Death,  179, 180,  86(^  87Q,  445,  AB^ 

497 
Deceive,  319,  348 
Deceived,  165 
Deoeiveth,  16S 
Decked,  641 


586 


INDBZ  OF  ENGLISH  WOBOa 


l>eclare,  312 

Declared,  61,  516 

Dedication,  ld6 

Demed,  278,  583 

Delicacies,  549 

Delivered,  282 

Denietb,  339 

Depart,  225,  255 

Departed,  499 

Depths,  457 

Destroy,  85,  348 

Devil,  155, 159»  176;  179,  848,  349, 

444,560 
DevoTir,  522 
Didymns,  201 
Dine,  -d,  299 
Diotrephes,  403 
Dipped,  567 
Dispersed,  162 
Division,  195 
Do,  101,  103,  135 
Do  the  trath,  315 
Doctrine,  158,  395,  896 
Doest,  401 
Dogs,  573 
Door,  190,  465 
Double  {verb),  550      . 
Doubting,  230 
Dragon,  522,  560 
Draw,  114,  151,  221,  297 
Draw  out,  81 
Dnnketh,  115 
Drunk  {verb),  82 
DweU,  504,  562 
Dwellest,  70 
Dwelleth,  153,  392 
Dwelt,  51,  71 

Eagle,  482,  507 
Ear,  269,  440 
Early,  273 
Earth  (the),  498 
Earthly,  96,  106 


Earthquake,  499 

East,  501 

Eaten,  85,  146 

Eateth,  153,  229 

Ebal,  118 

Elder,  391 

Elders,  478 

Elect,  391 

Emerald,  477 

End,  225 

Ended,  226 

Enter,  93 

Ephesos,  426 

Ephraim,  211 

Error,  357 

Eternal  life,  308,  351,  868,  369 

Even  (notm),  146 

Everlasting,  584 

Evil,  101,  138,  265,  4S8 

EvU  one,  334 

Euphrates,  511 

Example,  228 

Expedient,  255 

Eyeealve,  472 

Eyes,  336 

Faob  to  Faob,  397,  404 

Faith,  363 

Faithful,  321,  414, 469 

FaithfuUy,  401 

Faithless,  295 

FaUen,  438,  546 

False  prophets,  355 

Father,  119,  153,  177, 219, 241,  24% 

293,  308,  310,  324,  339 
Father-in-law,  270 
Fathers,  118,  833 
Fault,  276 
Fear  (noim),  361 
Feast,  234 
Feast  day,  87 
Feast  of  tabernacles,  156 
Feed,  300,  504 


ISDSX.  OF  BNOU8H  WOBDB. 


Fell,  433 

F«llow-diMiplM,  aOI 

Fellow-hdlpen,  402 

PeUowship,  309,  Sl(^  619 

Feror,  190 

Fig-tree,  75,  78 

FUl  {vtri),  81 

FiUed,  148,  637 

FUthj,  67S 

Findeth,  73,  73 

Fine  flour,  552 

Finiflb,  126,  189 

Fire,  428 

Firkiiu,  81 

First,  432 

First  begotten,  415 

Fish  (noun),  296 

Fishes,  144,  298 

Jisber's  coat,  297 

Flesh,  60,  93,  263,  S8S,  647 

Flow,  163 

Pold  (no»..).  192,  198 

Follow,  74,  18!I,  408,  635 

Tollowod,  558 

For  (in  exchange),  57 

For  {baoaute),  68 

Foroe,146 

Forehekd,  644 

Poi^iTO,  322 

■Fomicfttion,  176,  456,  6U 

Pound,  73 

FoimdAtioD,  628 

Fotusqaare,  566 

Frkgrneots,  145 

Friend,  281 

Frogs,  641 

Fmits,  668 

Full.  261,  260,  811,  39T 

Fnlnesa,  66 

FnrlongB,  686,  666 

QiSBiTBA,  382 

Guns,  399 


Oftrden,  268,  390 

Oaiment,  427 

Oarmenta,  237,  408 

0«tes,  666 

Oftther,  260,  536 

Gave,  99 

Gave  np,  386 

Qentiles,  162,  402 

Qerizim,  118 

Gift.  114 

Girded,  or  Oirt,  327.  417 

Oirdedst,  301 

Girdle,  427 

Give,  440,  647 

Given,  68,  226 

Giveth,  191 

Glus,  480,537 

Glorified,  164,  236,  2D0 

01or7,  52,  417,  620 

Olorir  of  God,  565 

Gnawed,  541 

Go,  16],  239,  256 

Go  about,  169 

Go  away,  169,  265 

Gog.  661 

Oodlf,  402 

Godspeed,  396 

Gold,  471 

Good  (noun),  362 

Good  (ndjadive),  188,  190 

OoodlT,  563 

Grkoe,  64,  392,  4U 

Grapes,  536 

GraB8,146 

Graves,  138 

Grave-clotbes.  307 

Great  mon,  499 

Greater,  363,  880 

QmMj,  106,  898 

Greek,  284 

Greeks,  217 

GrieToiu,  368,  689 

Groaned,  301 


tNDEZ  OF  BNGUSH  WORDa 


Guide  (verb),  266 
Onile,  75 

Hah,  (notm),  606 
Hair,  609 
HttU,  272 
Hand,  G16 
Handled,  305 
Happy,  229 
Hard,  163 
Hardened,  222 
Harps,  489,  637 
Haipetfl,  638 
Hanrest,  126 
HatB,  253,  350 
Hated,  253 
Hatetb,  332 
Hath,  3C9 
Hare,  167 
Heal,  129 
Healed,  133 
Health,  899 
Hear.  153,  166 
Heard,  4G1 
Heareth,  369 
Heart,  326, 287 
Heat  [aubitantitM),  60A 
Heavenlj,  97 
Hebrev,  284,  610 
Heel,  229 
Held,  497 
Hell,  496 
Hereby,  326,  366 
Herein.  1S6,  250,  369 
Hireling,  191 
Hold  {noun),  648 
Holy,  265,  464,  483,  538 
Holy  Ohost,  164,  291 
Holy  one,  338 
Honor,  140,  493 
Hope,  345 
HomB,  489 
Horse,  493 


HotMB,  609,  513 

Horsemen,  511 

Hoaanna,  216 

Hot,  470 

Honr,  80,  217,  225,  837,  6U 

Houne,  237 

Hurt   jifus^'ee],  446 

Husband,  117 

HniibiindniQQ,  249 

Hyssop,  286 

Idols,  376,  447 
Image,  628 
Impotent,  132 
Incense,  490 
Inarensed,  471 
Ink,  397 

Iscariot,  166,  283,  246 
InMlite,76 
iTory,  661 

Jashstb,  612 
Jacob,  114 
Jaap«r,  476 

Jorusftlem,  467 

Jrzebel,  453 

Jesun,  58,  315 

Jew.  -B,  62,  83,  104,  120,  164,  44S 

Jobn,  42,  408,  410 

Jona,  73 

Joy,  261,  400 

Jndtea,  103 

Juc3ge{iieri),498 

Jnilguieni,  188.  360 

Judgment-seat,  282 

Judgments,  538 

Jnst,  321 

ESP,  179,  219,  243,  326,  827,  8&4t 

363,  376,  409 
Eeepeth,  169,  469,  672 
Kept,  213,  265,  466 
Key,  -B,  433,  464 


SfDHX  OF  HNOLISH  WORD& 


689 


Eidion,  267 

Km,169 

Kindred,  491 

Kindreds,  419,  528 

King,  510 

King  of  the  Jews,  275 

Kings,  416 

Kingdom,  420 

Knew,  46,  87,  88,  298 

Knock,  473 

Know,  89,  96,  125,  140,  160,  167, 

227,  228,  240,  263,  826 
Knowest,  95,  227 
Knoweth,  252,  866 
Known,  241 


Labob  {noun),  487 
Labors,  535 
Labored,  127 
Lad,  144 
Lady,  391 
Laid  hands,  168 
Lamb,  66,  489,  58S 
Lambs,  300 
Lament,  258 
Lamps,  480 
Lanterns,  268 
Laodicea,  468 
Last,  432 

Last  day,  150, 16Q, 
Latin,  284 
Law,  198,  221 
Leadetb,  528 
Leaned,  301 
Leaning,  230 
Leave  (noun),  289 
Leave  [vei-b),  517 
Left  {verb).  111,  180, 
Leopard,  526 
Letters,  158 
Levites,  68 
Liar,  177,  889 
Lieth,  378 


Lie  (to  speak  falsely),  815 

Lie  {noun),  177 

Life,  38,   187,  208,  219,  241,  806, 

807,368,445 
Lifted,  98,  172,  221 
Light  (fUHui),  89, 189, 166»  812, 815^ 

565 
Lighteth,  44 
Lightnings,  479 
Likewise,  185 
Linen,  289,  588,  667 
Lion,  482 
Listeth,  94 

LitUe  obUdren,  828,  888,  884 
Little  ship,  297 
Live  {verb),  245 
Living  (poritc^),  114 
Locasts,  507 
Looked,  230,  805 
Looking,  70 
Lord,  497 
Lord's  day,  425 
Lose,  395 

Lost  {passivelf/),  265 
Love  {noun),  250,  857,  858, 860,  488 
Love  of  God,  827 
Love  {verb),  258,  800,  362 
Loved,  200,  205,  225,  291 
Lovest,  300 
Loveth,  135,  261 
Lukewarm,  470 
Lost,  335 
Lnsts,  176 
Lying,  281 

Madb,  36,  88 
Magdalene,  285 
Make,  323,  465 
Make  war,  449 
Malohns,  269 
Malefactor,  274 
Man,  67,  89,  175 
ManohUd,522 


590 


UTDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WOBDa 


Mudfest  [verb).  24C 

Manif  eBtad,  S07,  346 

Manirestatioo,  407 

Manim,  149,  460 

Manner,  343 

Mansions,  238 

H&rble,  663 

Mark,  529 

Marriage,  79 

Martyrs,  £4S 

Mural  (i>«r£),  136 

Master,  96,  203,  226 

Meaanre  (noun).  107, 496,  667 

Meat,  126,  148,  297 

Merohandiee,  85,  660 

Merohauts,  649 

Mero7,  892 

Message,  311 

Uessias,  73,  122 

Het,  202 

Mid  Heaven,  607 

Midst,  156,  283 

Mind  (»»u..),  646,  547 

MiracleB,  SS,  148 

MiBorable,  471 

Miituro,  289 

Month,  611 

Moon,  521 

Morning  star,  460 

Monntaina.  646 

Mnrderer,  176,  361 

Mnrmnred,  161 

Mnnnnring,  158 

Maaicions,  554 

Mast,  98,  111,292,407 

Mjetery,  544 

Naked,  297 

Name,  60,  87,  243,  264,  402,  < 

462,  544 
Napkin,  207,  292 
Natbanael,  74 
Nation,  210,  211 


Nations,  459 
Nasareth,  74,  268 
Net.  297 

New,  290,  330,  468 
Nicodemns,  89 
NioolaitADB,  43» 
Nobleman,  139 
Noisome,  S3d 
Number  (noun),  NO,  BSL 

OnrsND,  154 

Offended,  264 

Offloers,  161,  268 

Old,  91,  330 

Omega,  419 

Only,  141 

Open  iat(jeclive).  76,  465 

Opened,  474 

Openly,  167,  158 

Ordained,  252 

OTeicome,  261,  834 

Overcometh,  363,  364,  440 

Ought,  119,  228,  329 

Outran,  291 

Own,  47,  261 

PAi.MiK,a70 
Pale,  496 
lUms,  216,  503 
Paper,  396 
Paps,  427 
Parable,  189 
Paradise,  442 
Faroel.  112 
Fart  (noun),  561 
Partaker,  Siilfl 
Passed,  350 
Passover,  224 
Fast,  331 

Patienrp,  437,  466 
I^tmoN,  421 
I^vemi'nt,  282 
Peace,  'J*7 


INDEX  OF  ENGLISH  WORD& 


591 


Pearls,  569 

Pen,  404 

Pence,  212 

Pennyworth,  144 

People,  166,  206,  211,  216,  668 

Perceiye,  118 

Perdition,  265 

Perfect,  861,  862,  461 

Perfected,  327 

PcrgamoB,  446 

Persecnte,  134 

Persecuted,  268 

Peter,  72 

Pharisees,  110 

Philadelphia,  468 

Philip,  78,  217 

Pierced,  287,  419 

Pilate,  274 

Pillar,  467 

Pipers,  656 

Place  {noun),  174,  210,  289 

Please,  172 

Pleasing,  864 

Pleasure,  486 

Point  (noun),  129 

Pool,  181 

Poor,  212 

Porch,  196 

Porches,  132 

Porter,  189 

Potter,  459 

Poyerty,  443 

Pound,  -s,  212,  289 

Poured,  634 

Power,  48,  459,  486 

Praise  {noutt ),  185,  222 

Prating,  403 

Pray,  264,  372 

Prayers,  490,  505 

Preach,  534 

Precious,  212 

Preeminence,  403 

Pref en-ed,  55 


Prepare,  239 
Pride,  336 
Priests,  68,  416 
Prince,  221 
Print,  294 
Prison,  104 
Proceeded,  175 
Prophesy  {verb),  518 
Propitiation,  325 
Prosper,  399 
Proyerb,  -s,  260 
Pure,  346 
Purgeth,  249 
Purifieth,  346 
Purifying,  80,  105 
Purple,  279 
Put,  182,  226,  548 
Put  on,  279,  295 
Putteth,  189 

QuEsnoN  {noun),  104 
Quickeneth,  136 
Quickly,  234 

Babbi,  70,  76,  89 

Bain  {verb),  518 

Bainbow,  476 

Beached,  649 

Beadeth,  409 

Beady,  167 

Beceiye,  138,  141,  240,   267,  867, 

895 
Beceiyed,  47,  48,  129, 461 
Beceiyeth,  106 
Becord  {noun),  167 
Bed,  495 
Bedeem,  491 
Bejecteth,  228 
Beins,  466 
Bejoice,  139 
Bejoiced,  180,  898 
Bemain,  146 
Bemit,  294 


692 


INDBZ  OF  HNOLI8H  WORDa 


Bepented,  514 

Beprore,  256 

Beproyed,  101 

Besorted,  268 

Best  (verb),  498 

Besorreotion,  188»  202 

Bevelation,  405 

Beyiled,186 

Beward,  895,  578 

Bich,  443 

Biohes,  492 

Bighteoos,  160»  824,  842 

Bighteonsness,  256,  848»  849 

Bipe,  586 

Biyers,  164 

Boareth,  515 

Bobber,  189,  276 

Bobe,  280 

Bobes,  498 

Bod,  459 

Boot  (noun),  488 

Bowed,  147 

Bole  (verb),  459,  528 

Baler,  415 

Baler  of  the  feast,  81 

SaokoiiOTH,  499,  518 

Sacrificed,  447 

Said,  125,  127 

Saints,  545 

Salyation,  120 

Samaria,  118 

Same,  224 

Sanctify,  266 

Sanctified,  198 

Sapphire,  567 

Sardis,  460 

Sardine,  476 

Sardonyx,  568 

Satan,  233,  444,  457 

Save,  220 

Savioar,  127,  358 

Saw  (verb),  68,  69,  70, 143,  293, 


409 


Say,  125,  224 

Saying,  -s,  126,  127,  162,  179,  246 

Scarlet,  544 

Scorpions,  507,  510 

Scooige  (noun),  84 

Scoarged,  277 

Scriptore,  198,  292 

Scriptares,  140 

Scroll,  499 

Sea,  148,  561,  562 

Seal,  107 

Seal  (verb),  572 

Sealed,  148,  488 

Seam,  285 

Search  (verb),  140,  166 

Searoheth,  456 

Seat,  447 

Seats,  478 

Second  death,  446 

Second  time,  91 

Sedace,  840,  455 

See,  109,  147,  256,  257,  418 

Seed,  849 

Seek,  70 

Seen,  58,  96,  152,  858 

Seeth,  66,  151,  191,  223,  292,  352 

Sent,  41,  100,  127,  137,  183,  229^ 

266,  272,  294,  357 
Serpent,  523 
Serpents,  513 
Servant,  174,  408 
Servants,  80,  275 
Serve,  219,  503,  571 
Service,  255 
Set  (cu^ively),  465 
Set  (paseively),  475 
Set  down,  228 
Seven,  410,  411 
Shame,  542 
Shape,  140 
Sheath,  269 
Sheep,  300 
Sheep-market^  131 


IKDKX  OF  EVOUBH  WORDS. 


Sb«w  (verb),  SB7.  a6(^  307.  i07 

8hewad.2g5 

Shinath,  41^  889 

ShipmMter,  06A 

81uven,109 

Shore,  296 

Sliortl7,  407 

Sick,  129 

Uight,  SM 

SigDs,  129 

SigDified,  408 

8Uk,6C0 

Siloftio,  18S 

Simon,  166,  299 

F^imoD  Peter,  156.  369 

Sin  (noun),  168,  174,  ITS,  817,  847, 

870 
Sin  (verb),  S70 
Sinned,  82S 
Sinneth,  848 
Sins,  8Q1,  833,  UT 
Sir,  608 
Biater,  206 
Sit,  145 

Six  hundred  threeaoon  anddx,  681 
SknU,  283 

Slain  {poMttN^),  4S»,  ttT 
Sleepeth,  200 
Slew,  360 
Smite,  618 
Smote,  280 
Sm7nus443 
Somevhftt,  438 
Son,  180 

Son  of  mftn,  77,  427 
Son  of  God,  69,  196,  848,  888 
Sons,  49,  348 
Song,  637 
Sop,  2S2,  288 
Sorceries,  6M 
Sore,  539 
Sorrow,  259,  668 
Sorrowful.  26S 

Vol.  II. -88 


Sonl,3a0,400 
SonlB,  497 
Sonnd  (notm).  94 
Sound  [vtrh),  008 
Sprce,  466 
8pekk,96,  468 
Spekkeat,  261 
Speaking,  476 
Spur,  286 
Speech,  176 


Spikenard,  213 
Spirit,  121,  123,  164,  864,  433 
Spirit  (of  Ood),  91,  98 
Bpirita,  418 
SptritnallT,  619 
^e,  471 
Statideth,66 
Stan,  488 
Stings,  610 
8tinketh,306 
Stone,  78,  80,  462,  648 
Stood,  69,  168,  177,  4W 
Stooping,  293 
Straight,  64 
Street,  670 
Strength,  429,  465 
Strengthen,  461 
Stretah,  801 
Strong,  886 
Straok,271 
Btnmbling,  888 
Btnmblingblook,  447 
Bnflereat,468 
Sup,  474 
Snpper,  226,  337 
Sore,  166 
Sware,  616 
Sword,  428,  496,  ttT 
Sfohar,  111 

SjnagogDe,  168,  186,  233,  271,  i 
466 


Mi 


INDEX  OF  BNGLI8H  WORDB. 


Takb,  161 

Take  amtj,  66,  IM 

Taken  awaf,  291 

lUent,  643 

Tarried,  lOi 

TaGte  (ver-h).  ISO 

Taaght,  162 

Tell,  96,  122 

Temple,  83 

Temptation,  466 

Ten  thonsond,  492,  512 

Tenth,  71 

Testify,  368 

Teetimonj,  138,  406,  638,  667 

Tlianks,  145 

Thief,  189,  190,  462 

Thigh,  658 

Thirst  (verb),  116 

Thorns,  277 

Tbonsanda,  492 

Throne,  478 

Thrnst,  296,  636 

Tbandera,  515 

Thund<>rings,  479 

^yiitini,  153 

Thyine,  561 

TiboriaH.  296 

Time,  167,  516 

Title,  283 

Together.  126 

Told,  134 

Took,  269 

Took  up,  197 

Topaz,  568 

Torment,  361,  660 

ToTich,  293 

Tonobetb,  373 

Towel,  227 

Trade,  664 

TraoBgreHBetb,  316,  S9B 

Tmnsgreasion,  846 

Trftvail.  2B9 

Ttensniy,  168 


Tree,  440 

Tribnlfttion,  420,  448 
Tried,  446 

Tried  in  the  Bro,  472 
Tranbled,  204.-220,  230 
.  True,  44,  121,  126,  188,  161,  lfl{^ 

249,  264,  288,  331,  374,  464,  469 
Tnimpet,  425,  475 
Trust  (verb),  141 
Truth,  64,  121,  179,  241,  245,  256^ 

276,319 
Try,  364 

Tamed  back,  293 
Twelre,  164 

Uncmon,  338 
Undentand,  222 
nndeiBtanding,  S74 
Understood,  172 
TJnlooae,  66 

nnrighteonBDeBB,  159,  823, 873 
Untimely,  499 

TaBmr,  136,  188,  820 
Vessel,  661 
Vessels,  459 
Vesture,  285 

VialB,  490 
Victory  303,  687 
Vine,  24it 
Vinegar,  286 
Violence,  554 
VirginB,  533 
Vision,  406 
Voice,  140 
Voices,  479 

WAnm,  126 

Wail,  419 

Walk  (verh).  167,  MS,  8U,  81S 

Walked,  7U,  154 

Walkedet,  301 

Walkeet,400 


INDEX  OF  ENOIIBH  WORDS. 


695 


Walketh,  487 

Wanted,  79 

Wash,  227 

Washed,  227,  416,  508 

Watohfol,  461 

Water,  91,  104,  364,  865 

Waters,  548,  547 

Waterpot,  -s,  80,  124 

Way,  240 

Wearing,  280 

Weary,  488 

Wearied,  112 

Weep,  204,  258 

WeU  (noun),  112,  117 

WeU  [adverb),  117 

Went,  129,  147,  226 

Went  back,  154 

Went  out,  125,  888 

Went  np,  298 

Wept,  204,  488 

West,  565 

White,  126,  452,  468,  589 

Whole,  182,  159 

Whoremongers,  564 

Wicked  One,  873 

Wickedness,  878 

Wilderness,  64 

Will  {verb),  132,  140,  158 

Willingly,  147 

Wind,  98 

Winepress,  586 

Wings,  482 

Wish  (verb),  899 


Withered,  132,  250 

Witness,  42, 168,  254,  368,  414 

Witnesses,  518 

Woman,  80,  118,  124,  259 

Wonders,  129 

Wool,  428 

Word,  25,  34,  173,  224,  246,  306^ 

323,  327 
Word  of  God,  408,  557 
Words,  107, 155,  264 
Work,  -s,  242 
Work  (verb),  134 
Worketh,  134 

World,  44,  170,  325,  356, 861 
Wormwood,  506 
Worse,  82 

Worship  (verb),  119,  120,  122 
Worshipper,  -s,  121,  186 
WoYen,  285 
Woxmd,  527 
Wounded,  526 
Wrapped,  292 
Wrath,  110,  500 
Wretched,  471 
Write,  310,  824,  425 
Writings,  141 
Written,  85, 168,  884^  889 

Young,  801 

Zbaxi,85 
Zeftknifl,  478 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDa 


{f^gwm  r^er  to  the  poffei.) 


4,419 

ifivatrotf  607 

ayaXXuMt  189,  180 

oyairoai,  186,  200,  226,  800 

iyami,  260,  827,  886,  867 

SyytXoSf  406 

<iyid(«,  198,  266,  678 

iytos,  166,  266,  464 

6ypi{t»f  846 

AyvoSf  346 

iSyopa(«,  284,  ^1,  688 

ayptififurrotf  1^ 

ayaPtCofUUf  276 

<SdfX<^f,  882,  860,  861 
^di«<«,  446,  678 
^diicio,  169,  828,  872 
a^cft),  228 

aiyiaX<S(,  296 
aliw,  60,  864 

o2pd>,  66,  188, 194,  196 

alaxy'^ofiaif  842 

«>€«•,  118,  114,  202,  260,  860^ 

alria,  276 
a^;(^|MiXa»a'in,  162 

o^i&ir,  46,  187,  887,  418 
atoipiott  808,  868,  684 
dicfM^Uf  686 

a«oX<ii;^<«,  74,  148,  686,  649 
a«ov«»,  168,  266,  869,  461 

iUpaToyf  684 

oji^V,  607 


870 


aka{oP€Uif  886 
oXf  (<^o»,  199 

dX^^in,  64, 121,  179 

£kfi$;is,  44,  188,  288 

£kfi$ip6t.  44,  121,  126,  1^,  161,  IW, 

249,  881,  874,  469 
dXfi$in,  76,  160,  178 
dKkax66tw,  188 
oXXiyXovia,  666 
aXX^wir,  816 
SkXofuu,  117 
Skvaitf  660 
AfMfndvm,  828,  870 
a^iopri'a,  169,  174, 178, 188, 817, 822^ 

847,  370 
t^Bwrrot,  669 
ifL^p,  76,  188,  418 
ofufotf  66 
^liircXos,  249 
ofiirt Xovfyyv^r,  249 
Biuifwift  662 
«bii3a/i^  164,  294 
ipaffktnm,  184 

dMyyAX*,  122, 184,  267, 26%  aiS 

«BMiyiyM<rff«»,  409 
aniicfc^ai,  280 

<{MiriW«»,  146,  228,  801 

ipdtmuriv^  188 
ibnoroX^,  601 
ipfiPf  67,  117 
dpefxncin,  270 
MtmwoKTd^os,  176,  861 


598 


JJSDEJL  OF  GREEK  WORDa 


Mfmtros,  67,  89,  175 
dpoiym,  76,  465.  474 
dvofAiOf  846 
aPTtf  67 
oitXcm,  81 
^brrXiy/io,  114 
^bN»,  170 

^/oor,  402 
iiirayycXXo»,  807 

dir*  V*.  76,  280,  586 

cnrt  «^<a»,  109 

imipxoiuu,  129,  164,  169,  265 

Arurroff,  296 

iSird,  150,  158,  17%  176,  224,  804, 

811 
attrofiaipttf  298 
awMd^fUf  578 
Ofro^vijcrira),  162 
airoaedXu^ir,  405 
oiroXafi/Savo),  396 
cnr(SXXv/u,  265 
anropiofuUf  280 
<iir(Nn-c'XX«>,  41,   64,    100^  127,  266, 

272,  294,  867 
awoavpayioyot,  185 
dno}^topi(ofjuUf  499 
SwTOfAatf  293,  373 
dfTfloXcia,  265 
dpcoTOf,  354 
dp((rrda>,  299 
dpPtofiai,  339 

dptfio^f  300,  489 

apiraCo,  192,  196 

&ppa<f)Oi    285 

^^i.,  6/,  522 

^1,  235.  236,  256,  261,  888 

Sprof,  144 
dpxaioff  330,  523 
dtyx^*  23,  170,  304,  469 

ap;^(r^iicXii'o(,  81 

^^iX"*"*  221,  415 
da^Wo),  129,  132 


dor^p,  460 

daxijpwrvyrif  542 

o^Xii,  188,  192,  270 

a^Xijr^r,  666 

a^n^ff,  87,  88 

d^iV,  111,  180,  218^  294„  822,  48S 

&XPh  446 

^ii^ff,  606 

/3dA>r,  467 

/Soior,  216 

/SdXXtf,  182,  226,  249,  296,  861,405 

/Sdpof ,  468 

fiapvSf  868 

/Saotm^M,  622 

pao'tuna'fidt,  660 

/3»rcXf  to,  420 

/3a<nXf vr,  416 

/3a<riX(ff6i,  129 

/SacrrdCtt,  197,  218,  487 

/SdcXvcrcrofuu,  664 

3f  3p«ica,  146 

Biydo/Sapa,  66 

BiySoyia,  66 

BiySf  £dd,  182 

/94^,  282 
fifipvXXot,  568 
/9ta,  48 
/3i/3Xioy,  148 
/3iW,  38,  352 
ffkatnljvipia,  448 
/3Xc'fra>,  66,  292,  488 

/Sdcnco),  300 

0p«X»,  518 
/3ptt/Mi,  125 
PpSxris,  125,  148 
fiHadivott  557 

ya^o^vXdicioy,  168 
ydpoft  79 
ytpi^oij  81,  146 
yfyrrij,  181 
ycrMia),  90,  93 


IBDBZ  OF  GREBK  WOBDa 


599 


ytpmVf  91 

y*mfry6s,  249 

ri,  46,  106 

yipofioi,  36,  38,  41,  ^,  60^  66,  58, 

117,  133,  181,   198,   226,  246, 

250,  296,  349,  397,  421,  445, 

475 
ytM^aicca,  46,  87,  95,  155,  160, 172, 

227,  241,  263,  826^  856 

yXoMTOtkofioy,  212 
yraD/Aiy,  547 
yoyyi;(u,  151 
yo/Aor,  550 
ypdfifAOf  141 

ypafffrif  86,  140,  198 

ypd<l>m,  85,  168,  810, 884,426 

yprfyop€e»f  461 
yvyi7,  259 

daifio¥i{ofiaif  195 
daA/iOMor,  159 
^Kpve»t  204 

dfl,  98,  119,  407,  560 
dtiKvvfiif  407 

drcXuiM,  247 

d€lnpot^,  226,  227 
^(nnfn/r,  497 
^ixppMif  129 
d^,  444 
diyXdoi,  246 
hflimiHow,  144,  212 
dui,  37,  422,  525 
dio/SoXXo^uu,  141 
did^uXor,  155,  349,  444 

dtadtda»/i(,  547 
dia^<iavia//ii,  227 
didvoio,  374 
dca(rfro/>a,  162 
^larpiffwf  104 
dtdoicrc^f,  152 
dcdfiairaXof,  95,  203,  228 

Maxn,  158,  271,  395,  396 

Aidvfios,  201 


d(d«»fu,  58,  137,  343,  465,  548 

diryc(pi»,  146 

bupxpiuu^  117 

diKtuoVf  321 

diirauNn^yi;,  256 

diiea(«»/Aii,  538,  557 

diicrvoi^,  297 

Aiorpc<^(,  403 

diirX(^,  550 

di^^<t»,  115 

dcMicM,  134 

doictfui(M,  354 

doXoff,  75 

d6(a,  52,  185,  222,  417 

dofi(»,  164,  235,  250 

douXf  i;«»,  178 

doCXoff,  130 
dpcdcwv,  522,  560 

dvvofus,  48 
dvKirdf ,  500 
dvafiai,  565 

d«>pfa»,  114,  254 
«'<ii*,453 

ifipaiari,  510 

tyKoiptOf  195 

fyKoXffl*,  141 

€*^'X«,  73,  147 

c^ucdr,  402 

?A«r,  210,  211,  469 

f  id»,  oSSa,  88,  89,  96, 119, 160^  167, 

227,  409,  474 
tldwKoBvropf  447 
f  ZMlo^  875 
tU^^p,  528 
W/i/,  162,  170,  181 
tlmu  fic,  74, 179 
ttp^ptj^  392 
«;c,  60,  172,  367,  426 
f  &,  cV,  197 
fV, «'{,  104,  137,  158, 170,  224,  886, 

355,  356,  373,  466,  514,  537 
fV/3ciXX«»,  84^  189,  221 


600 


INBBX  OF  GRBBK  WOBD& 


/icduc(«»,  666 

iKtlpos,  48,  61,  68,  72,  86^  122, 188, 

167,  184,  186,  224,  284^  246, 

288,829 
imuvriti,  419 
MryofuUf  229 
(icX(rro(,  391 
iicvftimf  183 
cKirtirroi,  488 
tXtiaaiaPf  82 
iXavp^f  147 
A<Vx«>  101,  178 

ff'Xffcyot,  471 
At  or,  392 
iXtiPawriPOff  661 
cXiror,  689 
Aicu«,  161,  297 
'EXXiyi^r,  162,  217 
AiriCo),  141 
cfi^cVoa,  70 
t/ifipifidofjuUf  204 
ffif a>,  471 

€'^(,  178 
9finopio¥^  86 
IfiwopoSf  649 
IfinpoaBfVf  66,  362 
ffi<f>atfi(<i>,  246 
ifjitl>vaawf  294 

fV,  62,  68,  246,  491,  606 

ivdofxrjtrtSf  667 
fWpyf  to,  48 

^yra^'C«»)  290 
9Praif>uiafi6st  213 
cWcXXo/Aot,  262 
fWoXi7,  ld4>  236 

tyrvXiaatOf  292 
ivumiov,  364 
f^ip)(o^iatf  176,  338 
f(tTa(wf  299 
f^rjyiofiaif  61 
t^ofioKoytofiaif  463 
tfovtriof  48,  194 
€^imviCiM),  200 


lft»,  861 
^o^,  87,  284 

^oyytXio,  811 
^f  ydunyr,  297 

^/,  346,  487,  498,  608,  68r 
firiyviof,  96 
^t^^'a,  176,  886 
Micfifuu,  206 

«iriXcyofuu,  131 
mr/irrtf,  281 
iwurrpiffHt,  222 
hfU^mtOf  406 
^c^piw,  182 
flrovyMivioc,  97 
ffMM»,  186 

ifrydCofiai,  184,  401,  664 

Ipyoir,  129,  242 

fp€VM«»,  140,  466 

9piifi6^,  647 

fpxofioi,  47,  119,  289,  267,  266^  886^ 

896 
^^H»ra«»,  269,  289,  872 
/<rr/,  811 
l<r;(^arof,  160 
?<rc»^<^  487 
fvoyycXi^o),  616,  684 
fv$ioiS,  147 

€V$VV10f   64 

fvXoyfo,  216 
rvXoyia,  492 
rtMidov/Aai,  399 
€vpiaKtiif  73 
tHj^ofAai,  399 

lx»,  167,  269,  369,  497 

Caa>,  114,  163,  448 
C«n«r,  470 
{f^Xfvoi),  473 
^Xoff,  86 
^f^rc  o,  169 
(iTTTo-iff,  104 
(o0o(,  40 
{^t;yd(,  496 


INDaX  OF  QBHBK  WORDa 


601 


M,  88, 187, 15fi,  806,  a07,  806»  446 

(wyrvM,  801 
(Aow,  481 
(moirotiimf  186 

^Km,  150,  175 

liw,  24,  41.  55,  804 

4irfp,  222 

9avaroff,  850,  460,  487 
^afHrim^  261 

dfoo^ioi,  52,  59,  68,  70,  805 

dfio^  584 

ScXi^fui,  486 

3A«,  94, 182, 140,  158^  166^  176 

Of  or,  59 

SffNTf^^r,  186 

3cpairf  1^,  188 

^itpuTfidSf  126 

3«o>/M»,  59,  118,  147, 151, 179, 191, 

228,852 
dijffi;,  269 

^ripio¥f  519 

3Xi>if,  259,  420,  448 
ip^fifiUf  115 

3pi;yff«»,  258 

3/K{M>ff,  447,  478 

Svivor,  551 
3v/M$f,  110 
3i;pa,  465 

^vp<ap6s,  189,  270 
StNTUurnj/Hoi^,  497,  506 

laofiatt  129,  188 

Sdf ,  idfTf ,  66, 105,  848 

tdior,  47,  78, 128,  184, 159, 177,  261 

Itptvtf  416 

2f p<Sv,  88 

*l9po<ro\vfx7rmf  160 

'lijo-ovf,  58 

lkaa-fji6sf  325 

I^Mir,  227,  280 


Ua,  125, 286,  251,  258, 255,  a61«  862^ 

895 
lovdoior,  62, 108 
IwumSv,  511 
2^f ,  476 

*l<ncapumft,  156,  288 
^IcrpaffXinyr,  75 
umifu,  65,  177 
laxyp6£,  885 
/a^vr,  48 
2x^,298 
'IcMMjc,  42,  73 

Ka&aipm,  249 
KaBapiC^i,  817 
co^r,  249 
ira^ff,  286 
icai,  46,  60 
KoiP^,  235,  290,  880 
Kmp6sf  167 
mcroAyf,  111 
Kflutf,  189 
KaKonoi6sf  274 
jcoicor,  488,  689 

KoXofAOS,  404 

mXffoi,  843 
«iX<$(,  190,  197 
iraX»c,  117,  179,402 
ieaMM»,  438 
mpdui,  237 
mTu,  «I«M 
jcara/Scuyw,  88,  149 
icara/3oX^,  528 
curoyiMixf  jr«»,  352 
Konucttiw,  647 
KoraKafiffdiw,  40,  221 
Karaail>payi(oitai,  488 
K€nta$iti,  85,  522 
Kemfyoptta,  141,  526 
KOTrfyopiaf  141 
mr^yopoff,  524 
«ar«,  170 
Kf  dp«y,  267 


602 

icufuu,  373,  475 
Ktipiaif  207 

KtVTpOWf  610 

K9pafiuc6s<,  459 
Mpdvtnffu^  534 
MpfWTurrtitf  88 

KlfftOTOSf  521 

ici^ci^u,  489 
cctfapyddf,  533 

KiwifltltfAOPf  552 

icXadoc,  249 

icXma),  204,  258,  488 

fcXcio-zMi,  145 
KXtnrrjK,  189,  190,  462 
Kk^pa,  249 
ffocXia,  163 

KOlfldofUUf  200 

tioififjiTitf  200 

JCOiVVOMtt),    896 

KotPtat^iaf  309,  310 

ICO«C«CO(,  217 

jtuXao-if,  361 
iroXXovpioy,  472 
icoXXv3*(m7f,  84 
ffdXiroff,  60,  230,  281 

Ko\vfifffi6paf  131 

KOfiyl^OTtpOPf  130 
KOYTUIO),    127 

xoTTOff,  437,  535 

feOTTTO),    419 

KOfTfjLos,  36,  45,  170 

KOffHVOSf   145 

Kpdfi^aros,  132 

lepciCo),  55,  161,  223 

ffpar«<o,  500 

KpilTOt,  48 

r/Kiir/d^io,  276 
KplOlVOSf   144 
Kpipa,  188 

icp(Vu>,  100.  498 
KpliTii,  137,  360 
KpoCfo,  473 
Kplmrui^  450 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORDS. 

ic^<rraXXi{^fl»,  565 
Kri{m^  36 
KTiaiJMf  498 

KV^ipVffTtltt  554 

Kvpia,  391 
cvpioicdf ,  425 
icvpiof,  508 
mffl*!',  578 


XaX/»,  172,  186, 224.  258,  261,  475 

XaX»d,  127,  176 

Xii^M»,  48,  106,  141,  257,  461, 466^ 

486 
Xo^irdf,  480 
Xa/Airpd(,  539,  558 
Aoodtitf  vr,  468 
Xadf,  211,  568 
Xarptiof  255 
XorpcM*,  508,  571 
Xry«»,  172,  258,  261,  475 
XivTtop^  227 
Xffviedr,  126,  452,  468 
Xfip6t,  536 
X^crr^r,  189,  276 
Xiaw,  398 
A(3doTp4k»rof ,  282 
XitfoPy  538 
Xiirapdf,  553 
Xirpo,  212 

X&yoi,  25,  34, 127, 176, 224,  246, 306^ 
323,  327,  557 

^oyxn^  286 
Xocdopfctf,  186 
Xoua>,  227,  416 

XvYTCfiD,    258 

X(;7n7,  259 

XvxpiOf  426 

Xu;^i'of,  139 

Xt^o),  65,  85,  134,  198,  348 

paicdpioff  229 
pdvva,  450 
papyapiTrff,  569 


INDKZ  OF  6BSBK  WOBDa 


lU^iTvpim.  64,  866,  IM,  Me 
liapTvpio^  4^  138,  406 
liofmit,  411 

277 


ItajfoipOt  496 

M.;;*"'  368,  sw 

mAw,  397 

mA.4,  193 

pAX.,  139, 471 

M<Mh  70, 110,  168,  8S0 

liiaot,  66 

fMtnnifMnifio,  607 

fucnw,  168 

^.rJ,  244,  810,  888,  860,  06 

lirraffai,^,  226,  360 
lirrouairui,  16S 
lirrprfriit,  81 

^.jT^124 
^<ci.'n.,  278 


^>.  408 
253,332 
,  126,  395 
ttt,191 
fuijfuio*,  138 
liMytiti,  4fi6 


fUtvyvvqt,  37,  68,  6 

^»i,  141 

ltOITJ(OS,  482 

,«»a»(;(,664 

F.«<ioM<»,  516 

»»>*«(.  492 
r»pi'f«,  109 


■W^q,  418 

■x^c,  466 


Mif,  646 

riaau,  387 

iHfi^r*;  260,  686 
fq^t,  183 
£a<w,440 


iiit,  64 
f(C-.  206 
&6t,,  388 
Mi»or,389 
oi>^337 
oJaoAofMa,  06 
oliniVfMfq,  46 
Aor,  159, 187 
Avtdnr,  499 

dfUMW.  186 

i^tffi-,  186,  333,  8a(^  856,  894 
dfuD,  136 
^Kipw,  317 

60,364,403 


&r«. 


174 


AriirAr,  467 

^imiirta,  406 

afr»fMi,663 

^fMifia,  406 

ipaan,  406 

V-.  68,  66, 100,  148,  367, 118 

i,r,it,  110, 600 

opfii)|ui,  664 


604 


INDEX  OF  GBEBK  WOBDa 


ipmotfj  549 
6p4ta»ot^  245 
&r«off,  464, 588 

&rof  I  48 

&rrif,  180,  808,  419,  426 

jlroir,  182,  841,  868,  485,  504 

ovdffir,  814 

ovfccri,  252 

o^  tifi,  129,  149,  227 

olw,  180,  151,  157,  161,  169,  258 

oItos,  62,  159, 162 

o<^iX»,  228,  329 

tx^os,  62,  165,  206,  215,  216 

oy^diHov,  144,  298 

iy^ia,  146 

^if,  160,  429 

iroiddpioy,  144 

iniidiW,  130,  297,  884 

voidicrici;,  270 

iraXa«($f,  830 

vatn^Kpamp,  420 

natfTOT€f  172 

ira^,  42,  152,  166,  244,  811,  898 

wapayw,  331 

irapadfccror,  442 

napadidiofii,  154,  228,  268,  286 

rrapdickrfTos,  243,  324 
frapoiciWo),  292 
napaXafifiauio,  47,  240 
irafidoXir,  526 
rraptp^Xrjf  561 
trapBtvos,  533 
wapoipiaj  189,  260 
ftapovvlay  342 
vapprivlay  157,  158,  341 

nar,  36,  150,  255,  335,  345 

wa(r;(a,  276 
frariio-o-a),  518 
varrip,  53,  177,  308 
ndr/ior,  421 
narpiSt  128 
iTf  »^a),  109,  352,  377 


irrifKi(a>,  144 

irrXrffi(ofuu,  560 

im^/xk,  270 

wtpBoSf  568 

ircfM',  151,  255,  804 

vf^M/3aXX«,  279,  468, 479 

wtpi{»innfiiif  427 

ircptirar<u;,  70, 154, 200, 801, 815, 401, 

487 
n€pur<r€v«Of  145 
mpiaaotf  190 

WtTpOSy  73 

innni,  112,  117 

nrjxysf  567 

vmC»,  161,  168,  296,  296 

v<y«0,  115 

viWo),  546 

irMTTfi;.*,  49, 83, 86,  87, 157, 173, 187, 

198,  222,  228,  287,  868 
wurruc^j  212 
Yri<rrc(,  863 

wi<rr6s,  295,  821,  401,  414,  469 
irXaMa»,  158,  165,  819,  848,  455 
ffXdyi;,  357 
nXoPotf  894 
frXarcia,  570 
nXfiptji,  54 
n\fip6a>,  157,  251,  260,  811,  461 

rrX^^fui,  56 
nXoidpiop,  148,  297 
rrXoiov,  146 
irXovrco),  471 

frvcO/iia,  93,  121,  122,  164,  413,  422 

irvcv/xart«ca>(,  519 
fTMO),   147 
nodfjprjfj  427 

iro<<a>,  36, 103, 135, 159, 328, 846, 368^ 

627,  548 
noipaiv(Of  300,  459,  504 
nolppTi,  193 
troloff,  197,  274,  301 
noKtpiw,  449 
nokffioSf  541 


DfDEX  OF  aiLHBE  WOBOfl. 


wAvn^tet,  SIS 

»«^f>«,  101,  a6B,  S84,  589 

nfMva/uu,  180,  339,  aw 

MvprtU,  ITS 

<rV>*.  Ml 

iroToBOI,  543 
irfW<ra-.>,  101,  103 

■WptV&VTtpOt,  891 

wpoojw,  890 
trpaamaafuu,  Ul 
ir^Mid'n'iic'tE,  131 
wpiacroy,  300 
ir/wiri^ilrw,  403 

«;>dt,  83,  806,  834,  870 

V(w<mix7i  COD 

^^a.v»«,  119,  lao,  isa 

«po<riniV7rqt,  ISI 
wpmr^oyuw,  39T 
itpwipipm,  3BB 
wporpf^a.,  391 

«po^Tr(v«,  SIS 
w^,  378 

«fHHHil,  460 

vfMn»,  358      ' 

iTfMM'dnMror,  41S 
«rWpMi,339 

(ITHXTU,  418 

■niXar,  566 
nvfWTtii,  180 
WVpOOfiOl,  473 

wvppoi,  496 

ir>p<(a,  333 

Ai9Bo^469 
pawurfia,  371 


pqfid,  107,  lis,  361 
^(wi^aia,  138,  187 


aiSficmr,  vi^im,  391 
ff<iXtnr(,  136,  175 
lofu^mt,  118 
0wr^4pof,  567 
vu^ini,  668 
■rdfif,  80,  98 
mo-fiBi,  199 

loe 


<nvu<or,  BB,  139,  118 
mfputir,  660 

i:m«>>  156 

(rco-SoXiC*,  161,  961 
ircav&iXov,  833 
iTMvof,  169,  661 
ow^mK  61.  601,  663 
<riAifpai,  168 
(rnrk,  10,  167,  811,  81 
ir«4r<>c  10,  101,  811 
[.  177 


vToSur,  586 
ffro^iJ^  686 
^^wot,  115,  166, 17» 
<rT^[,  381,  383 
aT^Km,  66,  177 
<mfai,  183 
n^fw,  897 


wyaMVakifc,  laO 
myxpaoiiiat,  118 
niK^,  76,  76 
mAXn^iflriwt,  309 
Wfl^BwkfVO,  471 

tn^ifuiAfrqt,  301 
iovfi^/Mf,  3SS 


606 


INDEX  OF  GREEK  WORD& 


avvuya»9  268,  528 

oiwoytty^,  163,  271 

trwibfuov.  210 

irv¥tpy6sf  402 

avpf pxofiMf  271 

avtfriBtiaf  276 

fnnrrplfi^f  459 

avp»f  151 

a<^iC«*,  350,  489,  497,  526^ 

aiHKtyiCi^,  107,  148,  572 

vx^trpaf  195 

axoiPtop,  84 

a»(«*,  200 

aotr^p,  127,  358 

attrripiaf  120 

raXaiira>pf>r,  471 
raXayrialor,  543 
ropdaco),  220 
raiPoSf  138 
TA)(iO¥f  234 
'^X**^  («V  rd;^fc),  407 
rf  jcMov,  235,  323 
r€KPOP,  49,  391 
rcXctor,  361 
rAcido),  125,  139,  327 
rcX<'<»,  286,  537 
r<Xo(,  225 
rcmpraior,  206 
rrrpaycovof,  566 
TtTpdfirjvuVf  126 

n;p«»,  243,  326,  327,  409,  459,  465 

riBfifu,  191,  252,  351 

rifirjf  493 

rirXor,  283 

rowvTosy  122 

rdfoir,  494 

roirdfcov,  568 

rdfror,  210,  239 

r«(rf,  233 

rpvydw,  536 

Tp«»y«,  153,  229 

Tihrotf  294 


n;<^Xoa>,  333 

vaKtpBivos,  512 
vdXcyor,  480,  537 
•vyiaivoi,  899 
{7ii7(,  132,  159 
vdpiof  80,  114 
(^,  104,  364,  365 
vlot,  49,  115,  130 

{^dy«,  147,  155,  161,  169,  200,  204» 
216,  240,  252,  256, 539 

viroirdfla,  202,  217 
virdynyo-cr,  216 
imtpt  200 

{mfipirrit,  161,  268,  275 
wrd,  75,  76 
virddrftypa,  228 
VfroXafi/3dytt»,  402 
viru/Aoi^,  466 

VOTCptfO),  79 

v^HMtrroSf  285 
tr^doa,  98,  221 

^iW,  40,  332 

^»«pd»,  295,  307,  344,  472 

ffHiv^ptaais,  407 

<Paif6sf  268 

<t>apfiaK(iaf  514 

^aOXor,  101,  138 

^p»,  396 

i^idXi},  490 

<^/a>,  135,  205,  253,  261,  291,  300 

</MXo9rp«»rfva>,  403 
<fjXvap€»,  403 
^K)/3o(,  361 
<^m(,  216,  502 
it>op^^,  280 
<l)oprioVf  458 
<^/xiyAXtor,  84 

<^p<ap,  112,  114,  507 

<Pv\aKr),  104,  548 
<^vXdrrrra>,  265,  375 

^Xi7,  419,  491,  528 


INDEX  OF  GRBBK  WORDS. 


607 


^«f,  99,  139,  166,  312,  316 
ifiwrrripf  167,  665 
^k0Ti{<i>,  40 

Xoipa^  106,  396 
XakxridiAhf  568 
;(aA#coXi/3ayoy,  428 

XtifjLui^  182 

xupa,  106,  259,  400 

Xdpoyfia,  629 
X*if>i{ofJLai,  343 
X^ty»  360 
;((i^i(,  64,  392 
;^tipn;r,  396 
XfifJMppost  267 
;(iXtad«(,  492 

Xi\iapx*'ii  "269 
;(Xtap<ir,  470 
j^Xci>po(,  496 
j^oivif,  496 
XoKdtHf  159 
;(opr(i^a»,  148 
^fopror,  146 
XP^^  199 
Xpiviuh  838 


Xf>6i'oSf  616 
XpwrioPf  471 
;(^pv(roXi^f,  568 
Xpvadca,  644 
X«*pcw,  81,  174 
X^pioVf  112 
X«p«F,  37 

^wdoirpo^Tnjf,  866 

^cOdof,  177 

^w<myf,  177,  389 

Vn7Xa<^»,305 

^^o(,  462 

yitvxn,  219,  220,  400,  497 

y^XP^^9  ^^^ 
^cu^tfoi,  232 

y^apioVf  232 

12,419 

2>d«,  646 

«i;v,  60 

6  <ui',  icoi  6  i^v,  412 

&pa,  217,  337 

«»f ,  63 

wrdptoF,  269 


