# The First Epistle of S. Clement to the Corinthians

# Chapter 1

1.  By reason of the sudden and repeated calamities and reverses which have befallenus, brethren, we consider that we have been some- what tardy in giving heed to the matters of dispute that have arisen among you, dearly beloved, and to the detestable and unholy sedition, so alien and strange to the elect of Elohim (God), which a few headstrong and self-willed persons have kindled to such a pitch of madness that your name, once revered and renowned and lovely in the sight of all men, hath been greatly reviled. For who that had sojourned among you did not approve your most virtuous and stedfast faith? Who did not admire your sober and forbearing piety in Messiah (Christ)? Who did not publish abroad your magnificent disposition of hospitality? Who did not congratulate you on your perfect and sound knowledge? For ye did all things with- out respect of persons, and ye walked after the ordinances of Elohim (God), sub- mitting yourselves to your rulers and rendering to the e older men a among you the honour which is their due. On the young too ye enjoined modest and seemly thoughts: and the women ye charged to perform all their duties in a blameless and geemly and pure conscience, cherishing their own husbands, as is meet; and ye taught them to keep in the rule of obedience, and to manage the affairs of their household in seemliness, with all discretion. 58 S. CLEMENT OF ROME
2.  And ye were all lowly in mind and free from arrogance, yielding rather than claiming submission, ore glad to give than to receive, and content with the provisions which Elohim (God) _supplieth, And giving heed unto His words, ye laid them up diligently in your hearts, and His sufferings were before your eyes. Thus a profound and rich peace was given to all, and an insatiable desire of doing good. An abundant out- pouring also of the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) yt fell upon all; and, being full of holy counsel, in excellent zeal and with a pious confidence ye stretched out your hands to Almighty Elohim (God), supplicating Him to be propitious, if unwillingly ye had committed any sin. Ye had conflict day and night for all the brotherhood, that the number of His elect might be saved~ with fearfulness and intentness of mind. Ye were sincere and simple and free from malice one towards another. Every sedition and every schism was abominable to you. Ye mourned over the transgressions of your neighbours: ye judged their shortcomings to be your own. Ye repented not of any well-doing, but were ready unto every good work. Being adorned with a most virtuous and honourable life, ye performed all your duties in the fear - of Him, The commandments and the ordinances of the Yahuah (Lord) were written on the tables of your hearts. |
3.  All glory and enlargement was given unto you, and that was fulfilled which is written; AZy beloved ate and drank and was enlarged and waxed fat and kicked. Hence come jealousy and envy, strife and sedition, persecution and tumult, war and captivity. So men were stirred up, ¢he mean against the honouradle, the ill-reputed against the highly-reputed, the foolish against the wise, he jyoung against the elder. For this cause righteousness and peace stand aloof, while each man hath forsaken the fear of the Yahuah (Lord) and become purblind in the faith of Him, neither walketh in the ordinances of His commandments nor liveth according to that. which becometh Messiah (Christ), but each goeth after the lusts of his evil heart, seeing that th they have conceived an unrighteous and ungodly jealousy, through which also death entered into the world.
4.  For so it is written, And tt came to pass after certain days that Cain brought of the fruits of the earth a sacrifice unto Elohim (God), and Abel he also brought of the firstlings of the sheep and of their fatness. And Elohim (God) looked upon Abel and upon his gifts, but unto Cain and unto his sacrifices Fle gave no heed. And Cain sorrowed exceedingly, and his countenance Jel. And Elohim (God) said unto Cain, Wherefore art thou very sorrowful? and wherefore did thy countenance fall? Tf thou hast offered arizht and hast not divided aright, didst thou not sin? Hold thy peace. Unto thee shall \ TO THE CORINTHIANS. 59 he turn, and thou shalt rule over him. And Cain said unto Abel his brother, Let us go over unto the plain. And it came to pass, while they were in the plain, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him. Ye see, brethren, jealousy and envy wrought a brother’s murder. By reason of jealousy our father Jacob ran away from the face of Esau his brother. Jealousy caused Joseph to be persecuted even unto death, and to come even unto bondage. Jealousy compelled Moses to flee from the face of Pharaoh king of Egypt while it was said to him by his own countryman, Who made thee a judge or a decider over us? Wouldest thou slay me, even as yesterday thou slewest the Egyptian? By reason of jealousy Aaron and Miriam were lodged outside the camp. Jealousy brought Dathan and Abiram down alive to hades, because they made sedition against Moses the servant of Elohim (God). By reason of jealousy David was envied not only by the Philistines, but was persecuted also by Saul[king of Yashar'el (Israel)]. 5: But, to pass from the examples of ancient days, let us come to those champions who lived nearest to our time. Let us set before us the noble examples which belong to our generation. By reason of jealousy and envy the greatest and most righteous pillars of the Church were persecuted, and contended even unto death. Let us set before our eyes the good Apostles. There was Peter who by reason of unrighteous jealousy endured not one nor two but many labours, and thus having borne his testimony went to his appointed place of glory. By reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointed out the prize of patient_endurance. After that he had been seven times in bonds, had been driven into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won the noble renown which was the reward of his faith, having taught righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne his testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance.
6.  Unto these men of holy lives was gathered a vast multitude of the elect, who through many indignities and tortures, being the victims of jealousy, set a brave example among ourselves. By reason of jealousy women being persecuted, after that they had suffered cruel and unholy insults tas Danaids and Dirce}+, safely reached the goal in the race of faith, and received a noble reward, feeble though they were in body. Jealousy hath estranged wives from their husbands and 60 S. CLEMENT OF ROME changed the saying of our father Adam, 7/zs now is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. Jealousy and strife have overthrown great cities and uprooted great nations.
7.  These things, dearly beloved, we write, not only as admonishing you, but also as putting ourselves in remembrance. For we are in the same lists, and the same contest awaiteth us. Wherefore let us forsake idle and vain thoughts; and let us conform to the glorious and venerable rule which _ hath been handed down to us; and let us see what is good and what is pleasant and what is acceptable in the sight of Him that made us. Let us fix our eyes on the blood of ‘Messiah (Christ) and understand how precious it is unto His Father, because being sh¢ shed for our salvation it won for the whole world the grace of repentance. Let us review all the generations in turn, and learn how from generation to generation the Master hath given a place for repentance unto them that desire to turn to Him. Noah preached repentance, and they that obeyed were saved. Jonah preached destruction unto the men of Nineveh; but they, repenting of their sins, obtained pardon of Elohim (God) by their sup- plications and received salvation, albeit they were aliens from Elohim (God).
8.  The ministers of the grace of Elohim (God) through the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) spake concerning repentance. Yea and the Master of the universe Himself spake concerning repentance with an oath; For, as J live, saith the Yahuah (Lord), I desire not the death of the sinner, so much as his repentance ; and He added also a merciful judgment: Repent ye, O house of Lsrael, of your iniquity ; say unto the sons of My people, Though your sins reach rom the earth even unto the heaven, and though they be redder than scarlet and blacker than sackcloth, and ye turn unto Me with your whole heart and say Father, I will give ear unto you as unto a holy people. And in another place He saith on this wise, Wash, be ye clean. Put away your tniguities from your souls out of My sight. Cease from your iniguities; learn to do good; seek out judgment; defend him that ts wronged: give judgment for the orphan, and execute righteousness for the widow ; and come and let us reason together, saith He; and though your sins be as crimson, I will make them white as snow; and though they be as scarlet, I will make them white as wool. And if ye be willing and will hearken unto Me, ye shall eat the good things of the earth ; but of ye be not willing, netther hearken unto Me, a sword shall devour you; for the mouth of the Yahuah (Lord) hath spoken these things. Seeing then that He desireth all His beloved to be partakers of repentance, He confirmed it by an act of His almighty will. TO THE CORINTELANS. 61 g. Wherefore let us be obedient unto His excellent and_glorious will; and presenting ourselves as suppliants of His mercy and goodness, let us fall down before Him and betake ourselves unto His compassions, forsaking the vain toil and the strife and the jealousy which leadeth unto death. Let us fix our eyes on them that ministered perfectly unto His excellent glory. Let us set before us Enoch, who being found righteous in obedie was translated, and his death was not found. Noah, being found faithful, by his ministration preached _regeneration unto the world, and through him the Master saved the living creatures that entered into the ark in concord. — to. Abraham, who was called the ‘friend,’ was found faithful in that he rendered obedience unto the words of Elohim (God). He through obedience went forth from his land and from his kindred and from his father’s house, that leaving a scanty land and a feeble kindred and a mean house he might inherit the promises of Elohim (God). For He saith unto him; Go forth from thy land and from thy kindred and from thy father’s house unto the land which I shall show thee, and I will make thee into a great nation, and I will bless thee and will magnify thy name, and thou shalt be blessed. And I will bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them that curse thee ; and in thee shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed. And again, when he was parted from Lot, Elohim (God) said unto him; Look up with thine eyes, and behold from the place where thou now art, unto the north and the south and the sunrise and the sea; for all the land which thou seest, I will give it unto thee and to thy seed for ever; and I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, If any man can count the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be counted. And again He saith; Elohim (God) led Abraham forth and said unto him, Look up unto the heaven and count the stars, and see whether thou canst number them. So shall thy seed be. And Abraham believed Elohim (God), and it was reckoned unto him for righteousness. Yor his faith and hospitality a son was given unto him in old age, and by obedience he offered him a sacrifice unto Elohim (God) on one of the mountains which He showed him.
11.  For his hospitality and _godliness Lot was saved from Sodom, when all the country round about was judged by fire and brimstone ; the Master having thus foreshown that He forsaketh not them which set (ae hope on Him, but appointeth unto punishment and torment them which swerve aside. For when his wife had gone forth with him, being otherwise-minded and not in accord, she was appointed for a sign here- unto, so that she became a pillar of salt unto this day, that it might be | | 62 S. CLEMENT OF ROME known unto all men that they which are double-minded and they which doubt concerning the power of Elohim (God) are set for a judgment and for a token unto all the generations.
12.  For her faith and hospitality Rahab the harlot was saved. For when the spies were sent forth unto Jericho by Joshua the son of Nun, the king of the land perceived that they were come to spy out his country, and sent forth men to seize them, that being seized they might be put to death. So the hospitable Rahab received them and hid them in the upper chamber under the flax-stalks. And when the messengers of the king came near and said, Zhe spies of our land entered in unto thee: bring them forth, for the king so ordereth: then she answered, Zhe men truly, whom ye seek, entered in unto me, but they departed forthwith and are journeying on the way; and she pointed out to them the op- posite road. And she said unto the men, Of a surety J perceive that the Yahuah (Lord) your Elohim (God) delivereth this city unto you ; for the fear and the dread of you is fallen upon the inhabitants thereof. When therefore tt shall come to pass that ye take it, save me and the house of my father. And they said unto her, /¢ shad/ be even so as thou hast spoken unto us. When- soever therefore thou percetvest that we are coming, thou shalt gather all thy folk beneath thy roof, and they shall be saved ; for as many as shall be found without the house shall perish. And moreover they gave her a sign, that she should hang out from her house a scarlet thread, thereby showing beforehand that through the blood of the Yahuah (Lord) there shall be redemption unto all them that believe and hope on Elohim (God). Ye see, dearly beloved, not only faith, but prophecy, is found in the woman. E. oy Letius! therefore be lowly-minded, brethren, laying aside all arrogance and conceit and folly and anger, and let us do that which is written. For the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) saith, Let not the wise man boast in hts wisdom, nor the strong tn his strength, neither the rich tn hts riches ; but he that boasteth let him boast in the Yahuah (Lord), that he may seek Him out, and do judgment and righteousness ; most of all remembering the words of the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha (Jesus) which He spake, teaching forbearance and long-suffering : for thus He spake ; Have mercy, that ye may receive mercy : forgive, that it may be forgiven to you. As ye do, so shall it be done to you. As ye give, so shall it be given unto you. As ye judge, so shall ye be judged. As ye show kindness, so shall kindness be showed unto you. With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured withal to you. With this com- mandment and these precepts let us confirm ourselves, that we may walk in obedience to His hallowed words, with lowliness of mind. For — TO: THE CORINTHIANS. 63 the holy word saith, Ugon whom shall I look, save upon him that is gentle and quiet and feareth Mine oracles ?
14.  Therefore it is mnght and proper, brethren, that we should be obedient unto Elohim (God), rather than follow those who in arrogance and un- ruliness have set themselves up as leaders in abominable jealousy, For we shall bring upon us no common harm, but rather great peril, if we surrender ourselves recklessly to the purposes of men who launch out into strife and seditions, so as to estrange us from that which is right. Let us be good one towards another according to the compassion and sweetness of Him that made us. For it is written: Zhe good shall be dwellers in the land, and the innocent shall be left on it; but they that transgress shall be destroyed utterly from it. And again He saith; J saw the ungodly lifted up on high and exalted as the cedars of pe es And L passed by, and behold he was not; and I sought out his place, and I found it not. Keep innocence and behold uprishinesss; jor there is a remnant for the peacefuf man.
15.  Therefore let us cleave unto them that practise peace with godliness, and ngt unto them that desire peace with dissimulation. For He saith in a certain place; Zhzs people honoureth Me with their lips, but their heart is far from Me ; and again, They blessed with their mouth, but they cursed with their heart. And again He saith, They loved Him with their mouth, and with their tongue they lied unto Him; and their heart was not upright with Him, neither were they stedfast in f1is covenant. For this cause let the deceitful lips be made dumb which speak iniquity against the righteous. And again; J/ay the Yahuah (Lord) utterly destroy all the deceitful lips, the tongue that speaketh proud things, even them that say, Let us magnify our tongue ; our lips are our own, who ts lord over us? kor the musery of the ? needy and for the groaning of the poor L will now arise, saith the Yahuah (Lord). I will set him in safety ; - J will deal boldly by him.
16.  For Messiah (Christ) is with them that are lowly of mind, not with them that exalt themselves over the flock. The sceptre [ot the the majesty] of Elohim (God), even our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), came not in n the pom pomp of 5 of. arrogance or of pride, though He might have done so, but in lowliness of 1 mind, according as the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) spake concerning Him. For He saith ; Zord, who believed our report? and to whom was the arm of the Yahuah (Lord) re- vealed? We announced Him in His presence. Asa child was He, as a root in a thirsty ground. There is no form in Him, neither glory. And we beheld Him, and He had no form nor comeliness, but His form was mean, lacking more than the form of men. He was aman of stripes and of toil, and knowing how to bear infirmity: for Hts face is turned away. He was dishonoured and held of no account. He beareth our sins and suffereth pain for our sakes: and we accounted Him to be in toil and tn stripes and in affliction. And He was wounded for our sins and hath been afflicted for our intguities. The chastisement of our peace ts upon Him. With His bruises we were healed. We all went astray ltke sheep, each man went astray in his own path: and the Yahuah (Lord) delivered Him over for our sins. And He openeth not His mouth, because He ts afflicted. As a sheep He was led to slaughter; and as a lamb before his shearer is dumb, so openeth He not His mouth. In His humiliation His judgment was taken away. His generation who shall declare? For His life ts taken away from the earth. Lor the iniguities of my people He ts come to death, And I will give the wicked for Fis burial, and the rich for His death; for He wrought no iniguity, netther was guile found in His mouth. And the Yahuah (Lord) desireth to cleanse Him from His stripes. Tf ye offer for sin, your soul shall see a long-lived seed. And the Yahuah (Lord) desireth to take away from the toil of Hts soul, to show Him light and to mould Him with under- standing, to justify a Fust One that ts a good servant unto many. And He shall bear their sins. Therefore He shall inherit many, and shall divide the spoils of the strong; because Hts soul was delivered unto death, and He was reckoned unto the transgressors; and He bare the sins of many, and for their sins was He delivered up. And again He Himself saith; But [am a worm and no man, a reproach of men and an outcast of the people. All they that beheld me mocked at me, they spake with their lips; they wagged their heads, saying, He hoped on the Yahuah (Lord) ; let flim deliver him, or let Him save him, for He desireth him. Ye see, dearly beloved, what is the pattern that hath been given unto us; for, if the Yahuah (Lord) was thus lowly of mind, what should we do, who through Him haye been brought under the yoke of His grace® =
17.  Let us be imitators also of them which went about in goatskins and sheepskins, preaching the coming of Messiah (Christ). We mean Elijah and | Elisha and likewise Ezekiel, the prophets, and besides them those men | also that obtained a good report. Abraham obtained an exceeding good report and was called the friend of Elohim (God); and looking stedfastly on the glory of Elohim (God), he saith in lowliness of mind, But J am dust and ashes. Moreover concerning Job also it is thus written; And $0b was righteous and unblameable, one that was true and honoured Elohim (God) and abstained from all evil. Yet he himself accuseth himself saying, Vo TO THE CORINTHIANS. 65 man ts clean from filth ; no, not though his life be but for a day. Moses was called faithful in all His house, and through his ministration Elohim (God) judged Egypt with the plagues and the torments which befel them. Howbeit he also, though greatly glorified, yet spake no proud words, but said, when an oracle was given to him at the bush, Who am J, that Thou sendest me? Nay, Lam feeble of speech and slow of tongue. And again he saith, But 7 am smoke from the pot.
18.  But what must we say of David that obtained a good report? of whom Elohim (God) said, 7 have found a man after My heart, David the son of Jesse: with eternal mercy have I anointed him. Yet he too saith unto Elohim (God); Have mercy upon me, O Elohim (God), according to Thy great mercy ; and according to the multitude of Thy compasstons, blot out mine inigutty. Wash me yet more from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin ts ever before me. Against Thee only did I sin, and I wrought evil in Thy sight; that Thou mayest be justified in Thy words, and mayest conquer in Thy pleading. For behold, im tniguities was I conceived, and in sins did my mother bear me. For behold Thou hast loved truth: the dark and hidden things of Thy wisdom hast Thou showed unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean. Thou shalt wash me, and I shall become whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear of joy and gladness. The bones which have been humbled shall rejoice. Turn away Thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniguities. Make a clean heart within me, O Elohim (God), and renew a right spirit in mine inmost parts. Cast me not away Jrom Thy presence, and take not Thy Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and strengthen me with a princely spirit. I will teach sinners Thy ways, and godless men shall be converted unto Thee. Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O Elohim (God), the Elohim (God) of my salvation. My tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. Yahuah (Lord), Thou shalt open my mouth, and my lips shall declare Thy praise. For, if Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I would have given it: in whole burnt-offerings Thou wilt have no pleasure. A sacrifice unto Elohim (God) ts a contrite spirit; a contrite and humbled heart Elohim (God) will not despise.
19.  The humility therefore and the submissiveness of so many and sO great men, who have thus obtained a good report, hath through obedience made better not only us but also the generations which were before us, even them that received His oracles in fear and truth. Seeing then that we have been partakers of many great and glorious doings, let us hasten to return unto the goal of peace which hath been handed 66 S. CLEMENT OF ROME down to us from the beginning, and let us look stedfastly unto the Father and Maker of the whole world, and cleave unto His splendid and excellent gifts of peace and benefits. Let us behold Him in our mind, and let us look with the eyes of our soul unto His long-suffering will. Let us note how free from anger He is towards all His creatures.
20.  The heavens are moved by His direction and obey Him in peace. Day and night accomplish the course assigned to them by Him, without hindrance one to another. The sun and the moon and the dancing stars according to His appointment circle in harmony within the bounds assigned to them, without any swerving aside. The earth, bearing fruit in fulfilment of His will at her proper seasons, putteth forth the food that supplieth abundantly both men and beasts and all living things which are thereupon, making no dissension, neither altering anything which He hath decreed. Moreover, the inscrutable depths of the abysses and the unutterable jstatutest of the nether regions are constrained by the same ordinances, The basin of the boundless sea, gathered together by His workmanship 7n7/o zts reservoirs, passeth not the barriers wherewith it is surrounded ; but even as He ordered it, so it doeth. For He said, So far shalt thou come, and thy qwaves shall be broken within thee. The ocean which is impassable for men, and the worlds beyond it, are directed by the same ordinances of the Master. The seasons of spring and summer and autumn and winter give way in succession one to another in peace. The winds in their several quarters at their proper season fulfil their ministry without disturbance ; and the everflowing fountains, created for enjoyment and health, without fail give their breasts which sustain the life for men. Yea, the smallest of living things come together in concord and peace. All these things the great Creator and Master of the universe ordered to be in peace and concord, doing good unto all things, but far beyond the rest unto us who have taken refuge in His compassionate mercies through our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), to whom be the glory and the majesty for ever and ever. Amen.
21.  Look ye, brethren, lest His benefits, which are many, turn unto judgment to all of us, if we walk not worthily of Him, and do those things which are good and well-pleasing in His sight with concord. For He saith in a certain place, Zhe Spirit of the Yahuah (Lord) ts a lamp searching the closets of the belly, Let us see how near He is, and how that nothing escapeth Him of our thoughts or our devices which we make. It is right therefore that we should not be deserters from TO THE CORINTHIANS. 67 His will. Let us rather give offence to foolish and senseless men who exalt themselves and boast in the ar rrogance of their words, than to Elohim (God). Let us fear the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha (Jesus)[Messiah (Christ)], whose b blood was given for us. Let us reverence our rulers; let us honour our “elders ; let us instruct our young men in the lesson of the fear of Elohim (God). Let us guide our women toward that which is good: let them show forth their lovely disposition of purity ; ; let them prove their sincere affection of gentleness ; let them make manifest the moderation of their tongue through their silence ; let them show their love, 1 not in factious preferences but without partiality towards all them that fear Elohim (God), in holiness. Let our children be partakers of the instruction which is in Messiah (Christ): let them learn how lowliness of mind prevaileth with Elohim (God), what power chaste love hath with Elohim (God), how the fear of Him is good and great and saveth all them that walk therein in a pure mind with holiness. For He is the searcher out of the intents and desires ; whose breath is in us, and when He listeth, He shall take it away.
22.  Now all these things the faith which is in Messiah (Christ) confirmeth : for He Himself through the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) thus inviteth us: Come, my children, hearken unto Me, I will teach you the fear of the Yahuah (Lord). What man ts he that destreth life and loveth to see good days? Make thy tongue to cease from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Turn aside from evil and do good. Seek peace and ensue it. The eyes of the Yahuah (Lord) are over the righteous, and His ears are turned to their prayers. But the face of the Yahuah (Lord) ts upon them that do evil, to destroy thetr memorial from the earth. The righteous cried out, and the Yahuah (Lord) heard him, and delivered him from all his troubles. Many are the troubles of the righteous, and the Yahuah (Lord) shall deliver him from them all. And again; Many are the stripes of the sinner, but them that set their hope on the Yahuah (Lord) mercy shall compass about.
23.  The Father, who is pitiful in all things, and ready to do good, hath compassion on them that fear Him, and kindly and lovingly bestoweth His favours on them that draw nigh unto Him with a single mind. Wherefore let us not _be double-minded, neither let our soul indulge in idle humours respecting His exceeding and glorious gifts. Let this scripture be far from us where He saith; Wretched are the double-minded, which doubt in their soul and say, These things we did hear in the days of our fathers also, and behold we have grown old, and none of these things hath befallen us. Ve fools, compare yourselves unto a tree; take a vine. First it sheddeth its leaves, then a shoot cometh, then a 5—2 Sa 68 S. CLEMENT OF ROME - Meh eh then a flower, and after these a sour berry, then a full ripe grape. ety * ( “ Ye see that in a little time the fruit of the tree attaineth unto mellow- e: ge ness. Of a truth quickly and suddenly shall His will be accomplished, ag oan the scripture also bearing witness to it, saying; He shall come quickly tar SE oa | and shall not tarry ; and the Yahuah (Lord) shall come suddenly into His temple, u even the Holy One, whom ye expect.
24.  Let us understand, dearly beloved, how the Master continually showeth unto us the resurrection that shall be hereafter; whereof He made the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) the firstfruit, when He raised Him from the dead. Let us behold, dearly beloved, the resurrection which happeneth ie at its proper season. Day and night show unto us the resurrection. 4 The night falleth asleep, and day ariseth; the day departeth, and night cometh on. Let us mark the fruits, how and in what manner the sowing taketh place. Zhe sower goeth forth and casteth into the earth each of the seeds ; and these falling into the earth dry and bare decay: then out of their decay the mightiness of the Master’s providence raiseth them up, and from being one they increase manifold and bear fruit.
25.  Let us consider the marvellous sign which is seen in the regions of the east, that is, in the parts about Arabia. There is a bird, which is named the phcenix. This, being the only one of its kind, liveth for five hundred years; and when it hath now reached the time of its dissolution that it should die, it maketh for itself a coffin of frankin- cense and myrrh and the other spices, into the which in the fulness of time it entereth, and so it dieth. But, as the flesh rotteth, a certain worm is engendered, which is nurtured from the moisture of the dead creature and putteth forth wings. Then, when it is grown lusty, it taketh up that coffin where are the bones of its parent, and carrying them journeyeth from the country of Arabia even unto Egypt, to the place called the City of the Sun; and in the day time in the sight of all, flying to the altar of the Sun, it layeth them thereupon ; and this done, it setteth forth to return. So the priests examine the registers of the times, and they find that it hath come when the five hundredth year is completed.
26.  Do we then think it to be a great and marvellous thing, if the Creator of the universe shall bring about the resurrection of them that have served Him with holiness in the assurance of a good faith, seeing that He showeth to us even by a bird the magnificence of His promise? For He saith in a certain place; And Thou shalt raise me up, and I will praise Thee; and; J went to rest and slept, I was awaked, for Thou art ~ TO THE CORINTHIANS. 69 with me. And again Job saith; And Thou shalt raise this my flesh which hath endured all these things.
27.  With this hope therefore let our souls be bound unto Him that is faithful in His promises and that is righteous in His judgments) He that commanded not to lie, much more shall He Himself not lie: for nothing is impossible with Elohim (God) save to lie, Therefore let our faith in Him be kindled within us, and let us understand that all things are nigh unto Him. By a word of His majesty He compacted the universe; and by a word He can destroy it. Who shall say unto Him, What hast thou done? or who shall resist the might of His strength? When He listeth, and as He listeth, He will do all things; and nothing shall pass away of those things that He hath decreed. All things are in His sight, and nothing escapeth His counsel, seeing that Zhe heavens declare the glory of Elohim (God), and the firmament proclaimeth His handiwork. Day uttereth word unto day, and night proclaimeth knowledge unto night ; and there are neither words nor speeches, whose voices are not heard.
28.  Since therefore all things are seen and heard, let us fear Him and forsake the abominable lusts of evil works, that we may be shielded by His mercy from the coming judgments. For where can any of us escape from His strong hand? And what world will receive any of them that desert from His service? For the holy writing saith in a certain place; Where shall I go, and where shall I be hidden from Thy face? Lf L ascend into the heaven, Thou art there; tf I depart into the farthest parts of the earth, there is Thy right hand ; tf I make my bed in the depths, there is Thy Spirit. Whither then shall one depart, or where shall one flee, from Him that embraceth the universe,?
29.  Let us therefore approach Him in holiness of soul, lifting up pure and undefiled hands unto Him, with love ‘towards our gentle and compassionate Father who made us an elect portion unto Himself. For thus it is written: When the Most High divided the nations, when He dispersed the sons of Adam, He fixed the boundaries of the nations according to the number of the angels of Elohim (God). His people Jacob became the portion of the Yahuah (Lord), and Yashar'el (Israel) the measurement of Hts inheritance. And in another place He saith; Behold, the Yahuah (Lord) taketh for Himself a nation out of the midst of the nations, as a man taketh the firstfruits of his threshing floor ; and the holy of holies shall come forth from that nation.
30.  Seeing then that we are the special portion of a Holy Elohim (God), let us do all things that pertain unto holiness, forsaking evil-speakings, abominable and impure embraces, drunkennesses and tumults and 70 S. CLEMENT OF ROME - hateful lusts, abominable adultery, hateful pride ; /or Elohim (God), He saith, resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the lowly. Let us therefore cleave unto those to whom grace is given from Elohim (God). Let us clothe ourselves in concord, being lowly-minded and temperate, holding ourselves aloof from all backbiting and evil speaking, being justified by works and not ky words. For He saith; He that saith much shall hear also again. Doth the ready talker think to be righteous? Blessed ts the offspring of a woman that liveth but a short time. Be not thou abundant in words. Let our praise be with Elohim (God), and not of ourselves: for Elohim (God) hateth them that praise themselves. Let the testimony to our well-doing be given by others, as it was given unto our fathers who were righteous. Bold- ness and arrogance and daring are for them that are accursed of Elohim (God); but forbearance and humility and gentleness are with them that are blessed of Elohim (God).
31.  Let us therefore cleave unto His blessing, and let us see what are the ways of blessing. Let us study the records of the things that have happened from the beginning. Wherefore was our father Abraham blessed? Was it not because he wrought righteousness and truth through faith? Isaac with confidence, as knowing the future, was led a willing sacrifice. Jacob with humility departed from his land because of his brother, and went unto Laban and served ; and the twelve tribes of Yashar'el (Israel) were given unto him.
32.  If any man will consider them one by one in sincerity, he shall understand the magnificence of of the gifts that are given by Him. For of Jacob are all the priests and levites who minister unto the altar of Elohim (God); of him is the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha (Jesus) as concerning the flesh ; of him are kings and rulers and governors in the line of Yahudah (Judah); yea and the rest of his tribes are held in no small honour, seeing that Elohim (God) promised saying, Zhy seed shall be as the stars of heaven. ‘They all therefore were glorified and magnified, not through themselves or their own works or the righteous doing which they wrought, but through His will. And so we, having been called through His will in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus), are not justified through ourselves or through our own wisdom or understanding or piety or works which we wrought in holiness of heart, but through faith, whereby the Almighty Elohim (God) justified all men that have been from the beginning ; to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.
33.  What then must we do, brethren? Must we idly abstain from doing good, and forsake love? May the Master never allow this to befal us at least; but let us hasten with instancy and zeal to accomplish TO THE CORINTHIANS. 71 every good work. For the Creator and Master of the universe Himself rejoiceth in His works. For by His exceeding great might He established the heavens, and in His incomprehensible wisdom He set them in order. And the earth He separated from the water that surroundeth it, and He set it firm on the sure foundation of His own will; and the living creatures which walk upon it He commanded to exist by His ordinance. Having before created the sea and the living creatures therein, He enclosed it by His own power. Above all, as the most excellent and exceeding great work of His intelligence, with His sacred and faultless hands He formed man in the impress of His own image. For thus saith Elohim (God); Let us make man after our image and after our likeness. And Elohim (God) made man; male and female made He them. So having finished all these things, He praised them and blessed them and said, Jucrease and multiply. We have seen that all the righteous were adorned in good works. Yea, and the Yahuah (Lord) Himself having adorned Himself with works rejoiced. Seeing then that we have this pattern, let us conform ourselves with all diligence to His will; let us with all our strength work the work of righteousness.
34.  The good workman receiveth the bread of his work with boldness, but the slothful and careless dareth not look his employer in the face. It is therefore needful that we should be zealous unto well- doing, for of Him are all things: since He forewarneth us saying, Behold, the Yahuah (Lord), and His reward is before His face, to recompense each man according to his work. He exhorteth us therefore to believe on Him with our whole heart, and to be not idle nor careless unto every good work. Let our boast and our confidence be in Him: let us submit ourselves to His will; let us mark the whole host of His angels, how they stand by and minister unto His will. For the scripture saith ; Ten thousands of ten thousands stood by Him, and thousands of thousands ministered unto Him: and they cried aloud, Holy, holy, holy ts the Yahuah (Lord) of Sabaoth ; all creation is full of His glory. Yea, and let us ourselves then, being gathered together in concord with intentness of heart, cry unto Him as from one mouth earnestly that we may be made partakers of His great and glorious promises. For He saith, Lye hath not seen and ear hath not heard, and it hath not entered into the heart of man what great things He hath prepared for them that patiently awatt Him. 35- How blessed and marvellous are the gifts of Elohim (God), dearly beloved! Life in immortality, splendour in righteousness, truth in boldness, faith in confidence, temperance in sanctification! And all 72 S. CLEMENT OF ROME these things fall under our apprehension. What then, think ye, are the things preparing for them that patiently await Him? The Creator and Father of the ages, the All-holy One Himself knoweth their number and their beauty. Let us therefore contend, that we may be found in the number of those that patiently await Him, to the end that we may be partakers of His promised gifts. But how shall this be, dearly beloved? If our mind be fixed through faith towards Elohim (God); if we seek out those things which are well pleasing and acceptable unto Him; if we accomplish such things as beseem His faultless will, and follow the way of truth, casting off from ourselves all unrighteousness and iniquity, covetousness, strifes, malignities and deceits, whisperings and back- bitings, hatred of Elohim (God), pride and arrogance, vainglory and inhospitality. For they that do these things are hateful to Elohim (God); and not only they that do them, but they also that consent unto them. For the scripture saith; But unto the sinner said Elohim (God), Wherefore dost thou declare Mine ordinances, and takest My covenant upon thy lips? Yet thou didst hate instruction and didst cast away My words behind thee. Tf thou sawest a thief, thou didst keep company with him, and with the adulterers thou didst set thy portion. Thy mouth multiplied wickedness, and thy tongue wove decett. Thou sattest and spakest against thy brother, and against the son of thy mother thou didst lay a stumbling-block. These things thou hast done, and I kept silence. Thou thoughtest, unrighteous man, that L should be like unto thee. TI will convict thee and will set thee face to face— with thyself. Now understand ye these things, ye that forget Elohim (God), lest at any time He seize you as alion, and there be none to deliver. The sacrifice of praise shall glorify Me, and there ts the way wherein I will show him the salvation of Elohim (God).
36.  This is the way, dearly-beloved, wherein we found our sal- vation, even Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) the High-priest of our offerings, the Guardian and Helper of our weakness. ‘Through Him let us look stedfastly unto the heights of the heavens; through Him we behold as in a mirror His faultless and most excellent visage; through Him the eyes of our hearts were opened; through Him our foolish and darkened mind springeth up unto the light; through Him the Master willed that we should taste of the immortal knowledge; Who being the brightness of Lis mayesty ts so much greater than angels, as He hath inherited a more excellent name. For so it is written; Who maketh His angels spirits and His ministers a flame of fire; but of His Son the Master said thus; Zhou art My Son, I this day have begotten Thee. Ask of Me, TO THE CORINTHIANS. 73 and I will give Thee the Gentiles for Thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for Thy possession. And again He saith unto Him ; Sit Zhou on My right hand, until I make Thine enemtes a footstool for Thy feet. Who then are these enemies? They that are wicked and resist His will. 37- Let us therefore enlist ourselves, brethren, with all earnestness in His faultless ordinances. Let us mark the soldiers that are enlisted under our rulers, how exactly, how readily, how submissively, they | execute the orders given them. All are not prefects, nor rulers of thousands, nor rulers of hundreds, nor rulers of fifties, and so forth; but each man in his own rank executeth the orders given by the | king and the governors. The great without the small cannot exist, | neither the small without the great. ‘There is a certain mixture in all | things, and therein is utility. Let us take our body as an example. | The head without the feet is nothing; so likewise the feet without the | head are nothing: even the smallest limbs of our body are necessary | and useful for the whole body: but all the members conspire and unite in subjection, that the whole body may be saved.
38.  Soin our case let the whole body be saved in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus), and let each man be subject unto his neighbour, according as also he was appointed with his special grace. Let not the strong neglect the weak ; and let the weak respect the strong. Let the rich minister aid to the poor; and let the poor give thanks to Elohim (God), because He hath given him one through whom his wants may be supplied. Let the wise display his wisdom, not in words, but in good works. He that is lowly in mind, let him not bear testimony to himself, but leave testi- mony to be borne to him by his neighbour. He that is pure in the flesh, let him be so, and not boast, knowing that it is Another who bestoweth his continence upon him. Let us consider, brethren, of what matter we were made; who and what manner of beings we were, when we came into the world; from what a sepulchre and what darkness He that moulded and created us brought us into His world, having prepared His benefits aforehand ere ever we were born. Seeing therefore that we have all these things from Him, we ought in all things to give thanks to Him, to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.
39.  Senseless and stupid and foolish and ignorant men jeer and mock at us, desiring that they themselves should be exalted in their imaginations. For what power hath a mortal? or what strength hath a child of earth? For it is written; Zv%ere was no form before mine eyes ; only I heard a breath and a voice. What then? Shall a mortal be clean 74 | S. CLEMENT OF ROME in the sight of the Yahuah (Lord); or shall a man be unblameable for his works ? seeing that He is distrustful against His servants and noteth some perversity against His angels. Nay, the heaven ts not clean in His sight. Away then, ye that dwell in houses of clay, whereof, even of the same clay, we ourselves are made. He smote them like a moth, and from morn to even they are no more. Because they could not succour themselves, they perished. He breathed upon them and they died, because they had no wisdom. But call thou, uf perchance one shall obey thee, or tf thou shalt see one of the holy angels. For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth him that ts gone astray. And I have seen fools throwing out roots, but forthwith thetr habitation was eaten up. Far be their sons from safety. May they be mocked at the gates of inferiors, and there shall be none to deliver them. or the things which are prepared for them, the righteous shall eat ; but they themselves shall not be delivered from evils.
40.  Forasmuch then as these things are manifest beforehand, and we have searched into the depths of the Divine knowledge, we ought to do all things in order, as many as the Master hath commanded us to perform at their appointed seasons. Now the offerings and ministrations He commanded to be performed with care, and not to be done rashly © or in disorder, but at fixed times and seasons. And where and by whom He would have them performed, He Himself fixed by His supreme will: that all things being done with piety according to His good pleasure might be acceptable to His will. They therefore that make their offerings at the appointed seasons are acceptable and blessed : for while they follow the institutions of the Master they cannot go wrong. For unto the high-priest his proper services have been assigned, and to the priests their proper office is appointed, and upon the levites their proper ministrations are laid. The layman is bound by the layman’s ordinances.
41.  Let each of you, brethren, in his own order give thanks unto Elohim (God), maintaining a good conscience and not transgressing the appointed rule of his service, but acting with all seemliness. Not in every place, brethren, are the continual daily sacrifices offered, or the freewill offerings, or the sin offerings and the trespass offerings, but in Jerusalem alone. And even there the offering is not made in every place, but before the sanctuary in the court of the altar; and this too through the high-priest and the aforesaid ministers, after that the victim to be offered hath been inspected for blemishes. ‘They therefore who do any thing contrary to the seemly ordinance of His will receive death as the TO THE CORINTHIANS. 75 penalty. Ye see, brethren, in proportion as greater knowledge hath been vouchsafed unto us, so much the more are we exposed to danger. )
42.  The Apostles received the Gospel for us from the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) ; Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) was sent forth from Elohim (God). So then Messiah (Christ) is from Elohim (God), and the Apostles are from Messiah (Christ). Both therefore came of the will of Elohim (God) in the appointed order. Having therefore received a charge, and having been fully assured through the resurrection of our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and confirmed in the word of Elohim (God) with full assurance of the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), they went forth with the glad tidings that the kingdom of Elohim (God) should come. So preaching everywhere in country and town, they appointed their first-fruits, when they had proved them by the Spirit, to be bishops and deacons unto them that should believe. And this they did in no new fashion; for indeed it had been written con- cerning bishops and deacons from very ancient times; for thus saith the scripture in a certain place, / wz// appoint their bishops in righteous- ness and their deacons in faith,
43.  And what marvel, if they which were entrusted in Messiah (Christ) with such a work by Elohim (God) appointed the aforesaid persons? seeing that even the blessed Moses who was a faithful servant in all Hts house recorded for a sign in the sacred books all things that were enjoined upon him. And him also the rest of the prophets followed, bearing witness with him unto the laws that were ordained by him. For he, when jealousy arose concerning the priesthood, and there was dissension among the tribes which of them was adorned with the glorious name, commanded the twelve chiefs of the tribes to bring to him rods inscribed with the name of each tribe. And he took them and tied them and sealed them with the signet rings of the chiefs of the tribes, and put them away in the tabernacle of the testimony on the table of Elohim (God). And having shut the tabernacle he sealed the keys and likewise also the doors. And he said unto them, Brethren, the tribe whose rod shall bud, this hath Elohim (God) chosen to be priests and ministers unto Him. Now when morning came, he called together all Yashar'el (Israel), even the six hundred thousand men, and showed the seals to the chiefs of the tribes and opened the tabernacle of the testimony and drew forth the rods. And the rod of Aaron was found not only with buds, but also bearing fruit. What think ye, dearly beloved? Did not Moses know beforehand that this would come to pass? Assuredly he knew it. But that disorder might not arise in Yashar'el (Israel), he did thus, to the end that the Name of the true and only Elohim (God) might be glorified : to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 76 S. CLEMENT OF ROME
44.  And our Apostles knew through our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) that there would be strife over the name of the bishop’s office. For this cause therefore, having received complete foreknowledge, they ap- pointed the aforesaid persons, and afterwards they provided a con- tinuance, that if these should fall asleep, other approved men should succeed to their ministration. ‘Those therefore who were appointed by them, or afterward by other men of repute with the consent of the whole Church, and have ministered unblameably to the flock of Messiah (Christ) in lowliness of mind, peacefully and with all modesty, and for long time have borne a good report with all—these men we consider to be unjustly thrust out from their ministration. For it will be no light sin for us, if we thrust out those who have offered the gifts of the bishop’s office unblameably and holily. Blessed are those presbyters who have gone before, seeing that their departure was fruitful and ripe: for they have no fear lest any one should remove them from their appointed place. For we see that ye have displaced certain persons, though they were living honourably, from the ministration which thad been re- spected by themt blamelessly.
45.  Be ye contentious, brethren, and jealous about the things that pertain unto salvation. Ye have searched the scriptures, which are true, which were given through the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit); and ye know that nothing unrighteous or counterfeit is written in them. Ye will not find that righteous persons have been thrust out by holy men. Righteous men were persecuted, but it was by the lawless; they were imprisoned, but it was by the unholy. ‘They were stoned by transgressors: they were slain by those who had conceived a detestable and unrighteous jealousy. Suffering these things, they endured nobly. For what must we say, brethren? Was Daniel cast into the lions’ den by them that feared Elohim (God)? Or were Ananias and Azarias and Misael shut up in the furnace of fire by them that professed the excellent and glorious worship of the Most High? Far be this from our thoughts. Who then were they that did these things? Abominable men and full of all wickedness were stirred up to such a pitch of wrath, as to bring cruel suffering upon them that served Elohim (God) in a holy and blameless purpose, not knowing that the Most High is the champion and protector of them that in a pure conscience serve His excellent Name: unto whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. But they that endured patiently in confidence inherited glory and honour; they were exalted, and had their names recorded by Elohim (God) in their memorial for ever and ever. Amen. HOLE) CORINTHIANS. Td
46.  To such examples as these therefore, brethren, we also ought to cleave. For it is written; Cleave unto the saints, for they that cleave unto them shall be sanctified. And again He saith in another place; With the guiltless man thou shalt be guiltless, and with the elect thou shalt be elect, and with the crooked thou shalt deal crookedly. Let us therefore cleave to the guiltless and righteous: and these are the elect of Elohim (God). Wherefore are there strifes and wraths and factions and divisions and war among you? Have we not one Elohim (God) and one Messiah (Christ) and one Spirit of grace that was shed upon us? And is there not one calling in Messiah (Christ)? Wherefore do we tear and rend asunder the members of Messiah (Christ), and stir up factions against our own body, and reach such a pitch of folly, as to forget that we are members one of another? Re- member the words of Yahusha (Jesus) our Lord: for He said, Woe unto that man; it were good for him if he had not been born, rather than that he should offend one of Mine elect. It were better for him that a mill-stone were hanged about him, and he cast into the sea, than that he should pervert one of Mine elect. Your division hath perverted many; it hath brought many to despair, many to doubting, and all of us to sorrow. And your sedition still continueth.
47.  Take up the epistle of the blessed Paul the Apostle. What wrote he first unto you in the beginning of the Gospel? Of a truth he charged you in the Spirit concerning himself and Cephas and Apollos, because that even then ye had made parties. Yet that making of parties brought less sin upon you; for ye were partisans of Apostles that were highly reputed, and of a man approved in their sight. But now mark ye, who they are that have perverted you and diminished the glory of your renowned love for the brotherhood. It is shameful, dearly beloved, yes, utterly shameful and unworthy of your conduct in Messiah (Christ), that it should be reported that the very stedfast and ancient Church of the Corinthians, for the sake of one or two persons, maketh sedition against its presbyters. And this report hath reached not only us, but them also which differ from us, so that ye even heap blasphemies on the Name of the Yahuah (Lord) by reason of your folly, and moreover create peril for yourselves.
48.  Let us therefore root this out quickly, and let us fall down before the Master and entreat Him with tears, that He may show Him- self propitious and be reconciled unto us, and may restore us to the seemly and pure conduct which belongeth to our love of the brethren. For this is a gate of righteousness opened unto life, as it is written; 78 S. CLEMENT OF ROME Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may enter in thereby and pratse the Yahuah (Lord). This ts the gate of the Yahuah (Lord); the righteous shall enter in thereby. Seeing then that many gates are opened, this is that gate which is in righteousness, even that which is in Messiah (Christ), whereby all are blessed that have entered in and direct their path in holiness and righteousness, performing all things without confusion. Let a man be faithful, let him be able to expound a deep saying, let him be wise in the discernment of words, let him be strenuous in deeds, let him be pure; for so much the more ought he to be lowly in mind, in pro- portion as he seemeth to be the greater; and he ought to seek the common advantage of all, and not his own.
49.  Let him that hath love in Messiah (Christ) fulfil the commandments of Messiah (Christ). Who can declare the bond of the love of Elohim (God)? Who is sufficient to tell the majesty of its beauty? The height, whereunto love exalteth, is unspeakable. Love joineth us unto Elohim (God); Jove covereth a multitude of sins ; love endureth all things, is long-suffering in all things. There is nothing coarse, nothing arrogant in love. Love hath no di- visions, love maketh no seditions, love doeth all things in concord. In love were all the elect of Elohim (God) made perfect ; without love nothing is well-pleasing to Elohim (God): in love the Master took us unto Himself; for the love which He had toward us, Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our Lord hath given His blood for us by the will of Elohim (God), and His flesh for our flesh and His life for our lives.
50.  Ye see, dearly beloved, how great and marvellous a thing is love, and there is no declaring its perfection. Who is sufficient to be found therein, save those to whom Elohim (God) shall vouchsafe it? Let us therefore entreat and ask of His mercy, that we may be found blameless in love, standing apart from the factiousness of men. All the gene- rations from Adam unto this day have passed away: but they that by Elohim's (God’s) grace were perfected in love dwell in the abode of the pious; and they shall be made manifest in the visitation of the Kingdom of Elohim (God). For it is written; Luter into the closet for a very little while, until Mine anger and My wrath shall pass away, and I will remember a good day and will raise you from your tombs. Blessed were we, dearly beloved, if we should be doing the commandments of Elohim (God) in concord of love, to the end that our sins may through love be forgiven us. For it is written ; Blessed are they whose iniguities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed ts the man to whom the Yahuah (Lord) shall impute no sin, neither zs gutle in his mouth. This declaration of blessedness was pronounced TO THE CORINTHIANS. 79 upon them that have been elected by Elohim (God) through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our Lord, to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.
51.  For all our transgressions which we have committed through any of the wiles of the adversary, let us entreat that we may obtain forgiveness. Yea and they also, who set themselves up as leaders of faction and division, ought to look to the common ground of hope. For such as walk in fear and love desire that they themselves should fall into suffering rather than their neighbours; and they pronounce condemnation against themselves rather than against the harmony which hath been handed down to us nobly and nghteously. For it is good for a man to make confession of his trespasses rather than to harden his heart, as the heart of those was hardened who made sedition against Moses the servant of Elohim (God); whose condemnation was clearly manifest, for they went down to hades alive, and Death shall be their shepherd. Pharaoh and his host and all the rulers of Egypt, their chartots and their horsemen, were overwhelmed in the depths of the Red Sea, and perished for none other reason but because their foolish hearts were hardened after that the signs and the wonders had been wrought in the land of Egypt by the hand of Moses the servant of Elohim (God).
52.  The Master, brethren, hath need of nothing at all. He desireth not anything of any man, save to confess unto Him. For the elect David saith; 7 w#l/ confess unto the Yahuah (Lord), and it shall please Him more than a young calf that groweth horns and hoofs. Let the poor see tt, and rejoice. And again He saith; Sacrifice to Elohim (God) a sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High: and call upon Me in the day of thine affiction, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me. For a sacrifice unto Elohim (God) is a broken spirit.
53.  For ye know, and know well, the sacred scriptures, dearly beloved, and ye have searched into the oracles of Elohim (God). We write these things therefore to put you in remembrance. When Moses went up into the mountain and had spent forty days and forty nights in fasting and humiliation, Elohim (God) said unto him; JZoses, Moses, come down quickly hence, for My people whom thou leddest forth from the land of Egypt have wrought iniguity: they have transgressed quickly out of the way which thou didst command unto them; they have made for themselves molten images. And the Yahuah (Lord) said unto him; I have spoken unto thee once and twice, saying, I have seen this people, and behold tt ts stiff-necked. Let Me destroy them utterly, and I will blot out their name from under heaven, and I will make of thee a nation great and wonderful and numerous more 80 S, CLEMENT OF ROME than this. And Moses said; (Vay, not so, Yahuah (Lord). Forgive this people their sin, or blot me also out of the book of the living. O mighty love! O unsurpassable perfection! ‘The servant is bold with his Master; he asketh forgiveness for the multitude, or he demandeth that himself also be blotted out with them.
54.  Who therefore is noble among you? Who is compassionate? | Who is fulfilled with love? Let him say; If by reason of me there be ' faction and strife and divisions, I retire, I depart, whither ye will, and I do that which is ordered by the people: only let the flock of Messiah (Christ) be at peace with its duly appointed presbyters. He that shall have done this, shall win for himself great renown in Messiah (Christ), and every place will receive him: for the earth is the Yahuah's (Lord’s) and the fulness thereof. Thus have they done and will do, that live as citizens of that kingdom of Elohim (God) which bringeth no regrets.
55.  But, to bring forward examples of Gentiles also; many kings and rulers, when some season of pestilence pressed upon them, being taught by oracles have delivered themselves over to death, that they might rescue their fellow citizens through their own blood. Many have retired from their own cities, that they might have no more seditions. - We know that many among ourselves have delivered themselves to bondage, that they might ransom others. Many have sold themselves to slavery, and receiving the price paid for themselves have fed others. Many women being strengthened through the grace of Elohim (God) have performed many manly deeds. The blessed Judith, when the city was beleaguered, asked of the elders that she might be suffered to go forth into the camp of the aliens. So she exposed herself to peril and went forth for love of her country and of her people which were beleaguered ; and the Yahuah (Lord) delivered Holophernes into the hand of a woman. To no less peril did Esther also, who was perfect in faith, expose herself, that she might deliver the twelve tribes of Yashar'el (Israel), when they were on the point to perish. For through her fasting and her humiliation she entreated the all-seeing Master, the Elohim (God) of the ages ; and He, seeing the humility of her soul, delivered the people for whose sake she encountered the peril.
56.  Therefore let us also make intercession for them that are in any transgression, that forbearance and humility may be given them, to the end that they may yield not unto us, but unto the will of Elohim (God). For so shall the compassionate remembrance of them with Elohim (God) and the saints be fruitful unto them, and perfect. Let us accept chastisement, TO THE CORINTHIANS. 8I whereat no man ought to be vexed, dearly beloved. ‘The admonition which we give one to another is good and exceeding useful; for it joineth us unto the will of Elohim (God). For thus saith the holy word; Ze Yahuah (Lord) hath indeed chastened me, and hath not delivered me over unto death. For whom the Yahuah (Lord) loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. For the righteous, it 1s said, shall chasten me in mercy and shall reprove me, but let not the + mercyt of sinners anoint my head. And again He saith; Blessed is the man whom the Yahuah (Lord) hath reproved, and refuse not thou the admonition of the Almighty. For He causeth pain, and He restoreth again: He hath smitten, and His hands have healed. Six times shall He rescue thee from affiictions: and at the seventh no evil shall touch thee. In famine He shall deliver thee from death, and in war Fe shall release thee from the arm of the sword. And from the scourge of the tongue shall He hide thee, and thou shalt not be afratd when evils approach. Thou shalt laugh at the unrighteous and wicked, and of the wild beasts thou shalt not be afraid. For wild beasts shall be at peace with thee. Then shalt thou know that thy house shall be at peace: and the abode of thy tabernacle shall not go wrong, and thou shalt know that thy seed ts many, and thy children as the plenteous herbage of the field. And thou shalt come to the grave as ripe corn reaped in due season, or as the heap of the threshing floor gathered together at the right time. Ye see, dearly beloved, how great protection there is for them that are chastened by the Master: for being a kind father He chasteneth us to the end that we may obtain mercy through His holy chastisement.
57.  Ye therefore that laid the foundation of the sedition, submit yourselves unto the presbyters and receive chastisement unto repentance, bending the knees of your heart. Learn to submit yourselves, laying aside the arrogant and proud stubbornness of your tongue. For it is better for you to be found little in the flock of Messiah (Christ) and to have your © name on Elohim's (God’s) roll, than to be had in exceeding honour and yet be cast out from the hope of Him. For thus saith the All-virtuous Wisdom ; Behold I will pour out for you a saying of My breath, and I will teach you My word. Because I called and ye obeyed not, and I held out words and ye heeded not, but made My counsels of none effect, and were disobedient unto My reproofs; therefore I also will laugh at your destruction, and will rejoice over you when ruin cometh upon you, and when confusion overtaketh you suddenly, and your overthrow is at hand like a whirlwind, or when anguish and beleaguerment come upon you. Lor it shall be, when ye call upon Me, yet will I not hear you. Evil men 82 S. CLEMENT OF ROME shall seek Me and shall not find Me: for they hated wisdom, and chose not the fear of the Yahuah (Lord), neither would they give heed unto My counsels, but mocked at My reproofs. Therefore they shall eat the fruits of their own way, and shall be filled with their own ungodliness. For because they wronged babes, they shall be slain, and inquisition shall destroy the ungodly. But he that heareth Me shall dwell safely trusting in hope, and shall be quiet from fear of all evil.
58.  Let us therefore be obedient unto His most holy and glorious Name, thereby escaping the threatenings which were spoken of old by the mouth of Wisdom against them which disobey, that we may dwell safely, trusting in the most holy Name of His majesty. Receive our counsel, and ye shall have no occasion of regret. For as Elohim (God) liveth, and the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) liveth, and the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), who are the faith and the hope of the elect, so surely shall he, who with lowliness of mind and instant in gentleness hath without regretfulness performed the ordinances and commandments that are given by Elohim (God), be enrolled and have a name among the number of them that are saved through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), through whom is the glory unto Him for ever and ever. Amen.
59.  But if certain persons should be disobedient unto the words spoken by Him through us, let them understand that they will entangle themselves in no slight transgression and danger; but we shall be guiltless of this sin. And we will ask, with instancy of prayer and supplication, that the Creator of the universe may guard intact unto the end the number that hath been numbered of His elect throughout the whole world, through His beloved Son Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), through whom He called us from darkness to light, from ignorance to the full know- ledge of the glory of His Name. [Grant unto us, Yahuah (Lord),]that we may set our hope on Thy Name which is the primal source of all creation, and open the eyes of our hearts, that we may know Thee, who alone adidest Highest in the lofty, Holy in the holy; who layest low the insolence of the proud, who scatterest the imaginings of nations; who settest the lowly on high, and bringest the lofty low; who makest rich and makest poor; who killest and makest alive ; whoralone art the Benefactor of spirits and the Elohim (God) of all flesh ; who Jlookest into the abysses, who scannest the works of man; the Succour of them that are in peril, the Saviour of them that are in despair; the Creator and Overseer of every spirit; who multipliest the nations upon earth, and hast chosen out from all men those that love Thee through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), Thy beloved Son, through whom Thou didst TO THE CORINTHIANS. 83 instruct us, didst sanctify us, didst honour us. We beseech Thee, Yahuah (Lord) and Master, to be our help and succour. Save those among us who are in tribulation; have mercy on the lowly; lift up the fallen; show Thyself unto the needy; heal the ungodly; convert the wanderers of Thy people; feed the hungry; release our prisoners; raise up the weak ; comfort the faint-hearted. ef all the Gentiles know that Thou art Elohim (God) alone, and Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) is Thy Son, and we ave Thy people and the sheep of Thy pasture.
60.  Thou through Thine operations didst make manifest the ever- lasting fabric of the world. Thou, Yahuah (Lord), didst create the earth. Thou that art faithful throughout all generations, righteous in Thy judgments, marvellous in strength and excellence, Thou that art wise in creating and prudent in establishing that which Thou hast made, that art good in the things which are seen and faithful with them that trust on Thee, pitiful and compassionate, forgive us our iniquities and our unrighteous- nesses and our transgressions and shortcomings. Lay not to our account every sin of Thy servants and Thine handmaids, but cleanse us with the cleansing of Thy truth, and guzde our steps to walk in holiness and righteousness and singleness of heart and ¢o do such things as are good and well-pleasing in Thy sight and in the sight of our rulers. Yea, Yahuah (Lord), make Thy face to shine upon us in peace for our good, that we may be sheltered 4y Zhy mighty hand and delivered from every sin dy Thine uplifted arm. And deliver us from them that hate us wrongfully. Give concord and peace to us and to all that dwell on the earth, as Thou gavest to our fathers, when they called on Thee in faith and truth with holiness, [that we may be saved,] while we render obedience to Thine almighty and most excellent Name, and to our rulers and governors upon the earth.
61.  Thou, Yahuah (Lord) and Master, hast given them the power of sovereignty through Thine excellent and unspeakable might, that we knowing the glory and honour which Thou hast given them may submit ourselves unto them, in nothing resisting Thy will. Grant unto them therefore, O Yahuah (Lord), health, peace, concord, stability, that they may administer the government which Thou hast given them without failure. For Thou, O heavenly Master, King of the ages, givest to the sons of Adam glory and honour and power over all things that are upon the earth. Do Thou, Yahuah (Lord), direct their counsel according to that which is good and well- pleasing in Thy sight, that, administering in peace and gentleness with godliness the power which Thou hast given them, they may obtain Thy 6—2 84 S. CLEMENT OF ROME favour. O Thou, who alone art able to do these things and things far more exceeding good than these for us, we praise Thee through the High-priest and Guardian of our souls, Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), through whom be the glory and the majesty unto Thee both now and for all genera- tions and for ever and ever. Amen.
62.  As touching those things which befit our religion and are most useful for a virtuous life to such as would guide [their steps]in holiness and righteousness, we have written fully unto you, brethren. For con- cerning faith and repentance and genuine love and temperance and sobriety and patience we have handled every argument, putting you in remembrance, that ye ought to please Almighty Elohim (God) in righteousness and truth and long-suffering with holiness, laying aside malice and pur- suing concord in love and peace, being instant in gentleness; even as our fathers, of whom we spake before, pleased Him, being lowly- minded towards their Father and Elohim (God) and Creator and towards all men. And we have put you in mind of these things the more gladly, since we knew well that we were writing to men who are faithful and highly accounted and have diligently searched into the oracles of the teaching of Elohim (God).
63.  Therefore it is right for us to give heed to so great and so many examples and to submit the neck and occupying the place of obedience to take our side with them that are the leaders of our souls, that ceasing from this foolish dissension we may attain unto the goal which lieth before us in truthfulness, keeping aloof from every fault. For ye will give us great joy and gladness, if ye render obedience unto the things written by us through the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), and root out the un- righteous anger of your jealousy, according to the entreaty which we have made for peace and concord in this letter. And we have also sent faithful and prudent men that have walked among us from youth unto old age unblameably, who shall also be witnesses between you and us. And this we have done that ye might know that we have had, and still have, every solicitude that ye should be speedily at peace.
64.  Finally may the All-seeing Elohim (God) and Master of spirits and Yahuah (Lord) of all flesh, who chose the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), and us through Him for a peculiar people, grant unto every soul that is called after His excellent and holy Name faith, fear, peace, patience, long-suffering, temperance, chastity and soberness, that they may be well-pleasing unto His Name through our High-priest and Guardian Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), through whom TO THE CORINTHIANS. 85 unto Him be glory and majesty, might and honour, both now and for ever and ever. Amen.
65.  Nowsend ye back speedily unto us our messengers Claudius Ephebus and Valerius Bito, together with Fortunatus also, in peace and with joy, to the end that they may the more quickly report the peace and concord which is prayed for and earnestly desired by us, that we also may the more speedily rejoice over your good order. The grace of our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) be with you and with all men


# An Ancient Homily by an Unknown Author (Second Clement)

# Chapter 1

2.  Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not. Break out and cry, thou that travatlest not; for more are the children of the desolate than of her that hath the husband. In that He said Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not, | He spake of us: for our Church was barren, before that children were given unto her. And in that He said, Cry aloud, thou that travatlest not, He meaneth this; Let us not, like women in travail, grow weary of | offering up our prayers with simplicity to Elohim (God). Again, in that He said, For the children of the desolate are more than of her that hath the ee AN ANCIENT HOMILY. 87 husband, He so spake, because our people seemed desolate and forsaken of Elohim (God), whereas now, having believed, we have become more than those who seemed to have Elohim (God). Again another scripture saith, J came not to call the righteous, but sinners. He meaneth this; that it is right to save them that are perishing. For this indeed is a great and marvellous work, to establish, not those things which stand, but those which are falling. So also Messiah (Christ) willed to save the things which were perishing. And He saved many, coming and calling us when we were even now perishing. 3- Seeing then that He bestowed so great mercy on us; first of all, that we, who are living, do not sacrifice to these dead gods, neither worship them, but through Him have known the Father of truth. What else is this knowledge to Himward, but not to deny Him through whom we have known Him? Yea, He Himself saith, Whoso confesseth Me, flim will I confess before the Father. This then is our reward, if verily ewan) we shall confess Him through whom we were saved. But wherein do we confess Him? When we do that which He saith and are noty disobedient unto His commandments, and not only honour Him with our lips, but with our whole heart and with our whole mind. Now He saith also in Isaiah, Z/zs people honoureth Me with their lips, but their heart ts far from Me. ie fut aoe
4.  Let us therefore not only call Him Yahuah (Lord), for this will not save us: for He saith, (Vot every one that saith unto Me, Yahuah (Lord), Yahuah (Lord), shall be saved, but he that doeth righteousness. So then, brethren, let us confess Him in our works, by loving one another, by not committing adultery nor speaking evil one against another nor envying, but being temperate, merciful, kindly. And we ought to have fellow-feeling one with another and not to be covetous. By these works let us confess Him, and not by the contrary. And we ought not rather to fear men but Elohim (God). For this cause, if ye do these things, the Yahuah (Lord) said, Zhough ye be gathered together with Me in My bosom, and do not My commandments, [ will cast you away and will say unto you, Depart from Me, I know you not whence ye are, ye workers of iniqutty.
5.  Wherefore, brethren, let us forsake our sojourn in this world and do the will of Him that called us, and let us not be afraid to_depart out of this world. For the Yahuah (Lord) saith, Ye shall be as lambs in the midst of wolves. But Peter answered and said unto Him, What then, tf the wolves should tear the lambs? Yahusha (Jesus) said unto Peter, Let not the lambs fear the wolves after they are dead; and ye also, fear ye not them that kill - i) othe 88 AN ANCIENT HOMILY you and are not able to do anything to you; but fear Him that after ye are dead hath power over soul and body, to cast them into the gehenna of fire. And ye know, brethren, that the sojourn of this flesh in this world is mean and for a short time, but the promise of Messiah (Christ) is great and \~ marvellous, even the rest of the kingdom that shall be and of life eternal. What then can we do to obtain them, but walk in holiness and/\> righteousness, and consider these worldly things as alien to us, and not desire them? For when we desire to obtain these things we fall away from the righteous path.
6.  But the Yahuah (Lord) saith, Vo servant can serve two masters. If we desire to serve both Elohim (God) and mammon, it is unprofitable for us: /or what advantage ts tt, tf a man gain the whole world and forfeit his soul ? _— ~ Now this age and the future are two enemies. The one speaketh of } adultery and defilement and avarice and deceit, but the other biddeth farewell to these. We cannot therefore be friends of the two, but must bid farewell to the one and hold companionship with the other. Let us consider that it is better to hate the things which are here, because they are mean and for a short time and perishable, and to love the things. which are there, for they are good and imperishable. For, if we do the will of Messiah (Christ), we shall find rest; but if otherwise, then nothing shall deliver us from eternal punishment, if we should disobey His command- ments. And the scripture also saith in Ezekiel, Though Noah and Job and Daniel should rise up, they shall not deliver their children in the | captivity. But if even such righteous men as these cannot by their —_— righteous deeds deliver their children, with what confidence shall we, if we keep not our baptism pure and undefiled, enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God)? Or who shall be our advocate, unless we be found having holy and righteous works ?
7.  So then, my brethren, let us contend, knowing that the contest is nigh at hand, and that, while many resort to the corruptible contests, yet not all are crowned, but only they that have toiled hard and contended bravely. Let us then contend that we all may be crowned. Wherefore let us run in the straight course, the incorruptible contest. And let us resort to it in throngs and contend, that we may also be crowned. And if we cannot all be crowned, let us at least come near to_the crown. We ought to know that he which contendeth in the cor- ruptible contest, if he be found dealing corruptly with it, is first flogged, and then removed and driven out of the race-course. What think ye? What shall be done to him that hath dealt corruptly with the contest of incorruption? For as concerning them that have not kept the seal, He saith, Zhetr worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched, and they shall be for a spectacle unto all flesh.
8.  While we are on earth then, let us repent: for we are clay under the craftsman’s hand, For in like manner as the potter, if he be making a vessel, and it get twisted or crushed in his hands, reshapeth it again; but if he have once put it into the fiery oven, he shall no longer mend it: so also let us, while we are in this world, repent with our whole heart of the evil things which we have done in the flesh, that we may be saved by the Yahuah (Lord), while we have yet time for repentance. For after that we have departed out of the world, we can no more make confession there, or repent any more. Wherefore, brethren, if we shall have done the will of the Father and kept the flesh pure and guarded the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord), we shall receive life eternal. For the Yahuah (Lord) saith in the Gospel, Jf ye kept not that which ts little, who shall give unto you that which is great? For I say unto you that he which is Jaithful in the least, is faithful also in much. So then He meaneth this, Keep the flesh_pure and the seal unstained, to the end that we may | receive life. g. (And let not any one of you say that this flesh is not judged neither riseth a ain.\ Understand ye. In what were ye saved? In what did ye recover your sight? if ye were not in this flesh. ( We ought therefore to guard the flesh as a temple of Elohim (God): for in like manner as ; —= ~ ——_—_——. oan . ye were called in the flesh, ye shall come also in the flesh. If Messiah (Christ) the Yahuah (Lord) who saved us, being first spirit, then became flesh, and so | called us, in like manner also shall we in this flesh receive our reward. Let us therefore love one another, that we all may come unto the kingdom of Elohim (God).\ While we have time to be healed, let us place our- selves in the hands of Elohim (God) the physician, giving Him a recompense. What recompense? Repentance from a sincere heart. For He dis- cerneth all things beforehand and kno what is in our heart. Let us therefore give unto Him eternal praise, not from our lips only, but also from our heart, that He may receive us as sons. For the Yahuah (Lord) also said, These are My brethren, which do the will of My Father. ——~ -
10.  Wherefore, my brethren, let us do the will of the Father which called us, that we may live; and let us the rather pursue virtue, but forsake vice as the forerunner of our sins, and let us flee from ungodli- ness, lest evils overtake us. For if we be diligent in doing good, peace “will pursue us. For for this cause is a man unable to tattain happiness f, go AN ANCIENT HOMILY seeing that they call in the fears of men, preferring rather the enjoyment which is here than the promise which is to come. For they know not how great torment the enjoyment which is here bringeth, and what delight the promise which is to come bringeth. And if verily they were doing these things by themselves alone, it had been tolerable: but now they continue teaching evil to innocent souls, not knowing that they shall have their condemnation doubled, both themselves and their hearers.
11.  Let us therefore serve Elohim (God) in a pure heart, and we shall be righteous; but if we serve Him not, because we believe not the promise of Elohim (God), we shall be wretched. For the word of prophecy also saith: Wretched are the double-minded, that doubt in their heart and say, These things we heard of old in the days of our fathers also, yet we have waited day after day and have seen none of them. Ye fools! compare yourselves unto a tree; take a vine. First it sheddeth its leaves, then a shoot cometh, after this a sour berry, then a full ripe grape. So likewise My people had tumults and afftictions: but afterward they shall recetve good things. Wherefore, my brethren, let us not be double-minded but endure patiently in hope, that we may also obtain our reward. or faithful ts He that promised to pay to each man the recompense of his works. If therefore we shall have wrought righteousness in the sight of Elohim (God), we shall enter into His kingdom and shall receive the promises which ear hath not heard nor eye seen, neither hath it entered into the heart of man.
12.  Let us therefore await the kingdom of Elohim (God) betimes in love and righteousness, since we know not the day of Elohim's (God’s) appearing. For the Yahuah (Lord) Himsell, being asked by a certain person when His kingdom would come, said, When the two shall be one, and the outside as the inside, and the male with the female, neither male nor female. Now the two are one, when we speak truth among ourselves, and in two bodies there shall be one soul without dissimulation. And by ¢he outside as the inside He meaneth this: by the inside He meaneth the soul and by the outside the body. Therefore in like manner as thy body appeareth, so also let thy soul be manifest in its good works. And by ¢he male with the female, neither male nor female, He meaneth this; that a brother seeing a sister should have no thought of her as of a female, and that a sister seeing a brother should not have any thought of him as of a { male. These things if ye do, saith He, the kingdom of my Father | shall come. BY AN UNKNOWN AUTHOR. QI
13.  Therefore, brethren, let us repent forthwith. Let us be sober unto that which is good: for we are full of much folly and wickedness. —> Let us wipe away from us our former sins, and let us repent with a ms whole soul and be saved. And let us not be found men-pleasers. Neither let us desire to please one another only, but also those men that are without, by our righteousness, that the Name be not blasphemed by reason of us. For the Yahuah (Lord) saith, Zvery way My Name is blasphemed among all the Gentiles; and again, Woe unto him by reason of whom My Name is blasphemed. Wherein is it blasphemed? In that ye do not the things which I desire. For the Gentiles, when they hear from our | mouth the oracles of Elohim (God), marvel at them for their beauty and great- ness; then, when they discover that our works are not worthy of the | ~ words which we speak, forthwith they betake themselves to blasphemy, saying that it is an idle story and a delusion. For when they hear from us that Elohim (God) saith, /¢ is no thank unto you, tf ye love them that love you, but this ts thank unto you, tf ye love your enemies and them that hate you; when they hear these things, I say, they marvel at their exceeding good- ness ; but when they see that we not only do not love them that hate us, but not even them that love us, they laugh us to scorn, and the Name is blasphemed.
14.  Wherefore, brethren, if we do the will of Elohim (God) our Father, we shall be of the first Church, which is spiritual, which was created before the sun and Be rare io uot the will. of the Yahuah (Lord), we shall be of ~— the scripture that saith, JZ) house was made a den of robbers. So there- fore let us choose rather to be of the Church of life, that we may be saved. And I do not suppose ye are ignorant that the living Church is the body of Messiah (Christ): for the scripture saith, Elohim (God) made man, male and Jemale. The male is Messiah (Christ) and the female is the Church. And the Books and the Apostles plainly declare that the Church existeth not | now for the first time, but hath been from the beginning: for she was spiritual, as our Yahusha (Jesus) also was spiritual, but was manifested in the last days that He might save us. Now the Church, being spiritual, was manifested in the flesh of Messiah (Christ), thereby showing us that, if any of us guard her in the flesh and defile her not, he shall receive her again in the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) : for this flesh is the counterpart and copy of the Spirit. — No man therefore, when he hath defiled the copy, shall receive the original for his portion. This therefore is what He meaneth, brethren ; — Guard ye the flesh, that ye may partake of the spirit. But if we say that the flesh is the Church and the spirit is Messiah (Christ), then he that hath A 92 AN ANCIENT HOMILY dealt wantonly with the flesh hath dealt wantonly with the Church. Such an one therefore shall not partake of the spiri ich is Messiah (Christ). So excellent is the life and immortality which this flesh can receive as its portion, if the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) be joined to it. No man can declare or tell those things which the Yahuah (Lord) hath prepared for His elect.
15.  NowI do not think that I have given any mean counsel re- specting continence, and whosoever performeth it shall not repent thereof, but shall save both himself and me his counsellor. For it is no mean reward to convert a wandering and perishing soul, that it may be saved. For this is the recompense which we are able to pay to Elohim (God) who created us, if he that speaketh and heareth both speak and hear with faith and love. Let us therefore abide in the things which we believed, in righteousness and holiness, that we may with boldness ask of Elohim (God) who saith, Whiles thou art still speaking I will say, Behold, I am here. For this word is the token of a great promise: for the Yahuah (Lord) saith of Himself that He is more ready to give than he that asketh to ask. Seeing then that we are partakers of so great kindness, let us not grudge ourselves the obtaining of so many good things. For in proportion as the pleasure is great which these words bring to them that have per- formed them, so also is the condemnation great which they bring to them that have been disobedient.
16.  Therefore, brethren, since we have found no small opportunity for repentance, seeing that we have time, let us turn again unto Elohim (God) that called us, while we have still One that receiveth us. For if we bid fare- well to these enjoyments and conquer our soul in refusing to fulfil its evil lusts, we shall be partakers of the mercy of Yahusha (Jesus). But ye know that the day of judgment cometh even now as a burning oven, and the powers of the heavens shall melt, and all the earth as lead melting on the fire, and then shall appear the secret and open works of men. Alms- giving therefore is a good thing, even as repentance from sin. Fasting is better than prayer, but almsgiving than both. And Jove covereth a multitude of sins, but prayer out of a good conscience delivereth from death. Blessed is every man that is found full of these. For alms- giving lifteth off the burden of sin.
17.  Let us therefore repent with our whole heart, lest any of us perish by the way. For if we have received commands, that we should | make this also our business, to tear men away from idols and to in- struct them, how much more is it wrong that a soul which knoweth Elohim (God) already should perish! Therefore let us assist one another, that we may also lead the weak upward as touching that which is good, to the end that we all may be saved: and let us convert and admonish one another. And let us not think to give heed and believe now only, while we are admonished by the presbyters; but likewise when we have departed home, let us remember the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord), and not suffer ourselves to be dragged off the other way by our worldly lusts ; but coming hither more frequently, let us strive to go forward in the ermenids of the Yahuah (Lord), that we all having the same mind may be gathered together unto life. For the Yahuah (Lord) said, 7 come to gather together all the nations, tribes, and languages. Herein He speaketh of the day of His appearing, when He shall come and redeem us, each_man according to_his works. Amd the unbelievers shall see His glory and His might: and they shall be amazed when they see the kingdom of the world given to Yahusha (Jesus), saying, Woe unto us, for Thou wast, and we knew it not, and believed not ; and we obeyed not the presbyters when they told us of our salvation. And Their worm shall not die, and their jire shall not be quenched, and they shall be for a spectacle unto all flesh. He speaketh of that day of judgment, when men shall see those among us that lived ungodly lives and dealt falsely with the commandments of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). But the righteous, having done good and endured tor- ments and hated the pleasures of the soul, when they shall behold them that have done amiss and denied Yahusha (Jesus) by their words or by their deeds, how that they are punished with grievous torments in un- quenchable fire, shall give glory to Elohim (God), saying, There will be hope for him that hath served Elohim (God) with his whole heart.
18.  Therefore let us also be found among those that give thanks, among those that have served_Elohim (God), and not among the ungodly that are judged. For I myself too, being an utter sinner and not yet escaped from temptation, but being still amidst the engines of the devil, do my diligence to follow after righteousness, that I may prevail so_far at least as to come near unto it, while I fear the judgment to come.
19.  Therefore, brothers and sisters, after the Elohim (God) of truth hath been heard, I read to you an exhortation to the end that ye may give heed to the things which are written, so that ye may save both yourselves and him that readeth in the midst of you. For I ask of you as a reward that ye repent with your whole heart, and give salvation and Jife to yourselves. For doing this we shall set a goal for all the young who desire to toil in the study of piety and of the goodness of ON a 94 AN ANCIENT HOMILY. Elohim (God). And let us not be displeased and vexed, fools that we are, when- soever any one admonisheth us and turneth us aside from unrighteous- ness unto righteousness. For sometimes while we do evil things, we perceive it not by reason of the double-mindedness and unbelief which is in our breasts, and we are darkened in our understanding by our vain lusts. Let us therefore practise righteousness that we may be saved unto the end. Blessed are they that obey these ordinances. ‘Though they may endure affliction for a short time in the world, they will gather the immortal fruit of the resurrection, Therefore let not the godly be grieved, if he be miserable in the times that now are: a blessed time awaiteth him. He shall live again in heaven with the fathers, and shall have rejoicing throughout a sorrowless eternity.
20.  Neither suffer ye this again to trouble your mind, that we see the unrighteous possessing wealth, and the servants of Elohim (God) straitened. Let us then have faith, brothers and sisters. We are contending in the lists of a living Elohim (God); and we are trained by the present life, that we may be crowned with the future. No righteous man hath reaped fruit quickly, but waiteth for it. For if Elohim (God) had paid the recompense of the righteous speedily, then straightway we should have been training ourselves in merchandise, and not in godliness ; for we should seem to be righteous, though we were pursuing not that which is godly, but that which is gainful. And for this cause Divine judgment overtaketh a spirit that is not just, and loadeth it with chains. To the only Elohim (God) invisible, the Father of truth, who sent forth unto us the Saviour and: Prince of immortality, through whom also He made manifest unto us the truth and the heavenly life, to Him be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. fee EF PISTLES OF S IGNATIUS. a, t. on oh on ne . ae a a Sa einen Stabe oF ies ! , e ai re Ae a>: - 7 7 vim y mn 5 ; 7 i ie | ,) mia AD Ppa i Wy ‘ r eas { fi 4 ey Na ine re tr ; Aang! ee Pee) yan?) ae ‘ pt ita Fit ne 7 i ta +¥ : 4 Ao iH ia . y a% : : AS en 4 i : ; he 5 a ou ; ‘ ik) wt Ty AS M : i ' if if nit Li ‘ “ PF ! i } iy i rat , j . , ay) ' nh MAY ‘ Ay) Rit } = ~ I hy } ' "A “f [y.' ves Oe fee i aa} Al af ie ‘ 7) i w > “ iy -. MY] i } ii Wo wiug go soy prpowry ss = evan amoypat WETRom Se \* “SOLIVNDI'S 2G SHLISIdH AML WLVELSOTH OL dv WV fee EB PISTLES OF S. IGNATIUS. I HESE seven epistles were written in the early years of the second century, when the writer was on his way from Antioch to Rome, having been condemned to death and expecting to be thrown to the wild beasts in the amphitheatre on his arrival. They fall into two groups, written at two different halting-places on his way. The letters to the Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, and Romans, were sent from Smyrna, while Ignatius was staying there and was in personal com- munication with Polycarp the bishop. The three remaining letters, to the Philadelphians, to the Smyrnzans, and to Polycarp, were written at a subsequent stage in his journey, at A/exandria Troas, where again he halted for a time, before crossing the sea for Europe. The place of writing in every case is determined from notices in the epistles them- selves. The order in which they are printed here is the order given by Eusebius (7. Z£. iii. 36). Whether he found them in this order in his manuscript, or whether he determined the places of writing (as we might determine them) from internal evidence and arranged the epistles accordingly, may be questioned. So arranged, they fall into two groups, according to the place of writing. The letters themselves however contain no indication of their chronological order in their respective groups ; and, unless Eusebius simply followed his manuscript, he must have exercised his judgment in the sequence adopted in each group, e.g. Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, and Romans. The two groups, besides having been written at different places, are separated from each other by another distinctive feature. All the é, epistles written from Smyrna are addressed to churches which he had not visited in person but knew only through their delegates. On the Swed 1 we bb 98 THE EPISTLES OF S. IGNATIUS. other hand all the epistles written from Troas are addressed to those, whether churches (as in the case of the Philadelphians and Smyrnzans) or individuals (as in the case of Polycarp), with whom he had already held personal communication at some previous stage in his journey. At some point in his journey (probably Laodicea on the Lycus), where there was a choice of roads, his guards selected the northern road through Philadelphia and Sardis to Smyrna’. If they had taken the southern route instead, they would have passed in succession through Tralles, Magnesia, and Ephesus, before they reached their goal. It is probable that, at the point where the roads diverged, the Christian brethren sent messengers to the churches lying on the southern road, apprising them of the martyr’s destination; so that these churches would despatch their respective delegates without delay, and thus they would arrive at Smyrna as soon as, or even before, Ignatius himself. The first group then consists of letters to these three churches, whose delegates had thus met him at Smyrna, together with a fourth to the Roman Christians apprising them of his speedy arrival among them—this last probably having been called forth by some opportunity (such as was likely to occur at Smyrna) of communicating with the metropolis. ‘The three are arranged in a topographical order (Ephesus, Magnesia, Tralles) according to the distances of these cities from Smyrna, which is taken as the starting-point. The second group consists of a letter to the Philadelphians whom he had visited on his way to Smyrna, and another to the Smyrnzeans with whom he had stayed before going to Troas, together with a third to his friend Polycarp closing the series. The order however in the Greek Ms and in the versions (so far as it can be traced) is quite different, and disregards the places of writing. In these documents they stand in the following order: 1. Smyrnzans 5. Philadelphians 2. Polycarp 6. ‘Trallians 3. Ephesians 7. Romans. 4. Magnesians This sequence is consistent with the supposition that we have here the collection of the martyr’s letters made at the time by Polycarp, who writing to the Philippians says ‘The Epistles of Ignatius which were sent to us by him, and others as many as we had with us, we send 1 See the map facing p. 97. THE SEVEN EPISTLES. 99 to you, even as ye directed: they are subjoined to this letter’ (§ 13). But though this order, which is given in the documents, has high claims for consideration as representing the earliest form of the collected epistles, I have substituted the chronological arrangement of Eusebius as more instructive for purposes of continuous reading. Our documents are as follows. 1. The Manuscript of the Greek Original (G), the famous Medicean Ms at Florence, from which Voss published the editéo princeps in 1646. It is incomplete at the end, and does not contain the Epistle to the Romans. If this ms had been, as Turrianus described it, ‘ emendatissi- mus’, we should have had no further trouble about the text. But since this is far from being the case, the secondary authorities are of the highest moment in settling the readings. 2. Among these the Zatzx Version (L) holds the first place, as being an extremely literal rendering of the original. The history of this version is especially interesting to Englishmen. It was discovered by Ussher in English libraries in two mss, one of which has been since lost, and was given to the world by him in 1644. It was certainly translated in England, probably by Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln (c. a.p. 1250), or his immediate circle. It exhibits a much purer form of the text, being free from several corruptions and a few interpolations and omissions which disfigure the Greek. At the same time however it is clear, both from the contents of the collection and from other indi- cations, that this version was translated from a Greek ms of the same type as the extant Greek ms; and therefore its value, as a check upon the readings of this Ms, is limited. Whenever GL coincide, they must be regarded as one witness, not as two. 3. The Syriac Version (S) would therefore have been invaluable as an independent check, if we had possessed it entire, since it cannot have been made later than the fourth or fifth century, and would have exhibited the text much nearer to the fountain-head than either the Greek or the Latin. Unfortunately however only a few fragments (S,, S,, S,, S,) belonging to this version are preserved. But this defect is made up to a considerable extent in two ways. irst. We havea rough Adridgment or Collection of Excerpts (%) from this Syriac Version [ame 100 THE EPISTLES OF S. IGNATIUS. for three epistles (Ephesians, Romans, Polycarp) together with a frag- ment of a fourth (Trallians), preserving whole sentences and even paragraphs in their original form or with only slight changes. Secondly. There is extant also an Armenian Version (A) of the whole, made from the Syriac (S). This last however has passed through so many vicissi- tudes, that it is often difficult to discern the original Greek reading underlying its tertiary text. It will thus be seen that AX have no inde- pendent authority, where S is otherwise known, and that SAS must be regarded as one witness, not as three. 4. There is likewise extant a fragment of a Coptic Version (C), in the Sahidic (Thebaic) dialect of the Egyptian language, comprising the first six chapters of the Epistle to the Smyrnzeans, besides the end of the spurious Epistle to Hero. The date of this version is uncertain, though probably early; but the text appears to be quite independent of our other authorities, and it is therefore much to be regretted that so little is preserved. 5. Another and quite independent witness is the Greek Text of the Long Recension (g) of the Ignatian Epistles. This Long Recension consists of the seven genuine Epistles but interpolated throughout, together with six additional Epistles (Mary to Ignatius, Ignatius to Mary, to the Tarsians, to the Philippians, to the Antiochenes and to Hero). The Latin Version (1) of the Long Recension has no independent value, and is only important as assisting in determining the original form of this recension. The practice of treating it as an independent authority is altogether confusing. The text of the Long Recension, once launched into the world, had its own history, which should be kept quite distinct from that of the genuine Epistles of Ignatius. For the purpose of determining the text of the latter, we are only concerned with its original form. The Long Recension was constructed by some unknown author, probably in the latter half of the fourth century, from the genuine Ignatian Epistles by interpolation, alteration, and omission. If there- fore we can ascertain in any given passage the Greek text of the genuine epistles which this author had before him, we have traced the reading back to an earlier point in the stream than the direct Greek and Latin authorities, probably even than the Syriac Version. ‘This however it is not always easy to do, by reason of the freedom and capriciousness of the changes. No rule of universal application can be laid down. But the interpolator is obviously much more given to change at some times THE SEVEN EPISTLES. IOI than at others; and, where the fit is upon him, no stress can be laid on minor variations. On the other hand, where he adheres pretty closely to the text of the genuine Ignatius, as for instance through great parts of the Epistles to Polycarp and to the Romans, the readings of this recension deserve every consideration. Thus it will be seen that though this witness is highly important, because it cannot be suspected of collusion with other witnesses, yet it must be subject to careful cross-examination, before the truth under- lying its statements can be ascertained. 6. Besides manuscripts and versions, we have a fair number of Quotations, of which the value will vary according to their age and independence. From the above statement it will be seen that, though each authority separately may be regarded as more or less unsatisfactory, yet, as they are very various in kind, they act as checks one upon another, the one frequently supplying just that element of certainty which is lacking to the other, so that the result is fairly adequate. Thus A will often give what g withholds, and conversely. Moreover it will appear from what has been said that a combination of the secondary and capricious authorities must often decide a reading against the direct and primary. For instance, the combination Ag is, as a rule, decisive in favour of a reading, as against the more direct witnesses GL, notwithstanding that A singly, or g singly, is liable to any amount of aberration, though in different directions. The foregoing account applies to six out of the seven letters. The text of the Efzstle to the Romans has had a distinct history and is represented by separate authorities of its own. This epistle was at an early date incorporated into the Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius, and thus dissociated from the other six. In its new con- nexion, it was disseminated and translated separately. It so happens that the Greek mss which contain this epistle (the Colbertine, 18 S. Sab., and 519 Sin.) are even less satisfactory than the Greek ms of the other six (the Medicean); but on the other hand we have more than compensation for this inferiority in the fact that the Acts of Martyrdom (with the incorporated epistle) were translated independently both into Syriac (S,,) and into Armenian (A,,); and these two versions, which are extant, furnish two additional authorities for the text. Moreover the Metaphrast, who compiled his Acts of Ignatius from this and another 102 THE EPISTLES OF «S. IGNATIUS. Martyrology, has retained the Epistle to the Romans in his text, though in an abridged and altered form. From this account it will be seen that the authorities for the Epistle to the Romans fall into three classes. (1) Those authorities, which contain the epistle as part of the Martyrology. These are the Greek (G), the Latin (L), the Syriac (S,,), and the Armenian (A,,), besides the Metaphrast (M). These authorities however are of different values. When the epistle was first incorporated in the Acts of Martyrdom, it still preserved a compara- tively pure form. When it has arrived at the stage in which it appears in the extant Greek ms (G), it is very corrupt. In this last form, among other corruptions, it exhibits interpolations and alterations which have been introduced from the Long Recension (g). The ms used by the Metaphrast exhibited a text essentially the same as that of G. (2) The independent Syriac Version (S) of which only a few fragments remain, but which is represented, as before, by the Syriac Abridgment (%) and the Armenian Version (A). (3) The Long Recension (g), which in great parts of this epistle keeps close to the text of the original Ignatius. ra) re) Though the principles on which a text of the Seven Epistles should be constructed are sufficiently obvious, they have been strangely over- looked. The first period in the history of the text of the genuine Ignatius commences with the publication of the Latin Version by Ussher (1644), and of the Greek original by Isaac Voss (1646). The Greek of the Epistle to the Romans was first published by Ruinart (1689). The text of Voss was a very incorrect transcript of the Medicean ms, and in this respect subsequent collations have greatly improved on his editio princeps. But beyond this next to nothing was done to emend the Greek text. Though some very obvious corrections are suggested by the Latin Version, these were either neglected altogether by succeeding editors or were merely indicated by them in their notes without being intro- duced into the text. There was the same neglect also of the aid which might have been derived from the Long Recension. Moreover THE SEVEN EPISTLES. 103 the practice of treating the several mss and the Latin Version of the Long Recension independently of one another and recording them co-ordinately with the Greek and Latin of the genuine Ignatius (instead of using them apart to ascertain the original form of the Long Recen- sion, and then employing the text of this Recension, when thus ascertained, as a single authority) threw the criticism of the text into great confusion. Nor was any attention paid to the quotations, which in several instances have the highest value. Hence it happened that during this period which extended over two centuries from Voss to Hefele (ed. 1, 1839; ed. 3, 1847) and Jacobson (ed. 1, 1838; ed. 3, 1847) inclusive, nothing or next to nothing (beyond the more accurate collation of the Medicean ms) was done for the Greek text. The second period dates from the publication of the Oriental versions—the Syriac Abridgment with the Syriac Fragments by Cureton (1845, 1849), and the Armenian Version by Petermann (1849)?. New materials of the highest value were thus placed in the hands of critics; but, notwithstanding the interest which the Ignatian question excited, nearly thirty years elapsed before any proper use was made of them. In some cases the failure was due, at least in part, to a false solution of the Ignatian question. The text of Bunsen (1847), Cureton (1849), and Lipsius (1859), which started from the assumption that the Syriac Abridgment represented the genuine Ignatius, must neces- sarily have foundered on this rock, even if the principles adopted had been sound in other respects. Petermann and Dressel (1857) however maintained the priority of the Seven Epistles of the Vossian text to the Three of the Curetonian; and so far they built upon the true basis. But Petermann contented himself with a casual emendation of the text here and there from the versions; while Dressel neglected them altogether. Jacobson (ed. 4, 1863) and Hefele (ed. 4, 1855) also, in their more recent editions which have appeared since the Oriental versions were rendered accessible, have been satisfied with recording some of the phenomena of these versions in their notes without apply- ing them to the correction of the text, though they also were un- hampered by the false theory which maintained the priority of the Curetonian Abridgment. It was reserved for the most recent editors, Zahn (1876), and Funk (1878), to make use of all the available materials } The editio princeps of the Armenian was published at Constantinople in 1783: but this version was practically unknown to scholars until Petermann’s edition ap- peared. 104 THE EPISTLES OF S. IGNATIUS. and to reconstruct the text for the first time on sound and intelligible principles. The text which I have given was constructed independently of both these editions, and before I had seen them, but the main principles are the same. Indeed these principles must be sufficiently obvious to those who have investigated the materials with any care. In the details _ however my views frequently differ from theirs, as must necessarily be the case with independent editors; and in some respects I have had the advantage of more complete or more accurate materials than were accessible to them. TO THE EPHESIANS. 105 eS eee at OY >, > \ Lal ’ / ITNATIOS®’, 6 cai @codopos, TH evrAoynuévyn ev peyéber \ Lal 5 Ocod matpos TANPepaTL, TH Tpowpicpevy TPO aid@vey eivar \ \ > / / v e Vues Sua travtos eis So€av Tapdmovoy ArpeTTov, nv@pévyn Kal €xde- / 3 / > ws / la \ \3 an Reypevn ev aber adrnOive@ év OeXnpatt Tod Tatpos Kal Inoov nr a an ¢ / a 3 na Xpiorod Tov Ocod nudv, TH ExkrAynola TH akvopakapiot@ TH f lal > / a ’ A ovon ev Edéow [THs “Acias], mrciota év “Inood Xpiot@ Kai ’ / Ev Gono yapa yalpev. > . lal lal B) I. *ArrodeEdpevos [vpar] év Oe@ To ToAVayaTrnTov dvopa, 0 KéxtnoOe hice [év yvoun 0p0H Kal] Suxaia Kata Tiotuv n ALON) AOE , \ > A A A a kal ayarnv év Xpiot@ “Inood TH cwTHps nud: pupnTral a 3 fa) ovtes Qcod, avalwrupnoartes ev aipate Qeod, TO cuvyyeviKov 4 U4 épyov Tedelws amnpticate: 2. axovoavTes yap Sedepévov 3 \ / C \ A a > / \ > / » ! amo Lupias Urép Tov Kowvov dvouaTos Kal Edrridos, éAmrifovTa A ae A 3 a bul 3 / a ivf \ TH Tpocevyy vpuav éemitvyelv év ‘Podun Onpropayjoat, iva dia a tal 3 fal Tod émutuyxely SuvnOd pabnts eivar, ictopnoat éomovddaare. bd \ Ss \ A € A b) Sif ios) Se} , 3. émel ovv THY ToNUTTANOELaY VudY ev OvopaTL Meod aTret- 3 i nr rd ¢ Lal \ Anda év “Ovnciuo, TH én’ ayarn adunynte, vuov oe [ev « 2 a e a capki|] émickoTw’ ov ev’youat Kata ‘Inooby Xpictoy vmas 3 a \ / bia Sasi 13 ¢ , > 5 5) \ ayaTray, Kal TAVTAS Vas AUT@ év OpoloTyTe eivat’ EevNoyNTOS \ tal a yap 6 xXaptoduevos vuiv aEiows ovaWw ToLovTOY émiaKoTOV KexTHo Oat. \ A fa) \ II. Tept d€ rod cuvdovrov pov Bovppou tod Kata Gedy / ¢ Lal duaxovov vudv [Kal] év mdow evdroynuévou, eVyomat Tapa- n 7 \ a lal Melvat avTov eis TLunv Uma Kal TOD émioKoTrov. Kal Kpoxos \ ¢ e A € a Sé 6 Oceod akwos Kal tudv, dv éEeumdapiov THs af’ vuav 9 / > pL A ff Ele ae ¢ \ SEEN ayaTns atréNaBov, Kata TavTa Me AVETTAVGEV, WS KAL AVTOY 106 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [11 6 matnp “Incod Xpictod avawvEa, aya "Ovncipw Kai a S Bovppo cai Kimr@ cal Ppovtwv, dv dv mavtas vas Kata ree 75 § > , tn 5 \ ' 27 ” dyarnv eldov' 2. ovaiunv vudv dia tavtos, éavTep aktos @. Tpémov otv éotw Kata Tavta TpéTrov do-alew "Inoovv , a a ¢ n Xpictov tov doEacavta vas va év pud vrotayh KaTnp- Tio MEeVOL, UTOTATTOMEVOL TO ETLTKOTT@ Kal TH TpEeTBuTEpio, KATA TAVTA NTE NYLAT EVOL. III. Ov dcataccopar ipiv, os ov TU et yap Kal bédenas > nr lel r €v T® ovopuati, o’rw amnpticpmat év “Incod Xpiwte@’ viv a > \ »” 4 , 4 lal | Sey ec [yap] apynv yw Tod pabnreverOar Kai TpoTrAXG vpiv ws cvvdloackanrlrais pov’ ewe yap et Vp twov vrrarerpOjvat r f) , c A rf) / e np he be > \ c mictet, vovlerla, viromovn, paxpoOupia. 2. a émel 7) ayaTn ovk éad me ciwTay Tepl vuav, dia TovTO TpoéXaPov Tapakarely Vuas, bTws TUVTPEXNTE TH YO" TOD Oeod. Kal yap “Incovs Xpictos, TO advaxpitov nudv Env, Tod TaTpos c ¢ \ n yvoun, OS Kal of émloKoTrOL Of KaTa Ta Trépata opiabEVTES év “Inoovd Xpiotov youn iol. e A a / . “Odev mpére vyiv cuvtpéyew tH Tod émicKoTro IV... “OBe mn é ; KOTTOU yvepun omep Kai Toveite. TO yap aEvovouactoyv Uuadv Tpec- , fal la) a Butépiov, Tod eod aEvov, ovTws cvvnppootat TO eTLTKOTTO c \ / \ a > nm / ¢ a \ ws xopdai KiOapg. dia TodTO év TH dpovola budv Kal cup- / ’ / | | r 4 \ 10 \ ec 7, § gave ayarn Incots Xpictos adetar. 2. Kal of Kat avopa 6e \ / 8 iv Uf ov b] ¢ / fal lal € Yopos yiverOe, iva cuppwvor dvTes ev dpovoia, ypoua cod / > e / v > a lal , cal lal NaPovtes, ev evoTnts adynte ev avy pid dia “Inood Xprctod A / vA € tal \ BI , \ > , 8 > e x4 T® Tatpl, Wa voy Kal axovon Kal érvywwooKy, Ot ov ev / I Yj a le a ‘ Tpacoere, wen OVTaS TOU viod avTOv. ypHowov ovY éeoTLY e al b] > / clout > tA \ n ULas EV AUOpw EvoTHTL Eival, iva Kal Ocod TavToTE meTEeXNTE. > \ > \ > V. Ei yap éyo & pixpd xpove toiavtTny cuvnbevar v \ A > / € A > b] / > b] \ ETYOV Tpos Tov ETricKkoTTOY LUBY, ovK avOpaTivny ovcaY adda / / r ¢ fa) TVEVLATLKNY, TOT@ pwaddov Uuds paxapifw Tos dvaKexpa- ig dA i¢ ¢< > / 5 A oF A \ ¢ > ~ LEvousS OUTaS, ws 7 éExKdAnola “Incod Xpict@ Kai ws “Inoods te mN tS Cf Xpiotos TH Tatpl, wa Tavta év évoTynTL cipdova H. 2. wy- } \ x, / fa} a =A , od) x a , ¢ els TAavaclw é€av py Tis 9 EvTOS TOU OvcLacTnpiou, voTE- rw nr Vv an lal pettat Tov aptov [Tov @eod]. ef yap évds Kal Seuvtépov vit} TO THE EPHESIANS. 107 \ / ’ \ ” / A ef rn Tpocevyn TOTavTnY LayUY EXEL, TOT®W paddov 7 TE TOU > / \ / lal > / ¢ Sp ees / ETLOKOTIOU Kal TATNS THS EXKANTLAS. 3. O OUVY f1) EPYOMEVvOoS Ban \ Suen 2 v € a Vine \ s zi atc éml TO avTO ovTos 5n vmepnphavel Kal éauTov dvéxpLver" Prov. iii. yéyparra: yap, YTEPHMANOIC O Oedc ANTITACCETAI. o7TOU- ae re ak / 5S \ b) / lal } / vA > Sacwpev ovv pu) avtitaccec Oar TO ETTLcKdTro, iva Guev co ¢ UTOTATCOMEVOL. VI. Kal bcov Bree Tis cuyovta éricKkoTrov, TAELOVOS te , ’ \ aA , ¢ > , > avtov hoBeicOw. TavtTa yap dv Téutet 6 oikodeaTroTNs eis > / > / c/ Lal € A > \ / e ’ \ idiav oikovouiay, oTws Set nuas avTov déyecOal, ds avTov \ / \ s > / Py / ¢ ] \ A Tov Téurayta. Tov ovv émicKxoTroy SnNOVOTL WS avTOY TOV na = > e Kupsov Set rpocBrérrew. 2. avtos pév odv ’Ovnoimos vtrepe- ne a \ > a b] U a J Me / Tawe, vuov thy év Oc@ evta€iay, OTe TavTes KaTa adnOecay lal \ ad > ¢ Lal it) U 7 A, > >] Joe CnTe Kal OTL év vpiv ovdEmla aipecis KaTOLKEL’ ANN oOvdE > U fi / wa NZS a Lo} a > aKOvETE TLVOS TAEOY 7 TrEept Inco’ XpioTod AadodYTOS EV ’ / arnOeta. Sin / f a Wa? VIL. Eie@acw yap tives d0X\@ trovnpe TO dvopa Tepe- L ” \ t ie Od AL hres ¢ pépetv, dra TWA TpaccovTes avakia Oeovd' ods Set Vas ws / > y 3 TaN \ / a fal Onpia éexkrj{ivew" cicly yap KUves NUTTOYTES, NaOpodHKTas, \ o ¢ al / U ovs def Vvuas duraccecOar dvtas SucOeparev’Tovs. 2. els / / / LAT POS ECTLY, TAPKLKOS Kal TVEVMATLKOS, YEVYNTOS Kal ayévyn- , f U > Tos, €v avOpat@ Oeds, ev Cavatwm fwr adnOwn, Kal éx U \ b] nr lal \ \ / ’ / Mapias kal €x Ocovd, tpaétov maOntos Kal ToTe atrabns, > rn \ a Inoovs Xpiotos 6 Kupsos nur. VIII. My») otvv tis vuds éEarratatw, wotrep ovdée é€a- A d v a A \ s > , matdaole, odo bytes Deod. b6Tav yap pndeuia émiOvpia Cc oa / ¢ al évnperotar év viv 1» dvvaévyn vuds Bacavica, dpa Kata \ le! / ¢ A \ € U a Qcov Syre. mepiynua vudv Kal ayrifouat vudv “Edeciwv y n / lal lal exkrAnolas THs SvaBontov Tots aidow. 2. of capKiKol Ta > / TVEUPATLKA Tpacce ov SUvaVTaL OVSE Of TVEVpAaTLKOL Ta ft el IOV ¢ / \ a 3 / ANA Ge oS TAPKLKA, WoTTEP OVOE 7) TiaTLS Ta THS ATrLaTLaS OVOE 1) aTrL- lA \ / \ \ \ a oTla Ta THS TiaTews. a Sé Kal KATA TapKa TPacceETE, TAUTA Le om) - > ? a \ n / / Tvevpatina eat €v Inoov yap Xptot@ TavtTa Tpaccere. vii. 2 & avOpwrw Oceds] Fathers [A]; év capkl yevduevos Ocds GL; al. g. & Oavarw fwh adnOwn] Fathers [A]; é ddavary fwn ddnOw7 GL; al. g. > Jamesiv. 6. cf. S. John xii. 20. Col. i. 23. 108 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [1x / ‘ lal IX. "Eyvoyv 6€ rapodevoavtas tivas éxeiOev, exovTas \ fig “\ b] >/ a > ¢ a U Kaknv SiWaynv’ os ovK Elacate oreipat eis Vuds, BicavTes A > > \ \ 66 6 \ f eens: J 92 De Ta ota eis TO pr) TapadéEacOa Ta oTrELipomeva UT aUTOV € v / n / > > \ r ws ovtes ALOoL vaod mponTolmacpévot Eis oiKodopny Oeod / a U > 5 AR p>) \ lal lel ,’ n mTaTpos, avadepomevoe els Ta Uy CLa THS pnyavyns “Inood Xpictod, bs é€otw cravpos, cxowio ypodpevoe TH TvEvpaTL A Seinie c \ , c a > ‘ (eee, <a ee. TO ayio' 1 Sé Tictis vudy avaywyeds mov, n b€ ayaTy \ > ! ods 1 avadhépovca eis Oedv. 2. éote oly Kal avvodot / / \ / / ¢ / \ mavTes, Oeopopot Kai vaopopor, ypirTopopor, ayropopor, KaTa rn > la) rn mMavTa Kexoopnuéevor ev évtorais “Incotd Xpictod' ols Kai ayardiwpevos nEWOnv, dv av ypadw, Tpocomirncat vpiv, a ’ nr kal ovyyaphvar OTe Kat avOpwrwyv Biovy ovdcyv ayamate, & N / \ / fn ovov Tov Oeov. X. Kal tmép tév addov 6€ avOpeTwv adiadeirTos / wet: \ 5) Jeter > \ , Y mpocevyerOe’ éatw yap [év] avTois éAmis petavoias, iva Qcod tvywow. emitpéate ovv avTois Kav Ex TOV Epyov dyiv pabnrevOnvar. 2. Wpos Tas opyas avTev vuels Tpacis, \ ’ A ¢ lal f Tpos Tas pmeyaXropnuocivas avTaV vpels TaTrEeLvoppoves, TPOS A a \ tas Bracdnulas avtaév vuels Tas Tpogevyas, Tpos THV TAAYHY avTaY uels EApaiol TH TIICTEI, TPOS TO aypLov avTaV Upels Huepoer pun omovdalovtes avtTipipncaclat avrTovs. an ¢ fal a 3. adedpol avtadv evpeOapev TH errverkeia’ pipyntal S€ Tod Kupiov orovdalwpev eivat, tis Tréov adixnOy, Tis arrocTe- A x / fol pnOn, tis abernOn: tva pur) TOD SiaBdrov Botavyn tis evpeO7R > Chin > os , ¢ / \ ‘ , 3 év vpiv' adr ev Tracy ayvela Kal cwdpocivyn péveTe ev Xpict@ “Inood capkik@s Kal TvevpatiKas. / \ A XI. "Eoyatou karpol. Rovrov aicyvyOapev, PoBnOdpev nr a \ CPN a / THY paKpoOupiay Tod Ocod, iva py nyly els Kpiwa yevnras. x \ \ I ON bd ‘ O06 bal \ b] tal ) yap THv pédroveav opynv poRnOapev 7 THY éeverTaocav Ud 3 f A a 6u / > a4 a a | [a] yap ayarncwpev, Ev Tov dvo- povov ev Xpiot@ “Inaod c a ’ \ 3 \ Ln) \ / \ £N 1c evpeOnvas eis TO GXNOwwov Env. 2. ywpis TovTo wndev vpiv ix. I mponrowmacuévo] conj. Lightfoot, Markland; warpos (written mpc) hromacuévoe GLA [3]; al. g. 2 Kar’ dvOpwrwyv Biov] conj. Lightfoot [g]; kar’ &\dov Blov GL; al. A. xv] TO THE EPHESIANS. 109 4 2 e \ \ , TPETETM, EV © TA Seopa TreEpLpépw, TOUS TVEVpATLKOVS pap- 4 4 > ze , / > a A a yapitas’ év ols yévolTo po avacThvat TH Tpocevyn Vuav, Hs , ! aN , > YEVOLTO fool del peTOYoY eivat, iva év KAHPw Edeciwr evpeOw tav Xpictiaver, of kal Tols atrooToANols TavTOTe TUYnVETAY > / > a A év Suvaper Inood Xpictod. L Lf > \ / / ‘ XII. Oida ris eius nai ticw ypadwo. eye Kataxpttos, e o b] J A > \ ¢€ \ / c o > I Vues HArenuevor éyd v0 Kivduvov, vuels éoTnpLypévot. , It b) a > \ > , , 2. Tapodos écte THY els Oedv avatpovpévwv, Lavrov cup- fa) € fal pwotat TOU nylacpévov, ToD peyapTupnuévov, afiouaxapl- \ \ a a oTov, ob yévorTd por UO Ta iyvn evpEeOnvat, btTav Beod z} / ees 3 , b al U € a b A emitiy@’ Os ev Tacn éTLTTONH pynmovever vuav ev XpioTe@ *Inood. XIII. Szroviakere ovv ruevotepov cuvépyerOas eis ev- , n Nie ts / Pty? \ PIS ENT AUN SIAN xapiotiay Med Kai eis S0€av' Stay yap TuKVas Ett TO AUTO / fal @ fn te Py / A Ss a \ / yiverOe, Kabaipodvtar ai Svvapers ToD Latavd, cal AveTat 6 OXEOpos avtTod év TH Opovola Uuav THS TicTEws. 2. OUdE pos 7} Omovoia VUoY TNS gs. 2. ovdév ect apwewvov cipnvns, ev ) Tas TOAEMOS KaTAapyEitaL éTrov- paviov Kal émuyelov. XIV. ‘Ov ovdév AavOave buds, éav Tereiws eis “Incody > A Xproroy éynte THY Tictw Kal THY ayaTnY’ HTS eoTiv apyn A Acs sates CN y l Sh Seay A \ gras fons Kat TéeKos* apy pev Tiatts, TEXAS Se ayarrn’ Ta dé dvo Ce BOM t ! 9 \ \ + , > év évoTnte yevoueva Oeos eat, Ta d€ G@\Xa Tavta els Kado- kayabiav axodovba éotiv. 2. ovdels Tiatiy érrayyEeddOpmEVvOS ¢ / 29O\ > / / lal ‘ \ , apapTavel ovee AYATNVY KEKTNMEVOS fLaEL. DANEPON TO AEN- S. Matt. oR) A . > a. a Ve) s Apsil. 33: APON AITO TOY KAPTIOY AYTOY* OVT@S OL ETTAYYyEAAOMEVOL Xpiorov > 3 / ’ fa} , ’ \ A , , eivat, d¢ av Tpaccovew oPOncovtar. ov yap viv érrayyedlas TO &pyov, aAN év Suvaper rictews éav Tis evpEeOH els TEXos. ” / > lal \ a x a \ XV. “Apewvov éotiv cwwrday Kal elvat 7) NadodYTAa pH Elva Kadov TO didacKetv, €av 6 AéyoV Tron. els ovv Siba- A 3 \ VEE \ \ lal \ / By ats TKANOS, Os EITIEN Kal EFéNETO’ Kal & ouyav O€ TreTTOinKEY aELa Ps, xxxiii. a t 5) ¢ , > a , b) a Q- ToU TaTpos éoTw. 2. 6 Oyo ‘Incod KExTnpEvos adnO@s Py) \ a ¢ , b) im. 39 / 7. ft ee eg s vvaTat Kal THS novylas avTod aKovew, iva TédeLos 7° iva Oe - A r \ 3 e a / ION dv adel mpacon Kal Se av ciyd ywooKnTaL. 3. ovdEeV , \ A A AavOaver Tov Kuptov, ddrAa Kal Ta KpuTTA NudY eyyds avT@ I Cor. vi. g, 10. Gal. v. 21. t Cor. i. 20. 110 THE EPISTLE OF 5S. IGNATIUS [xv €oTW. TAVTA OU TTOLMMEV, WS AUTOD ev Nuiv KATOLKOUITOS, o 5 > A \ Sines mR 9 Gite r a \ a @pyev avTovd vaol Kal avTos H ev jnyiv Oeos: OTrep Kal ” x , \ f ¢ a > z Py / éotw Kal havncetat po mpocwmov nuav, €E av SiKalws a ’ / ayaTOmev avTov. XVI. M) wAavdcbe, aderpot pov: ot oikopOopor Baci- ' a > ’ ? LS e \ / Aelan Oceoy oy KAHPONOMHCOYCIN. 2. €4 OVY OL KATA Gapka fa) / > / / La) SN / an TavTa TpaccovTes aTréVavov, TOT@ paddov éav trict Oeod € ae > a ) év Kakobilackaria Pbeipn, virep ns Incods Xpictos éotav- A \ a > \ A \ poOn. 6 ToLovTOS pUTrapos yevomeEvos Els TO TIP TO AaBecTOV ¢ > / ’ na YOPHNTEL, OMOLWS KAL O GKOVOY aUTOD. a /- ] lal fel fal XVII. Aca todto pwpov ExaPev eri THs Keharms [avTov] a vA , x > 7 6 Kupios, tva trvén TH exxrAnoia apGapaiav. 1) dreiperbe A a Y An fal Suvcwdiav THs SidacKarias TOV ApyovTos ToD ai@vos TovTOU, \ > / ¢ a > an / A \ be \ fn) aixuarotion vuas éx Tov TpoKetpévou Cnv. 2. dud Ti bE , t / f / fal a fet vd ov mavres Ppovipor yivouea AaBovTes Oeod yvaou, 6 éoTw ’ al a / / Lal 3 / 3 fal \ / cous > a- Inoods Xpioctos ; TL pwpws atroddAvpEVa ayvoodvTes TO x © 3 lal ¢ Ud piopa 0 mwétoudev adnOas o Kupsos; XVIII. Tepipnwa 76 éwov rvedua Tod otavpod, 6 éorw l a ? A Cue \ Id \ \ Sie oKavoaroy Tols atiaTovat, nuiy dé cwTnpia Kal bon aid- vios. TOY coddc; TOY CYZHTHTHC; 7rOvU KavyNoLs TOY NEyopE- a ¢ \ \ ¢ Aa 3 n ig \ > vov ovveTov; 2. 0 yap Oeos nuav Inoovs 0 Xpiatos Eexvo- ’ Caw , 9 > / > / \ popnOn vio Mapias Kat otkovomiay, €x omeppatos pmev ¢ a Aaveld mvevpatos S€ ayiou: Os éyevvnOn Kat éBarrticOn iva To@ Tabet TO VOwp Kabapion 4 P Pp c : Ye \ Yj n a XIX. Kal €daGev tov apyovta Tod aidvos TovTou 1 / / \ ¢ \ 3 a € i Ak , mapGevia Mapias cal 0 ToKeTOs avTHs, Omolws Kat 06 Pavatos a / / U a ce > ¢ / lal tod Kupiov: tpia pvotnpia Kpavyis, atwa év novyia Oeod » / Lal x ’ , nr , A > \ 5 empayOn. 2. 1ws ovv épavepwOn Tols aidaw; aotnp év b) a »- ¢ \ / \ ’ 4 \ \ fel ovpav@® édaprwev vTép TavTas Tovs acTépas, Kal TO has b) a > / 2 \ ia) avTov avexNadynTov Hv, Kal Eeviopov mapetyev 1) KaWworTns ’ a \ \ \ U v a t\ / \ , \ avtov: Ta Oé NoLTTAa TaVTa aoTPA aa nALW Kal GEANVH YopoOs > / fel ) J > \ \ 3 ¢€ / lal A éyéveTo TO aoTépt, avtos b€ Av UrepBadrov TO Pos avToOd ey aaN t P D > r uTep TavTa’ Tapayn Te nv TolEV 7 KaLVOTNS 7 aVOmoLOS b) n (v4 / A / lal avtois. 3. O0ev édXveTO Taga payela Kal Tas Secuds, Hpavi- Xx1] TO THE EPHESIANS. Det Yj a \ Eero Kaxias adyvoia, KaOnpetro madaia Bacireia, [diepOet- a ’ lA f >’ , o-Q7 peto], Qeod avOpwrivas havepovpévou eis KAINOTHTA aidiou zwhic’ apynv o¢ éhawPavey TO Tapa Bed arnpticpévor. ” \ / al A \ a , évOevy Ta TavtTa auvexweito Ota TO pereTacOat OavaTtou KaTaNuow. > / ' > n \ > lal XX. “Hav pe xatakioan ‘Inoovs Xpiotos €v tH mpoo- ¢ Bi A n evyn vuar, kal OédAnpa 7, ev TO Sevtépw BiBALSiw, 0 pédro / cn / c A e ’ / ’ / 3 ypadew viv, mpocdnr\ocw viv ns npEaunv otKovopias eis fa) > aA a Tov Kawov avOpetov “Incody Xpictov, ev Ti avtTod TicTeL a 7) ’ a Kal €v Th avToD ayarn, év mae. avTov Kal avacTace, , 2 Me U padsata éav 6 Kipids pot arroxariyyn fotuf of Kat avdpa A ? >’ J lal Kown mavtes ev yapits €& ovopatos cvvépyecbe ev pa micte. kat évt “Inood Xpiot@ TO KaTa capKa éK yévous / lal ta > / \ ea a > N € , Aaveid, TO vid dvOperou Kal vid Oeod, eis TO VTraKovEW ¢ lal al / buds TO éeTicKOT@ Kal TO TpecBuTEpiw amreplaoTracT@ Sia- Tp > Fe a bee ¢ > / > fe > / voia’ éva aptov Kr@vTES, 6 €oTW PappaKov alavacias, avTi- nr WN b) nr ’ Ni aA b} ’ na A : Sotos Tov px) amroVavely adda Shv év “Inood Xpicta@ dia TAVTOS. A th nr XXI. ?Avtinpuyor tudy éyo, Kat dv éréurpate eis Oceod \ > , 5 v4 \ , (oar: ’ a A Tiyuny eis Ywvpvav' o0ev Kal ypadw vylv evyapioTav TO a / ¢ “G an Kupto, ayarév WodtKcaprov ws Kai vids. pvnuoveveté pou, ¢ \ ¢ tal ’ a f , ¢ \ A os Kal vuav “Incots Xpiotds. 2. mpocevyerOe vrep THs > x / a b) >a) / 60 8 8 , b) ‘Pp / b) / exkAnolas THS év Lupia, bev Sedepevos els “Pony amrayouat, »” x A b A A dé > / > \ la) ésyatos Oy TMV éxel TIcTaY, WoTrEep HELWOnY eis TYunY Beod evpeOnvar. eéppwobe év Ocw@ Twratpt Kal év “Incod Xpiot@ TH Kownh edrridt nMLOv. xx. €vl Inco Xpiorg@] Theodt. Gelas.; & Incov Xpisor~ GLS,; al. Ag. Rom. vi. ¢. T12 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS (1 TIPOS:) TOYS EN» MAT NASIAL fal / ITNATIO® 6 cat Ocodpopos, TH evrAoynpévyn ev YapeTe a \ > Ae 9 n a a c rn ’ e @cod matpos év Xpiotsé “Incov’ tH cwrnps [npdyv], ev @ , / \ ’ / \ 4 5] / lal \ domavowat THY ExKAnoLav THY ovcay ev Mayvnoia TH TpOS / \ Yj BJ al A 4. » a la fel Mauavépa, Kai evyouat ev Oe@ tratpi Kai ev “Incod XpicT@ TrEloTa yaipevy. a ’ I. Tvovs tudv 70 rodvevtaxtov THs Kata Medv ayarns, > / fi >’ / , fal nr AYANNLMMEVOS TPOELNALHV EV TLOTEL Incod Xpictov tpoc- AaAjnoat vuiv. 2. Katakiwbels yap ovopatos OcompeTrerta- > a , a ” \ > / > ° tov, év ols mepipépw Secpois adm tas éxkdnalas, ev ais évwow evyopmat capKos Kal tvevpatos “Incot Xpiotod Tod lal A -) dva mavtos nuav nv, wictews TE Kal ayamns, Hs ovdev Tpo- fal ec Kéxpital, TO Sé KUpL@TEpov, "Incod Kal TaTpos’ 3. & @ UTOMEVOVTES THY TAcaY eTNpELaY TOU ApYoVTOS TOV aiwvos Toutou Kal dvaduyovTes Oeod TevEdpeBa. Il. ’Evret ody n&vdbOnv ideiv vas dia Aapa tod a&vobéov c lal > / \ , > / J. » We) UMOV ETLOKOTTOU Kal TpecBuTépwv akiwy Bacoov Kai ‘ATo)- Awviov Kal Tod cuydovAov pov Staxovov Zwtiwvos, ob é&y@ li U a ovaipny, OTL UTOTATCETAL TO ETLTKOT@ WS yapLTL O«eod Kal “A / ¢ t > rn fal T@ TpecBuTepio ws vouw Incod Xpicrod. Ne aa IN / » A a ¢ / A“ III. Kai vuiv d€ rpéres pn cvyypdcba TH nruKla ToD / > \ \ / r \ lal > \ émicKkoTov, adda Kata Sivauiv Oeod Tatpos waaay évtpoTrny SSSA f Ae 7 \ \ eer A avT®@ a7rovéuelv, Kaas Eyvwv Kal Tos aylous TpeaBuTéepous ’ Ld \ / ] ov Tpocernhoras THY hatvowéevny vewTepixny Tak, GAN ws / ? r a a ’ a. 2 > A / > a A ppoviuw ev Ged cvyxwpodvvtas a’T@ ovK avT@ Sé, GAG TO ANS: a lol ar f matpt ‘Incod Xpictov TO TavTwv éemicKkoT@. 2. Els TLD ovyv éxelvou Tov OerAnoavTos vuds Tpétov éeaTly UmaKovew , ¢ lal Kata pnoemlay vTOKplow" Emel oY CTL TOY éicKOTTOY TOUTOV \ / A ’ A \ x7 / Tov BNeTrOomevov TAAVG TLS, AANA TOY aopaToy TrapanroyiCeTat \ \ rn > \ U ¢ / > \ \ \ \ TO d€ TOLODTOV, OU TPOS TapPKa O NOYOS GdAa Tpds Oeov Tov \ U a7 Ta Kpudia eldora. vir] TO THE MAGNESIANS. RES IV. Ipétrov ovv éotw pu) povov Kareicbat Xpictiavovs >. \ eee) alter ? say \ A QXNGA Kal Eival’ WOTTEP Kal TLVES ETICKOTTOY MEV KadovoL, \ \ ? an / / e a \ ? xopis S€ avToU TavTa Tpadccovol. ot TovodTot [dé] ovK , \ \ eVovvEelonTot por eivar haivovtat Sia TO py BeBaiws Kat’ \ evtToAny cuvabpoifer ar. ed \ s / \ / 4 \ / \ V. “Evel ovv TéXos Ta Tpaypata evel, Kal TpoKELTAL Ta ' c a of 4 x c / ee > \ 4 dvo Omov, 6 Te Oavatos Kal 1 Cwn, Kal ExacTos Eic TON IAION , I rn ed / > y / A TOTION péAAEL YwpEiv: 2. daoTEp yap EoTLW Vvopicpata Svo, 0 \ a wv \ e Neel , a 7 al péev Ocod 0 dé Kocpov, Kal Exactov avtéy idiov yapaxTHpa lal , ETLKELMEVOV EXEL, OL ATLTTOL TOD KOTO TOUTOL, OL Sé TLTTOL > ’ , fal a \ Nk 9, an a > e év ayatn yapaxthpa Ocod tatpos dia “Inood Xpio rod, bi’ ob 2\ \ > fe By 4 \ >’ a > \ , rn / €av pun avlaipéTas Exwpev TO atroOaveiv Els TO a’TOv Trados, lal fa) ’ ¢ nr TO Snv avTovd ovK éotuv ev nuiv. VI. Evel ovv év tois mpoyeypappévors Tpocwiois TO fal rf ? ’ fal mav TAHOos EVedpnoca ev TicTEL Kal HYyaTnTA, TapaLye év ¢ a / / , opovoia Ocod omrovdakete TavTa Tpaccew, mpoKaOnpévou > Uy A A Tov émioKOTTOU els TUTOV Deod Kal Tov TpecBuTépwy eis / val An A TUTOV cuVEdplov TOV aTOTTOAwY, Kal TOV Siakoverv Tov éuol / A A D) yAuKUTaTO@DY, TeTLoTEULEVoY Stakoviay ‘Incod Xpictod, Os \ pe \ \ 9S \ > lA ] , / TPO alWvaV Tapa TaTpl nv Kal ev TédeL Ehavyn. 2. TaVTES Le ¢ a ovv omonfevcav Ocod AaBovTes evtpémecOe AAAnXOUS, Kai \ / , fol poets Kata capka BrETETW TOV TANCIOV, aAN év “Inaood ore n > / \ x) > aA \ ” b] € lal XpiocT@ adrndovs dia TavTos ayaTate. pndev ctw ev Vyiv v\ 5 / c. a / NONE e 14) an > / 7 0 duvncetar vuds pepioat, AAN éveOnTe TO EticKOTm Kal tal / > , x \ ,’ / Tols mpokalnpmévors eis TUTOV Kal didaynv apVapcias. J 5 ¢ a , VII. “Qozep otv 0 Kupuos dvev Tob matpos ovdév érrol- ¢e IA Vv v 9 (48 n ” \ a ’ ! noev [nvapévos wv], ovte du EavTov ote Sia TOY aTrOTTONW), f Nis ¢: lal ’ na al OUTMS NOE Vues avEeV TOD ETLTKOTTOU Kal TOY TpecBuUTEpaD \ / / pnoev Tpdocete pundé Treipacnte eVroyov TL haiverBat idia etal > Vs ae \ aaeIN f , / I a vuiv' aXN el TO avTO pla Tpocevyn, pla Sénats, Els vods, / eori ? > fy ’ A a A bd , / ? iy | fa) Mia EXTIs, EV AyaTN, EV TH YAPA TH auope, os éeotiv Inaods / e ’ Xpictos, o0 dwewvov ovbév éotw. 2. TavTes ws els Eva vaor / lal e a A / lal ouvtpéxete +Ocod+, ws emi ev Ovovactnpior, emt eva Inoodv Vil. I 6s €or] conj. Lightfoot; els éorw G3 6 éorw L Antioch.; al. Ag. Acts i. 25. Ts. xvi. 18. 114 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [vir \ 9 SE lVA \ Xpictov tov ad évds Tatpos mpoeMovTa Kal eis Eva ovTa Kal yopnoavta. \ lal a VIII. My mravacbe tais érepodoEiaus pndée pvOevpacw nr Ta] ’ a Tols Taravois avwpedéow ovow: eb yap méxpL viv KaTa Lov- ” \ a € rf / \ > , [ A Saicpov Cdpev, omoroyovpev Yap pn eiAnpévar. 2. of yap , n \ \ > rn ” \ al Oevotatoe tpopntat Kata Xpictov ‘Inooby &fnocav. dia TodTo red / > / ¢ \ lal / > a) ’ ‘ Kal €didyOnoay, Eutrvedpevot UTO THS yapTos [avTOv] Els TO trAnpopopnOnvat Tovs arrevOovvTas, ort els Oeds eotw 6 have- pwaas éavrov d1a “Inood Xpictov Tod viod avrod, 63 éoTw , fa) / > \ lal / ray \ / 3 VA avtTovd Noyos ato aiyns TpoEeOwrv, Os KaTAa TravTa evdnpérTN- nw J , / cev TO TEUAPAVTL AUTOV. IX. Eid ody of év Tranratots mpaypaciw avactpadévtes els KawoTnta édridos nAOov, unKéTe caBBatilovtes addXa \ SN a ’ a \ ¢€ \ c tal ee? > Kata Kuptakny Cavtes, ev 7 Kal n Son nuov avéterrev 61 an na nr a = avtTov Kal Tov Oavatou avTov, 2. bv Ties apvobdvyTat Ov Ov J > U \ / \ \ a € / puotnpiov édaPRouev TO TiaTever, Kal Sud TOUTO UTOpEeVOpED, iva evpeOadpev wabntat Inood Xpioctod tod povov didacKkddov Ls A tal c lal 4 lal \ ,’ lal Ka i HOV’ TAS Hues SuYnoopeda Groat ywpis avTOV; 3. ov Kal e lol \ ow n / € Ul ’ \ ol tpodnra wabntat dvTes TO TVEVpaTL WS SUdacKaXoV aUTOV TpocEedoKwv. Kat da TodTO, Ov Sikalws avéuevov, TapOV iryEl- peéVv aUTOUS EK VEKPOV. \ S , A A rf 3 X. M7 ovy avarcOntepev THs ypnoteTnTos avTod. av yap nas plunontat Kaba mpaccopev, ovKéTe eopév. dia fa) b) A ToUTO, wabnTal avTOD yevomevor, udPwpev KATA YpLoTLAaViC- \ tal \ \ by, 4 a / / b] pov Snv. os yap adXX@ ovowaTe KaNEtTaL TEOV TOUTOV, OVK + fal la) ¢ / s \ \ / \ Esty Tov Oeov. 2. vrépOecbe ovy thy Kaxny Cvpnv thy marawleicay Kal évoEicacay, Kai petaBarecbe eis véav if tJé & > lal / ¢ / b] ; QO & \ fupny, os éativ “Incots Xpioros. adricOnte év avTo, iva pH A b) e rf b} \ ’ \ an ’ na ’ f SiapGaph tis ev viv, érret aro THS Oopns ereyyOyjceabe. 3. atoTov éotiv “Inoodv Xpiotov Aareiv Kai iovdaifew. 6 \ \ ? > ? - \ > IY 2) 37. yap yploTiavic 0s OUK Els Lovdaicpoy émiaTEVaEV, GAN Lov- ” \ Ig ® a Lon / Saicpmos eis yploTiavicpov, @ T&ca PAdcca micTevcaca eis ®cov cynHyOu. eee 3 XI. Taira 8, ayarntoi wou, ovK éret éyvwv tivas é& xv] TO THE MAGNESIANS. II5 ¢ lal e/ BA > ’ ¢ / ¢ A / UEL@Y OUTWS EXOVTAS, GAN WS pLKPOTEPOS UuUaY FéXw TpOodu- iy (3 n Weer an > eed a / AacceOat Uuds un éuTreceiv els TA AyKioTpa THS KEvooo€las, 3. \ l 3 an / \ A / \ A ara TeTANpopdpynabe ev TH yevvnoe Kat TO TADE Kal TH > a A ¢ avacTaces TH yevouevn ev Kaip® THs nyewovias Llovtiov Ilikatou: mpaydévta adnOds kai BeBaiws vo “Incood Xpu- OTOU, THS EAmLOos MOV, HS ExTpaTHVaL pNndevi VuoV yévorTo. XII. “Ovaipny tudv cata wavta, éavtep ak&wos &. et \ \ / \ / an / ¢ “~ eB] > Ig yap Kai dédewar, mpds Eva TOV AEdupEVOY TuoV ovK ecipi. ed er ? n hae A \ \ ” > e lad otda Ott ov duciodabe “Incovy yap Xpiotov Exete ev éavrots. \ es JA > a CAA * 24 b) / ¢ Kal paddov, bTav éraw@e vuds, oda OTL evTpémecbe ws yéypamtat OTL 6 AiKAlOc EayTOY KATHTOpOc. Prov. xviii. A n I7- XIII. Yrovdakfete otv BeBarwOjvat ev tots Sdoymacuy n / Si ial ’ / vA U a S . tod Kupiov cat Tov amocToAwr, iva TANTA Oca TolEiTeE Ps. i. 3- KATEYOAWOATE TapK Kal TvEevpaTt, TidTEL Kal aya, ev Vid Kal TaTpi Kab ev mvevpmatl, Ev apyn Kal év TédEL, META TOD , e n akwompeTectatou émicKoTrov vue Kal a&voTNOKOU TrvEevMa- fa) la) td A A TUKOD aTEpavou Tov TpecRuTEpiov vay Kal T@V KaTa Oeov / ¢ fe lal > / Si ’ / e dvaxovov. 2. viToTaynTeE T@® €TLOKOT@ KAL AAANKOLS, WS > fal \ n \ \ / \ e > , Inoods Xpiotos TH Tratpl [Kata capKa] Kal of amocToNoL a a acer , tf > T@® XpioT@ kai TO TaTpl, Wa Evwors 7 capKiKH TE Kal TrVEV- PaTeKn. XIV. Eidas OTe Oeod yéeuete, cvvTiuws Tapexadreca vds. pvnpwoveveTé pov év Tais Tpocevyais vuav, wa Oecod > i: \ a > / 3 ‘ / ¢/ ’ v f > EmLTUXo, Kal THS év Lupla exkdyolas, Oley ovK aELOS Elpe KanelioOar. émidéopat yap THs nvwpévns Uuov év Ocw Tpoc- ; pat yap THs Hveawerys vp d Tp A \ ,’ / >] \ ) al \ > 4 > / EvXS Kal ayarns els TO aEvwOnvar THY év Yupia éexxrAnolav \ a a a Ova THs exTevelas Uudv SpocraOjvat. 2 rn XV. “Aorafovtar tuas ’Edéowot aro Xpipvys, ev Kal / (4 al / > / lal cs \ ¢ la’ ec ypabw viv, tapovtes ets SoEav Ocod, BoTrep Kal vmels, ob \ / KaTa TavTa pe avévravoay, aua LloAvKaptTe éTicKéTT@ Dpmup- / A la a vaiwov. Kal ai Noval dé éxxAyolas év Twn “Inood Xpioctod 3 U ¢ fal A aotafovtat vpas. éEppwabe év cpovoia Oecod, KexTnuéver 3 / tal A r adidKpitov Tvedpa, bs éotw “Inoobs Xpuctos. xlv. éxrevelas] conj. Lightfoot [A]; éxxAnolas GL; evrailas g. 8—2 116 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [1 WPOS TPAAMANG Y= U ] fal \ ITNATIO‘S, 6 xai Ocodopos, jnyamnuévy Oe warp a la! id a Yi ~ *Inood Xpiotod, éxxdrnoia ayia TH ovon év Tpadreow TIS 5 f , n \ > / > ih > \ \ / Actas, ékrextH Kal a&vobé@, eipnvevovan év capKi Kai Trvev- a 10 al lal xX rn lal EX, 8 ¢ tal >’ a pate TO TAUOeL “Incood Xpiotod THs EAmibos nudv EV TH « “ >’ els avTOv avactacet’ Hv Kal domalouar ev TO TANPOpAaTL EV ’ lal lol an ATOTTONK® YAPAKTHPL, Kal EVYOMaL TAELTTA YalpeEL. I. "Apopov dudvovay Kai advaxpeiTov ev vropovn éyvav ¢ a yy >’ \ a DON \ \ (f e fa} \ bas éxovtas, ov Kata xpjow adda Kata dia Kabos € a ray 4 edyrwcév prot HorvBi0s 6 érricKkotros vay, 0s TapeyéeveTo n a a \ if Oerxnpate Ocod cat Incod Xpicrovd év Yuvpvy, Kal ovTws pot ipn Sedeueve ev X @& Inoov, dot TO Wav TAH- guvexapn Sedenévm ev Xpiot@ Inaod, € pe H a a lal > \ 4 Gos vuav év avT@ Oewphjoa. 2. dmodeEauevos ovv THY KaTa © \ v 8 b) > a 286 ¢ \ ¢ lal c ” cov evvotav dt avTov, ebofaca evpov vuds, Os eyvarv, mLen- \ ” an Tas OvTas Meod. II. “Orav yap t@ érickdT@ vrotacanabe ws ‘Incod a a \ Xpiocte, haivecGE or ov Kata avOpwrovs Eavtes, aNAa KATA > a / \ SAE, al > U vf / Incody Xpiotov, Tov dv Huds aroBavovta iva TicTEVoavTeEs > \ / b) na \ > a > if > a eis TOV Pavatov avTod TO aToOaveiv Expvynte. 2. avaryKatov ovv €oTW, WOTTEP TroLEiTe, AVEV TOD éemLoKOTTOU pNdeY TPac- € ok DONS: € / fa) \ tal / ¢ a cew vuds' add’ vToTacoedbe Kal TO TpEecBuTEplo, ws [Tots] > / ’ lal lal aA ae atroatonos “Incov Xpiotov, THs EdTidos nudv, ev @® Sia- b) bets ¢ , a Q\ \ \ , yovtes [ev avT@] evpeOnoopeba. 3. det dé Kal Tovs dtaxovous ovTas pvotnpiov Incod Xpicrov Kata Tavta TpoTrov Tacw ’ / 3G > \ / \ A > 8 if DNDN apéckey* ov yap Bpopatwov Kat Totaév eiaw SdiaKovot, a éxkrnoias Meod vrnpétar: Séov ovv avtovs duraccecbar Ta 4 € a EYKANMATA WS TUP. ¢€ / , > ik \ / ¢ III. ‘Opolws travtes évtpetécOwaav tors Svaxovous ws lo) > lol Incotv Xpiorov, ws Kab Tov ewicKoTov dvTa TUTOY TOU / ¢ / r \ ¢ Tatpos, Tos 5&€ mperBuTépous ws cvvédpiov Oeod Kat [ws] t ’ / \ ' ? / > a aUVOETMOV ATOTTOAWY: YwpPLS TOUTWY EXKANTLa OU KadEtTAL. vit] TO THE TRALLIANS. Liz Ne / ec a ids 4 \ \ b) / 2. TEpPl OY TETELT WAL VLAaS OVTwWS EXEL: TO yap EEeuTApLOY A 3 / € A oy. \ a Fie) a >) A *) THS ayaTns vueov EXaBov Kal éyw pel EavTovD Ev TO ETrI- , Ls a 3 ’ TKOT® VUL@V, OV AVTO TO KaTaoTHMA peydAn MalnTeia, 7 Sé , ’ an , \ / \ \ > / > TpaoTns avTov dvvapmis Ov RoyiGopwat Kat Tors aOéous év- TpéTeo0al. 3. ayaTav vuds oUTws peldopat, cUVTOVOTEpoY / / ¢ \ / b] 3 ’ e NX id \ Suvapevos ypadew virép Tovtouv: [adr ovy ikavoyv éavrov] 3 lal LY! iv A / e > ‘ € A els TOUTO @nOny, iva OY KATAaKpPLTOS WS aTTOTTONOS Viv SLa- TATTWLAL. \ a? A > 29 \ a 7 \ IV. Ilovdra dpove ev Oew adr Ewavtov petpa, iva py év KavxynoEel GTON@paL VdV yap pe Set TAEOV hoPeticPat Kal A a N pn Tpocéyxew Tois pucwodoly pe ot yap AéyovTés por pacTi- yeh ’ a \ \ \ ta b) > ’ 5 bd yovoiv pe. 2. ayaTo@ pev yap TO Tale, adr ovK oida Ek ” / > \ \ lal a \ ’ / ’ N \ a&vos ely: TO yap EHros ToAXols pev ov daivetat, Ewe Seé / lal / > / 3 «@ / ¢€ [wAéov] mronenet. ypntw ovv mpaoTytos, év 7) KaTadveTaL O apY@v TOU aidvos ToUToU. V. My ov Svvapar byiv ta érrovpavia ypawyar; adra goBovwat pn vyiois ovow vpuiv BrAABnv Twapado. Kat Tuyyv@pmovelTé jor, note ov SuvnbévTEes Ywpnoa, oTparyya- Aw@OATe. 2. Kal yap éye, ov KaOore Séewat cal Svvapat voeiv Ta éToupavia Kal Tas TomoVETias Tas ayyEedtKds Kal TaS GvoTaTELS TAS apYoVTLKAS, OpaTad Te Kal adpata, Tapa rn v7 s\ Ud ’ \ AY c lal / vA TOUTO 7)0n Kal maOnTns Elutt TOAAAa yap nuiy ReElTrEL, Wa cod pr) NevTT@peda. A 5 A ’ A VI. Iapaxanrd otv vuds, ovK éyd adnX 7 ayarn ‘Incod rn A an A a / Xpictov, wovn TH Xpiotiavyn tpopH xphabe, adrotpias Sé Botavns améxecbe, nris éotly aipeciss 2. of Kal i@ Tapep- / n mréxovew “Inoody Xpiotov, KxataksoTicTevdpevot, WoTrEp 6 / / Py 8 / \ ] / ¢ e 3 avacimov dapuakov SidovTEes peTA OLVOMEALTOS, OTTEP O ay- vody adeds AapBaves év HOovH KaKH TO aTroVaveiv ld 00V7) 7 ° VII. @Pvratrecbe otv Tovs TotovTovs. TovTO dé ErTaL lil. 3 dyardv buds ottws Peldouac] conj. Lightfoot [Ag]; dyaravras ws ov deldouae GL. adn’ ovx ikavdv éavror] insert Lightfoot [A]. vi. 2 of kal (@ mapewrdékovow] conj. Lightfoot; of karpol mapeumdéxovow G3; Kai Tov lov rpoomdéxovtes g; of Kal purap’ éumdéxovow L; of Kal mapeumde- kovow S,A. adeGis] conj. Lightfoot [g]; 7déws GLS|A. Is. lid. 5. 118 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS (vir Poe ayn] \ J \ SF. > / fal >’ lol vpiv pn puolovpévols Kal ova. aywpiatots [Oeod] “Inaod Xpicrod nai Tod émicKorov Kal Tév Siataypatwv TAY atro- i Cian a / a , > € OA oTO\wy. 2. 0 évTos Ovotactnpiov av Kafapds eat, 0 bé / éxt0s OvctactTnpiov oy ov Kabapos ert: TovTécTLV, 6 yopls émicKoTrou Kal mpecBuTepiov Kal diaxovwv Tpacawy TL, oUTOS / ov Kabapos éotw TH TUVELONTEL. a ? a VIII. Ov érel éyver Tovodrov Tt év bpuiv, aAXa Tpodu- a / “ ra) Ndoow Vas OvTAS pov ayaTrnTOUS, Tpoopav Tas évédpas Tod f ¢€ a L \ / . / >’ / dvaBorov. vpets ovv THY TpavTraeray avadaBovTes avaKTN- € \ ’ / ids > ‘ fal / \ > cacQe éavtovs ev Tictel, 6 éotw capE Tov Kupiov, Kai év ’ U we 3 ,’ an nan \ ¢ lal ayatn, 0 éotw aiwa Inood Xpictov. 2. pnoels vuav Kata a , > / a ’ \ / lal ” Vf \ Tov TAnclov éxéTw: on apopyas didote Tois EOverw, va wn 82 dAXiyous adpovas TO EvOcov TAHOos PracdnpHntravr Oyai yap Al oY ml MATAIOTHT! TO ONOMA MOY ETT! TIN@N BAACHH- MEITAI. a \ , lal r IX. Kade@nte otv, drav viv ywpis “Inood Xpictod n 6 / \ . AarH Tis, TOD ex yévous Aaveld, Tod é« Mapias, ds adnOads éyevynOn, ebayév TE Kat Emer, GAXNOas ediwWyOn eri LlovTiou Tlivdrov, adnOas éotavpedn cal améBavev, BreTrovTwv [Tov] i) / \ > t \ € fal / = e\ \ > fal érroupavioy Kal émuyel@y Kal UToxyOoviwy' 2. ds Kal adnOds a ’ la) n HyépOn aro vEexpar, éyelpavTos avTOV TO TaTpOS aUTOU, KATA TO Omolwma OS Kal NMas TOs TLaTEVOVTAS AUTO OUTwS éyEpEt 6 TaTp avTod év Xpict@ ‘Incod, ob} ywpis TO adnOwov Sv ovK Exoper. X. Ed &€, domep tivés dUeot ovtes, TovTésTLV AmLaTOL, J \ rn / ’ / ’ Y \ al Néyouow TO Soxeiy tretovOévat avTov, avTol dvTes TO SoKely, >] \ iy / / \ \ v Ls) A. eyo Ti dédeuar; ti dé Kal evyowat Onprowaynoat; Swpeav 5 3 t y 5 f a / odv atoOvncKw. apa oty Katarrevdopat ToD Kupiov. XI. Wevyere odv Tas Kaxds Tapadvabas Tas yevvdcas kaptrov Oavatnpopov, ov éav yevontal Tis, TapavTa atroOyn- oKeL. ovTOL yap oUK elow uTEela TaTpos 2. Et Yap Hoar, ? I x U na n Wes) xX ¢ \ b) fal éhaivovto av KNabot TOU oTAUpOD, Kai HY av O KapTrOS aUTOY viii. I dvaxtynoacbe] conj. Cotelier; dvaxricacde G; dub. LS,A. 2 &v@eov] Dam-Vat.; ¢v Oca GL; dub. Ag. xu] TO THE TRALLIANS. 119 ” - See 3 fal , ’ fal co ¢ A v apOaptos’ dv’ 0b ev TO Taber aVTOD TpOcKaneiTaL Vas, dvTAs i > an > , ke \ \ A wv HéAN avTov. ov dSvvatat ovy Kepady yopis yevynOnvat avev A a n ef > VA v4 > Pens PEX@Y, TOD Ocovd Evwow ETTayYENOp[EVOV, OS ETTLY AUTOS. ¢ a) bl] \ i“ n XII. ’Acralowat tds amd Xppvys, dua tais cvpta- povoais por éxxdAnolats Tod @eod, of Kata TavTa pe avé- , a Tavoav capki Te Kal TvevpaTl. 2. TapaKanel vuds Ta € ’ a la) Seopa pov, & évexev “Inood Xpiotov mepidépw, aitovpevos n a , A ¢ , ¢e A an Qcod éerutvyeiv' Svapévete ev TH Opmovota vuadv Kal TH peT b] / tal , \ Coun a Ser, b) , adnov Tpocevy}. TpeTrer yap viv Tots Kal’ eva, éEaspé- A s > / \ Tws Kal Tols TpecBuTEépols, avarrvyely Tov émicKoTroY éis \ >? an n a Tyunv tatpos [Kal eis tiunv] Incod Xpiotov Kal tov atoc- ¢ n / la) TON@Y. 3. EVYoMaL Vas ev ayaTn aKkodcal pov, Wa pwn bs / > > c A / \ NS a \ els poapTuplov @ [év] vuly ypayas. Kal repli ewod dé mpoc- , a nn ie ¢ A > / U > A b) / a evyerOe, THS ap vuav ayamns xpnfovTos év TO édéee TOD n a lA A ®ecod, eis TO kata~iwOjvai pe TOD KANpOU ovTrEep eyKELpat > tal vA Ni ’ / ¢ A emiTuyelV, twa pr) addKimos evpEOd. a ¢ > XU. “Aowaferas vuds n ayarn Spvpvaiwv cal ’Ede- / a al A a ciwov. punuovevete ev Tais mpocevyais vuav THs ev Yupia ’ / mk \ bd) » / > / a ” éxxrnotas 60ev [kai] ove d&ds elms éyerOat, ay ExyaTos > rn a A éxeivav. 2. éppwabe ev “Inood Xpiote, vrotaccépevor TO > a ee As x c / \ a B Hanne \ e ETLTKOT@ WS TH EVTONT, Ofmoiws Kal TO TpecBuTepio Kal of > oS % f ’ a ’ ’ / / ¢ kat avopa addndous ayamate év auepiotw Kapdia. 3. ay- / ¢ a \ SPN a b) / la) 2 A Nines. vigeTal VULOY TO E“ov TVEDMA, OV moVvoY VOY AANA Kal OTaY foe ae / BY \ id \ 4 / > BI \ \ Qcod emitvyw. Tt yap vid Kivdvvov eiutr AANA TLOTOS e \ > alt a Xi tal Xr a / \ 7 »\ o matnp ev ‘Inood Xpict@ mANP@cal pov THY aitnow Kal e A @ ¢€ b} UpaV: év @ evpEeOeinwey Auwpot. TPOZ POQMAIOYS. ‘IPNATIOS, 6 Kal Ocodopos, 7H nrenuevy ev weyarevornTe matpos viictou Kal Incov Xpictov, Tod povou viod avTod, EKKANTLA HyaTnEry Kal TepwTicpevyn ev OeAnpaTe TOD Oeds- \ \ / / \ fal cavToS Ta TavTa & éoTLV, KaTa TioTW Kal ayarnv “Incod 120 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [1 a lal ¢ Lal U Xpuctod Tod Oeod nuar, nts Kat mpoxaOnra: ev TOT@ Ywpiov c / 5 / , la -) / Popaiwr, a&00c0s, a€vorperns, aEvopaxapiotos, aEvérrawos, > / n aévoetritevKtos, aElayvos, Kat mpoxaOnuevn THs ayaTns, Xpl- / Paan 3 , rn oTOVOMOS, TAaTPeOVULOS HY Kal aoTralopa év dvopwate “Inood r a rn / a Xpictod viod matpos’ Kata capka Kal Tredua nyMpéevols lol fa) / U r Tacn evTOAn avTov, TeTANPwWpLEVOLS YapiTos Beod dovaKpl- \ “J / > \ NX > if ld Tws Kal aTodLUMapMEVOLS ATO TraVvTOS GdoTPloVv ypwpaToS, rn lal ’ | lal x4 nr lal e nr € lal -) f / Tretota ev Inood Xpictd TH Oe@ Huov apopws yalpew. ao \ ’ / lel > / ’ rn id lel I. Enel evEapevos Oecd érrétvyor ideiv tudv Ta aévobea / c \ / x ,’ / ral / 4 , mpocwTa, OS Kal TAéoY 7) HTOVpHV AaBeEtv: Sedep~évos yap ev lal lal id lal , / Xpictd “Inood érrifw vas acnacacba, éavTep Oédnpa > rn , a / > UA 9 ¢ \ \ , 9 TOV akiwOnvai pe eis TédoS elvale 2. MEV yap apy , ] ' “ EVOLKOVOUNTOS ETTLY, EaV TépaTOS ETLTUYw Els TO TOV KAHpOV ’ lal a x € pov aveuTrodictws atrodaBelv. poBodpar yap THY vay , / € a \ b) Ne > ¢ ayarny, mn avdTn pe adixnon vuiv yap evxepés eat, 6 / a e] \ \ , / > lal an 3 a Gérere Trovpoar, éwot dé SVaKOAdY EoTLV TOD Deod EmriTvyxeir, any c lal \ / / éavirep vuels ur) petonaGe pov. 3 \ / id lal 3 lal > \ Lal Il. Ov yap Oé\o vuds avOpwrapeckncat adda Oc@ , \ dpéom, @oTrep Kal apécKeTe. ovTE yap éy@ ToTE Ew Kalpov lal la) a. Yj c a 3 Towvtov Ocod éeruitvyetiv' ovTE Upels, Edy CLWTNTNTE, KPELTTOVE an > a épyo éyete éerruypadivat. €dv yap olwmnonte am epmod, SEN l raat MY we A a l 0 éy® oyos Oeod' éav Sé éEpacOjtTe THS capKos pov, aru J f \ fal écouat dovn. 2. mréov [S€é] por wn Tapacynabe Tod o7rov- S ae @cd cy Q l ¢ , 2 at 3 waOnvat Qed, ws Ett OvotactHpioy Etoipwov éeoti wa év , / \ / ” A \ 2) ») r fal ayatrn xopos yevouevot dante TG Tatpi év “Incod Xpictd, vA \ es, SS / ) ¢€ e \ id a > OTL TOV éericKoTroy Yupias KaTnEiwoev 0 Oeds evpeOHvar eis , ’ \ b) a Ul ay sf an b] \ dvoL, ATO avaToANS peTaTreurrapmevos. KaXdOV TO ODVaL aro / \ / vA ’ ] \ > /- Kocpmov Tpos Deor, iva eis avTOV avaTEiho. III. Ovdérote éBackavate ovdevi: adddovs ed1daEaTe. I tal / e éyo S€ Odo iva Kaxeiva BéBaa 7 a pabntedvovtes évTéd- id lal AecOe. 2. povov por Svvaptv aiteicbe Ecwbév Te Kal &EwOev, \ A iva pun povov Aéyw AANA Kal Gédrw" iva py povoy Aéywuat > e re 2\ \ e A Xpictiavos, GANa Kal evpeOG. éav yap evpeOa, Kai Néyec Oat i. « #] insert Lightfoot [Am]; om. GLAgSp; def. 2M. v] TO THE ROMANS. 125 ’ \ f ‘ ‘ Svvayat, Kal TOoTe TuaTOS Eival, bTav Koco pn PaivepaL. ¢ \ ¢ an 3. ovdey haivopwevoy Kadov. 6 yap eds Hnuadv “Incods na / ? a Xpictos, év matpt av, waddrov faivetat. ov Tetopovns Td + ? \ / b] Ni c E t/ A Epyov adda peyéous eotiv 6 yplioTiavicpes, bTaV puLonTaL UT0 KOopOov. IV. “Eye ypadw macais tais éxxrnoiats, Kai évtédXo- lal / > \ e \ ¢ \ e lal 3 / bat pat Taow ote [eyo] Exav vrép Ocod arobvnckw, éavtrep lal a ¢ rf vuels fn K@UTNTE. TapakKAaNO vpas, fn eVvola aKaLpos > ’ a fa yevnoGé por. adeté pe Onpiwy eivas, dv dv [év-lectiv Ocod nr a A ’ emituyel. oiTds eit Oeod, Kai ds ddovtwy Onpiwy adnOo- / c fal fal Qn A pat, wa Kalapos aptos evpeOa [Tod Xpictod]. 2. wadrXov t \ / ivf f / \ \ KodkaKkevoate Ta Onpia, iva por Tados yévwvTat, Kai pnOev KaTaritwow Tov TOD GepaTos jou, iva pn KomwnOels Bapds / f 4 \ > a > an r lal Tivs yéev@pat. TOTE Ecopwat pabnTs adnOds Inacod Xpicrod, cd OA A lel / e I, ” , \ OTE OVE TO THud pou 6 KOopos OeTat. RLTave’caTE TOV Ud ¢ \ ? i (yA \ a > , , a I Kupiov virép éuod, iva bia Tév dpyavev TovTav Ocod Ouvaia ¢ an la) lal evpe00. 3. ovy ws Ilétpos cal Iladdos Statadocoopar bpiv- b) lal > / > \ / >? A >] , b] \ ‘ EKELVOL ATTOTTOAOL, eyo KATAaKpLTOS’ ExElvoL EeVOeEpor, eyo SE / nr nr 3 > n féxypt vov dovrAos. arr éav tTadw, amedevOepos “Incod Xpiotod, Kal avactncopat év avt@ édevbepos. viv pavOavw / \ 3 a dedemévos pndev émrOupeiv. \ ¢ A A V. °Aso Zuplas péyps “Pons Onpropaya, Sia ys Kai / \ \ e / ’ / / / Oaracons, vuKTos Kal nuépas, evdedepévos déxa eoTrapdocs, 0 EOTW OTPATLWTLKOY Taypwa, ol Kal EVEpryeTOUpeEVoL YeElpouS Le > \ a ? / > fal na ylwovtar. év 6€ Tols adiKnuacw avToVY paddrov pwabn- / > > > 4 n t > f Lal Tevoualt* AAA OY TIAPA TOYTO AEAIKAIWMAI. 2. OVaLLNY TwV A / Onpiov Tav Emol nToacpevov, A Kal e’Yomat oVVTOMA pot ¢ nr e fal ) evpeOjvar & Kal KoXaKe’ow cuVTOMas pe KaTapayely, ov t/ an , ,’ (dA 4 XN , \ Oe e / @oTTEp TLWOY SEetdaLvopeva ovy HYravTO’ Kav avTa dé ExovTa \ / > \ / 4 a 4 hy Gdn, Ey mpocBiacopar. 3. cuyyvepunyv pou ExeTE TI a a A , Mot cuphéper eyo ywvadoKw’ viv dpyowat waOnTns eivar’ nev t A e a \ A > t 7. b a al Me CnXwoas TOY 6paTav Kat TAY adopatar, iva Inood Xpiotov > / an / 3 ETLTUX®. Tp Kal oTaupds Onpiwy Te cvaTdcels, [avaTomal, 8 / \ 3 J \ A % \ Latpecets|, oKopTicuol doTéwy, cUYyKOTTAal peNOV, adecpol 1 Cor. iv. 4. E22 THE EPISTLE OF 8S. IGNATIUS [v n t \ U la , \ dAXov TOU GwpmaTos, KaKal KoAaTELS TOD OtaBdodou err Epme > J s r ” > A a 9 / épxécOwaoav' povov iva “Inoob Xpiorov eritiyo. VI. Ovdév pe ddherjces Ta tépata tod Koopou, ovdE ¢ a lal 7A / a / , a A ai Baowrelat TOD aidvos Tov’Tov' Kaddv pou arro0aveiy dia > nr / x / ta) / a a 7 a Incobv Xpiorov, ) Bacihevew TOV TEpaTwY THS ys. Exelvov a ¢€ a Mf A ad > fnta, Tov Uirép nuov arroOavovta’ éxeivov Oédw, Tov [bu fal ¢ npas| avactayTa. 0 TOKETOS mol ETrikelTaL. 2. cUYyyVwTE [oOL, \ Ie th A \ / / nr aderot’ py eutrodianté wot Cjoat, wn Oedjnonté pe arrodaveiv. nr la) / be \ Tov ToD Oeovd Oédovta civas Kocpm pH yapionaOe, pnde UAH / ‘ \ lel n n KoraKevonte. adhere pe Kabapov pas raPeiv' exe? Trapayevo- / lal wevos avOpwrros Ecomat. 3. erriTpéraTé poe pmipnTny eivar TOD an an a / maQovs Tov Ocod pov. el Tis avTOY év EavT@ EXEL, VONTATW a I \ / > \ \ / / 0 Oétw Kal cupTrabeitw pot Eidos Ta TUVEXOVTA [E. ¢ an ,n VII. ‘O dpywv tod aidvos tovTov dvapracat pe Bov- \ nr AeTat Kal THY els Oeov pov yvopunv SiadpOeipar. pndels ovv Tov Tapovtwv vueav Bonbel: IT@’ padrrov éuot yivecO vy Tapovtov vuav Bonbeitw avT@e paddov éuot yivecGe, rn lal ral rn r Ne TouTég Tw TOV Ocod. pu NarelTte Inooby Xpiotov Kocpov SE bd 0 al / > ( ed a \ / * > * emuOupeite. 2. Backavia év vuly pn KaToiKeiTo’ fund ay > \ \ a ¢€ lal / a) lA , be n eEYO TAPWV TAPAKAAW VEGAS, TELDONTE LOL, TOUTOLS OE ~addOV / / LPNs. an \ / Canary: b) a na TioTevoate, ols ypapw vuiv. Cov [yap] ypade viv, épov Tod a \ amroOaveiy’ 6 éwos Epws éeotavpwtat, Kal ovK Eat ev Emor A - f “A nr Tip dirovAov, Vowp Oe Cav +Kal Nadodvt év enol, EcwOEv / - A a \ \ f by AS a pot reyou’ Aedpo mpos Tov Twatépa. 3. ovx Hdouar TpopA a IQ\ ¢ a fo) 7 fo) POopas ovdé Hdovais Tod Biov TovTov' dptov Ocod Béro, 6 > \ an xX a ay 2) / A ") \ / eat cap& Tov Xpictov tod éx omréppatos Aaveid, cal tropa / \ e ’ int ty fs) 3 / v GéXw TO aia avtod, 6 éotw ayarn adpOapTos. ’ / UA ’ n a VIII. Ovxére PéX@ Kata avOperous Shy todto é éoran, 2N ¢ Lal / ! An lal é€av vets Oedynonte. Oednoate, iva Kal vets OernOFrTe. he ~ A 2. Oe OAly@Y ypappatwv aiToduat Uuds’ TicTevcaTe pot. a \ NES: A tal *Inaods 5€ Xpictos viv tabra havepwcer, Tt adnOas éyo" A¢ ©: \ Ld b Ve. \ ul na TO arpevdes TTOMA, EV © O TaTHp eXadnoev [adrANOas]. 3. ai- / @ \ b] lal ivf b] ’ b] / ¢ / ] tThoacGe tept euod, va éritdyw [év mvevpate ayiw|. ov \ , tla 4 3 \ \ / a 24 Kata capka vuly éypawa, adda Kata yvodunv Oecovd. édv ! 2 , oh POIANA na 2 ' mado, nOeXncaTe éay aTrodoKimacbG, éuionaate. | TO THE ROMANS. 123 iz, =f A ° ¢ a A > Tv Ve IX. Mvnpovevete ev TH mpocevyh ved THs ev Lupia 3 aN , vA 3 \ > a / a e a a a / éxkrAnolas, ATs avTl éwod Troméve TO Oe@ ypHnrar pdvos nr ¢ (2 lal ~ avtny “Inoots Xpiotos émicKoTnces Kal n vay ayarn. 2. eyo Oé aicytvopuar €& avtav NéyecOau' ovdE yap AELos ete, * yy WE wt} Np ot A > Sef “4 3 2\ @V ETYATOS AUT@OV Kal EKTPHMA AN NAENMAL TIS Eival, EaV rn \ \ a cod emitdyo. 3. doraferar vuds TO emov Tredpa Kai 7 > / al b] lal a / > 4 3 fol adyarn TeV éxxrnolav Tov SeEapevwyv pe ets Ovona ‘Incod \ e Xpictov, ovy ws mapodevovta’ Kal yap at pa) TpoaHKovaat MOL TH 0O@ TH KATA TapKa KATA TOW pe TPOHyov. fal fal 7 ~ heb) X. Tpado &€ tiv tadta ard Zpyvpvns 80 “Edeciov fa b) / 7 \ \ e/ ) \ \ / Tov akiopakaplotov. éotw Sé Kal dua éwot adv arrows modXois Kal Kpoxos, TO moOntov [wor] dvowa. 2. Tepl ToOY o) a A mpoerOovrav pe aro Lupias eis “Popny eis dd£av [Tod] Ocod A / TieTEVo Upas eTeyvaxévat. ols Kal SndwaaTe eyyuUS me OVTA’ / / > ” A a UG (a \ / Cla mTavres yap eiow a&tot [Tov] Ocod Kal vu@v" ovs TpéTrov viv a Cae fal €oTlY KATA TravTa avaTravoal. 3. éypawpa O€ viv TavTa TH mTpo évvéa Karavddyv YewrewSpiov. eEppwaGe els Tédos ev ¢€ Ce a rn utrouovn Incov Xpicrod. WeROz DIAAAEADE!S, ITNATIO“’, 6 cal Ocodpdpos, éxxrAnoia Oeod mazpods Kai ‘Inood Xpicrov 7H ovcn év Piraderdia ths ’Acias, nenwévy kai nopacpévy év duovoia Ocod Kal dyadMapevyn ev TO TAOet Tov Kupiov nuav advaxpitas Kal év TH avactacer avrod, meTANPopopnuevyn év TravTl édéeu’ nv aomalouar év atwate "Incod Xpictod, nris eotly yapa aidvios Kat Tapdpovos’ padwora éay év évi Bow odv TO éemicKoT@ Kal Tois cUY atTe mpeaButépors Kal Svaxovors atrodedevypéevors ev yvaun Inood Xpiatod, ods kata To idvov OéAnuwa éornpréev ev BeBarwotvy T® aylm avtov rvevpare. 1Cor. vi. 9. 124 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [1 U lal 4 I. “Ov é€rrickotrov éyvwv ovK ad’ éavtod ovdé 60’ avOpa- rn iy mov KexTHoOar THY StaKxoviay THY Eis TO KOLWOY avnKoUVaa)Y, ,’ / a ovoé KaTa Kevocokiay, AAN ev ayatrn Oeod watpos Kal Kupiov n la) \ € lal "Inood Xpictod' ob KatatrémAnypat THY emrLEiKELaV, 05 TLYOV TrElova SVvaTat TOY AadovYTwV’ 2. cUVEVpYOWLCTAL Yap a al a \ tals évToNais, ws yopdais KiOapa. 610 pwakapifer wou 7 Wuy7 THv eis Oedv avtovd yvopuny, éervyvods évapeToy Kal TédELoV \ rn ovaav, TO aKivntov avTod Kal TO aopyntov [avTod| év macn évrveixela Oeov Favros. II. Téxva ovv [pwros|] adrnOeias, pevyere Tov pepiopov \ \ i Ke A ve ! > few Kal Tas KakodloacKadlas’ OTrov S€ Oo ToLuny eat, Exel ws mpoBata dKxodovbeire 2. ToAdol yap dAvKOL aksoTrLTTOL lol / > > nr nOOVvR Kak alyparwtifoval tovs Oeodpomovs’ adr ev TH évoTnte Vuov ovy eEovow ToToP. III. “AméyeoOe tov xaxav Botavar, iotwas ov yewpryet > fo) es / LS \ \ 3 ’ \ g / > Inoovs Xpiotos, d1a TO pu) etvar avTovs duTelay TaTpos. ovx wv Cyn verte \ ® > S23) ' oe ; OTL Tap vpiv mepiopov eUpov, AAN aTrodiwALopoV. 2. CoOL \ a > AS a 7 a a \ a 3 ft yap cod eiow Kat ’Inood Xpic rod, ovtor peta Tov eTLcKOTTOU > Lea ely x / >} 3 \ \ id / eloiv’ Kal boot av petavoncavtes EMOwow én THY EvoTnTA n b) / \ e a / C2 XS: fal THS exKANGLas, Kal oUTOL Oeod EcovTat, iva Gow Kata Inoovy fal \ lal Xpiotov Eavtes. 3. pn tAavacbe, adeAdoi pov' el Tis oxifovTte axodovbe?, Bacikelan OeoY oY KAHPONOME! ef Tes év > / 4 lal J adXoTplia yvouN TepiTratel, ovTOs TO Taler ov cUYyKaTATI- Oerat. / Ss a s / a ~ / \ IV. Xtrovdacate oby mid evyapiotia ypnabar pia yap \ lal / ¢ n ? lol aA rst ie > capE Tov Kupiov nyadv “Inood Xpictod, kal év motnpiov eis A / > lel Evoow TOV aiwatos avTov' ev OvctacTHpLoy, ws els eTWlaKOTOS, ul tal a apa TO TpecButepio Kati Svaxovois Tots cvvdovAoLs pov’ iva, a t 0 €av Tpaconte, KaTa Ocov Tpacanrte. ’ al a V. “Aderdoi pov, Aiav éexkéyupat ayaTaév vpdas, Kab ¢ lal , UTEepayardopevos acdharifoua vuds ove ey 5é, GAN "In- a ’ a A ¢ * covs Xpiortos, ev & dedeuévos PoBodpar pwaddov, ws ETL wv 2) / 3 CF te \ € A 3 f Ed) avaTrapTLcTos. GadA’ 7 Tpocevyn vuwv [els Oeov] pe atrap- / Cy ’ & 4 > Ln ? / a a Tioe, va ev © KANPw HArENOnY ETLTVYw, TpocduyoV TO vu] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 125 > / ¢ Noo A \ a a / ¢ evayyehio ws capkt Inood Kat tots atroatonols &s pec Bu- / > ON / 2 \ \ / e ? A Py X Teplm exKAnolas. 2. Kal Tos mpodytas 5é ayarauer, did \ \ b) \ > N ’ / 4 \ > aK TO KAl AUTOUS Els TO evayyéNLov KaTnyyEAKEéVal Kal eis avTOV / si ) \ e} / ? ne! \ UA ’ , ermrifew Kal avtov avapévew ev @ Kal TicTevoayTeEs éoo- >? Ch > a A bd > iy \ Oncav év evotnte “Incod Xpictod, dvtes adEvaydrnto. Kat bd , er c Nine ~ a , akvobavpactot ayiot, v0 “Incoot Xpictod pewaptupnuévoe \ / b A ’ / A a ’ / kal cvvnptOunuévor ev TO Evayyeri@ THs Kownhs err ios. \ , > ” \ e f Cle ,’ VI. ’Eay 6é tis tovdaiopov Epunve’yn byt, ur) axovere n » b \ avTod. dpewov yap éoti.v Tapa avdpos Trepttopny eyovTos D > Ul ” XploTiavic Lov akoveww 1) Tapa akpoBvaTou lovdaicpmov. éav 5é dudotepor rept “Inood Xpioctod pur) NadGow, obTot ewol a / > \ / A > > e / / oTnAal elow Kal Tao. vexpav, ép’ ols yéypaTtar pdvoy - ovopata avOporav. 2. hevyete ody Tas KaKoTeyvias Kar Shah, an Vv la) > a) / t J evédpas TOD apYovTos TOD al@vos TovTOV, uNTroTEe OdiBévTES aA , ’ nr 2 / > An > U b] \ / TH yvopwn avtod eEacOevnonte év TH dyatn: adda TravTes et\ \ Seat N / a} | ’ / T OL ] n be €ml TO avTo yiveoOe ev apepioT@ Kapdia. 3. EvyapioTa fal e al ¢/ Wer iS / > b] ¢ an ‘ ’ yy T® Oe@ pov, bTe evovveiOntos eips év viv, Kal ovK eyes Ts 4 ” / BA al v4 > / f > Kavynoacbat ovTe AaOpa ov'Te havepas, bTt EBapnoa Tiva év AK 39 u \ A LP) Ly > U v biKp@ 7) év pmeyado. Kal mao 6é, év ols éXaAnoA, Vyopat / iva pn els paptipioy avTo KTHTwVTAL. VII. Ei yap nal cata odpka pé ties 70éX\noav Tra- lal la) a A 3 VRTAL, AANA TO TvEdLA OU TAAVATAL, ard Meod dy OIAEN yap S. John iii. a \ \ \ / . TIGDEN EpYETAl KAI TOY YTIArEl, Kal Ta KpUTTTA Ehéyyet. expa- / a lel fal Aa A yaoa weTa&d av, éXadouv peyaryn povn, Oeod dorvy: TS é- / KOT TpocéyeTE Kal TH TpecBvTepiw Kal Siaxovows. 2. ob (3 la \ 6 vromtevcavtés pe, WS TpoeldoTa TOY mepicuoy TwWw)D, re na U 66 b>] a 660 e/ ’ A \ éyew TavTa. apts oé€ pot év @ Sédemwat, OTL ard TapKos b} / > »” \ \ fa! 3 , / y avOpwtrivns ovK éyvav: TO 5é Tvetpa exnpvocer, Néyov Tade a a \ ¢ (a) Xopls Tod émucKxorrou pndev tToveires THY capKa vuov ws vaov @eod typeite: tiv Evwow ayarate: Tovs pepicpovs a A ¢ lo) gpevyete? pipntal yiverbe "Inood Xpiotod, ws Kai av’tos Tod TATPOS avTov. iA VIII. “Eyo peév obv 16 idtov éroiovy, bs avOpwros eis ig , e \ f 5] 5) ’ ld ‘ EVWOLW KATNPTLCMEVOS. ov Sé pwEeplapos EoTLY Kal opyn, Oeds cf. S. John X. 7. 126 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [ viny r) n a ‘a lal , / € / aA OU KaTOLKel. TacW ovy peTavoodaw adiet 0 Kupsos, éav ‘ / nr an 9 / petavonowow eis éEvoTnta Peod Kal cvvédptov Tov éeTicKoTrov. / lel f. > a a / ahig 2 et tal / miactevo TH xapite Inood Xpiorod, 0s Veet ad’ Vuov TavTa S a \ € nr \ , ’ / f Secpov' 2. Tapakade dé vuds, pndev Kat eépiOevay tpac- ’ \ \ / > » aie U U oeTE GANA KATA ypLoTOMaDiav. Eemrel NKOVTd TeV hEyoVT@V ae ay 4 ‘ 5) val ,’ , ‘/ ? an >. ri , ore “Kav pn év tols apyetous ebpw, ev THO evayyedip ov ' ’ al td / TicTEVM’ Kal NEéyoyTOS pou avTots OTe TéyparTat, atrexpl- t ov 4 ? \ Oe > al b bd la) Onoav por OTe IIpoxectar. epoi de apyeia éeotw ‘Inaods ' Naa ) a c \ > a Vat y Xpictos, Ta AOiKTa apxeia 6 TTavpos avTOU Kal 0 GavaTos \ ¢ ’ / > lal \ e / ¢€ Py , b] oe Bu 7 bé Kal 7 dvactaots avTov Kal 7 TricTis » dv avTov: év ois Oédo n At. n lal év Th mpocevyy vuav SixarwOjvar. lal Cal c , \ c IX. Karol kat of iepets: Kxpetooov S€ 0 apytepeds oO tal a , / \ MeTLOTEVLEVOS TA Lyla TOV AyiwV, Os oVvos TETICTEUVTAL TA \ lol e lal + tay a Ou lal / be e > / kpuTTa Tov Qecov: avtos wv Ovpa Tov TaTpos, du Hs ELaép- >’ e lal yxovtar ABpaap nat loadk« Kat ‘laxoB Kat ot rpopqtas Kab Ol aimrocTOXOL Kal 7 exKAnoia. TavTa TavTa eis EvoTnTa a > / , ” \ > , \ / Ocod. 2. éEaiperov 8 Ti Exes TO EVaryyéMov, THY Tapovatay a a / i a ’ nr fal \ / e] le] Tod cwthpos, Kupiov nuav Inood Xpictod, to maGos avTov, THY avacTagW. ot yap ayarntol TpopnTar KaTHYyyElNaV Ets ’ \ >» , / > Ud Lao BJ / / auTov: TO Oe evayyéNLoy aTrapTicua ect aplapcias. TavTa a > Ou00 KANGA EoTLV, Edy eV AyaTTN TLOTEVTTE. \ \ an X. *Enecd) Kata thy Tpocevyny vudv, Kal KaTa Ta f a ” > nan? an od J . omhayyva & éyete Ev Xpiot@ ‘Inood, amnyyédn pot eipy- f \ > / \ bd ’ / lal / J vevey THY éxkArAnolav THY Ev AvTLoxeia THS Lupias: Tpétrov 3 \ Ces ¢ > / (a) fa) a p>) / > \ éoTly vu, ws ExKANTIGa Ocod, yeipoTovncat SuaKovoy Eis TO la) ’ lal la) lal lal mpecBevaar exe Qeod mpecBeiav, els TO cuyyaphvat avTots \ \ a) ZEN i AY / v éml TO avTo yevopévots Kal Sofacat TO ovopwas 2. baKkapLos b] a? a ow / fal / / év Xpict@ ‘Inood, os KataEwwOnceras THs TovavTns SvaKxovias" \ ¢ tal / a , Kat vyets So€acOncecbe. OédXovow bé Upuiv ovK éoTW advva- ¢ \ a) v A (s A deere , / BA Tov UTrép ovopmaTtos Meod: ws Kal al éyytoTta ExKAnolar ETreu- b] / e \ v4 Wav émuaKorrous, ai 6é mperBuTépous Kal Svaxovous. I. fa) i XI. Ilepi d¢ Birwvos rob Siaxovov aio Kidtxias, avdpos / \ \ an ] t rn \s lal ewapTupnevon, 05 Kat viv ev Noyw Ocod vanpete? pot, Awa ¢ , > ’ b) A ¢ Pai ’Aya@orrods, avdpt éxdexT@, Os amo Yuplas pou axo- i] TO THE SMYRNAANS. 127 AovOet atrotaEdpevo 5 Blo of kal 0 jee over fevos TH Biw> o L paptupovow viv. , s! a a ’ Ae \ ¢€ a iJ 2Q/ > , € Kayo TO Oe@ evyapioT@ vrép var, OTe ed€Eace avTovs, ws Nem é , e ee) , ’ \ , Kal vas 0 Kupsos. ot d€ atysacaytes avtovs NuTpwOEinoav ©) a / b ] tal ral > / € rf e 3 / év T) yapttt Incod Xpiotod. 2. aomaferat buds n ayarn ToV adeApav TaV ev Tpwads BHev Kal ypadw vyiv Sia Bovp- \ >? pou weupOévtos dua éuol amd “Edeciov Kal Xpupvaiwv eis Ni / A / ] \ ¢ K / aT a B.S / Oyov TYyLHs. Tlunoer avTovs 0 Kupsos “Incods Xpuictos, >] a > / / a / / b) / eis Ov édrrifovow capki, uy}, Tveipatt, TioTeE, ayamn, ¢ Vs ” >? a? an lel (ne pt 7 e a omovoia. eéppwole ev Xpict@ Inood, TH Kownh edrridse nudv. nrO> H2AWYPNAIOY 2: ITNATIOS®‘, 6 nal Ocodopos, éxxrAncia Oeod watpos Kai A > , >) A r A 5 / 3 \ , Tov nyaTnpevov Incov Xpictod, nrenuévyn év TravtTl yapic- pat, TeTAnp@MEeVN ev TicTEL Kal ayaTn, avUTTEpHTH ovo mavTos yapiouatos, OcompeTectatyn Kal aytopope, TH ovan >] , a >) / ] , / / \: / fa) év Xpwpvyn ths “Acias, év dueuo Tvevpate Kal Moyo Oeod TAEioTA YalpeLy. I. Aogéafo “Incoty Xpiotov tov Oedv tov ovtTws vpmdas codicayta: évonoa yap vas KaTnpTicpévous ev aKWHT@ lA c / ,’ A a / mioTel, WoTep KAaOnAwpEévoUS EV TO TTavp@® Tov Kupiov 3 la) a / \ / \ iq / > Incod Xpictov, capKi Te Kal TvevpaTt, Kal nOpacpévovs év an Ja r fn ayarn ev T@ aiwate Xpictod, weTAnpopopnmévous els TOV ¢ a A Kvpiov nuadv adnOas ovra éx yévous Aaveld kata odpKa, vidv an \ } \ / fi , A , @cod Kata Oédnwa Kat Svvapw, yeyevynpévov adnOds éx mapUévov, BeBamticpévoy v0 “lwavvou tva mAHpwoH T1&ca 5: poe } lll. I5. AIKAIOCYNH U7 avTod, 2. dAnOas él Ilovtiov Ilikatouv Kai ¢ An 3 ’ Hpodov tetpapyou xaOndwpévov vrrép yuov év capKi: ap e A a A a Ed vA ov Kaptrov nets amo ToD Oeopaxapiotov avtov mafous: iva APH CYCCHMON els TOUS aiavas Sia THs avacTacEews Eis TOVS ue pe X11X. 22. LS 4 \ a aylouvs Kal mioTovs avTod, elte év lovdaiols elite év EOvecwr, 3 Criy , A €V EVL OMpaTL THS ExKANTIAS AUTO. ? ‘The Teaching of Peter.’ 128 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS [ur r ,’ a II. Tatra yap ravta érabev dv jyds [va cobdper): kal adds érabev, os Kal adynOas avéctnoev Eavtov: ovx @aomep amioctol tTwes NEyovsw TO Soxelv avTov TretrovOEevat, ,’ \ A PS) Lal v \ 0 \ a \ / avtol TO doxely OvTes: Kal Kabas hpovodtow, Kal cupBnoeTar cal > lal avTots, ovow dowpaTols Kal Satpovixots. III. “Eyo yap cal peta tiv avacracw év capKl adtov s \ U ” “ \ a \ \ \ , olda Kal TicTevw OVTa’ 2. Kal OTE Mpos Tovs Trepi Ilérpov mrAOev, En avTois: AdBeTe, YHAADHCATE ME, KAI TAETE OTI OYK 1) ' > , \ ’ 4 ’ re , , EIMI AAIMONION ACHMATON. Kal EvVOdS avTOD mYavTO, Kal é7ri- oTevoay Kpabévtes TH capKi avTov Kal TO aipati. Sia TOTO \ / / ¢ , \ id \ / kal Oavatov Katedpovncayv, nupéOncav é€ v7ep Oavarov. \ \ \ b] / \ / , rn \ , 3. meta S€ THY avactacw [Kai] ovvédhayev avTots Kal cvVvE- TLE WS TAPKLKOS, KALTEP TVEUPLATLKDS NVWLEVOS TO TraTpl. a a a / IV. Tadra dé rapaweé vuiv, ayarntol, eidas OTL Kal id r a »” / \ ¢ A , \ tal / Upeis ovTws eyete: TpopudAacaow Sé Uuas amo Tav Onpiwv A > / \ ’ / a ¢ A 4 s Tov avOpwrromoppuwr, ois ov povov bet VYuds wn Tapadéxeo Oat, 2) ’ >] / \ A , al u \ ‘ ann’, et Suvatov, wndé cuvavtady [avrois]: pwovoy b€ mpocev- fal ‘ il yeoOe Urép altar, éav Twas MEeTavonTwoL, OTEp SUTKONOV* , be M” > , > lal rT U \ > fal \ c lal Toutou oe éyer eEovolav ‘Incovds Xpiotos, TO adnOivov nav a > \ \ lal lal > U e A lal / fv. 2. ef yap TO doxeiy tTadra empaxOn vireo Tov Kupiou e a cd \ \ lal / / \ \ e \ a nav, Kayo TO Soxely Sédewar. Ti b€ Kal éavTov ExdoTOV lé “ , \ nw \ / \ ’ bY dédwxa TO Oavatw, Tpos Tip, Tpos pwaxatpay, pos Onpia; > 2, ¢ ’ » / > \ lal \ / \ GXN’ oO eyyds paxaipas, éyyds Ocod- pwerakd Onpiov, petakv Ocod: povoy év TO dvoyate Inood Xpictod eis TO cvprrabeiv aUT@. TavTa VTOMévM, AVTOD pe EvOUVAMLOUYTOS TOD TEEloU ’ / avOparov. ~ fr A , , V. "Ov tives ayvoodytes apvotyTat, wadrov Se npvnOn- lol lal cal * ~ cay UT avTod, dvTEs aUYHyopoL ToD BavaTov padXov 7) THS b « r 3 adnGeias os ovK ETEcay ai Tpodyteiat ovde 6 voywos Mo- / 3 , sA\ / Le) \ ’ I. sO\ \ ¢ / n oéws, GAN ovde Ex pL VOY TO EvayyeLov, oVdE TA NMETEPA TOV 3 4 FOS , \ \ \ ¢ a \ + oe kat avopa Tabjpata: 2. Kal yap Tepl nuwv TO avTO dpo- lal / / >’ lal 7 Pee J oe aed a \ \ / ‘ vovow. Ti yap [we] Wderel, et ewe Evrae Tis, Tov dé Kupiov al a / la) pov Bracdnpel, 47) Omoroyav avTov capKodopoy ; o dé TOUTO \ A / 3 \ > , a / \ be He) Néyor TeXelws aUTOV aTNpPVYNTAL, OY veKpopopos. 3. TA OE vii] TO THE SMYRNEANS. 129 ae: In v ’ Sia) 9? , ’ , 3 ‘ ovopaTa avT@Y, OvTa aTLoTa, oUK dokEV pot Eyyparral’ adra > kd , poe YyévolrTo por aAVT@V pynmovevewy, péypts 00 pEeTAVvonTwaL / UA e > eis TO TaOos, 0 éoTLY UaY avdacTacis. \ VI. Myéeis mravacOw. Kai Ta érovpama Kai n do€a Lal > lA ‘ cc c / \ Ie 3A \ TOV ayyéXwV Kal ol ApyovTEs OpaToL TE Kai AOpaToL, Eayv wn ‘ a fa a > A miatevowoly eis TO aiua Xpictov [Tod Oecod], Kaxeivois xpi- re ’ / t \ ois eoTiv. 6 YWPHN YwpPElTW. TOTos pndéva huciovTw TO ‘ vd > \ Ul \ 2) , e Joe / yap Orov éotiv Tictis Kal ayarn, wy ovdév TpoKéKpLTat. / \ \ e lal > \ / > fal 2. katapabete 5é Tovs éEtepodokobvtas eis THY yapiv “Incod nr b) ¢ a 5 a a > / aN a / Xpictod tv els Nuds ENodcar, Tas EvayTio: ELoiy TH yvOuN lo) nr b] U ’ / > Lal > \ / , ToD @cod. epi ayamns ov pédrEl avTOIs, ov TEpL YNpAs, OU fal / > \ , mept dpdavod, ov rept OuBopévov, ov rept Sedeuevov [7 nr aA a > NeAvpevou], ov epi mewa@vTos 7) SiupevTos’ evyapiotias Kal \ a \ ’ Tpocevyns améyovtar Sid TO pr) Opodoyeiy THY evyapioTiay > al lol © tel a lal capka civat TOD cwTHpos Nnuoy "Inood Xpictod, THY VTép TOV a lal la © lel \ y apaptiov nuav Tabodaay, ivy TH YpHoTOTHTL O TaTNp HryELtpev. VII. Oi ody avtiréyovtes TH Swpead TOD Oeod cufntodbvr- | , / \ , Lal ’ A 7 \ tes atroOvncKkovaolv. cuvédepev S€é avTois ayamday, iva Kai 2 tal / 3 ’ \ > , n / avact@ow. 2. mpérov [ovy] éotiv aréyerOat THY TOLOUTMY, ’ a lal / a Kal pnTe KaT lOlay Tepi avT@Y NarEly pNTE KOLV Tpocéyew \ rn , > , \ a b] / 5] e \ / dé Tois mpodyrais, éEaipétws Sé TO evayyeriv, év @ TO Taos npiv SeOn\wTal Kal 7 avaoTacts TeTEAELWTAL. \ \ / € > a VIII. Tovs [d€] pepirpovs evyete, ws apynv Kxaxov. , n >? / > a e > a r \ lal TaVvTes TO ETloKOTT@ akoNovOeEiTE, ws “Incots Xpiotos TO / fal / ec a > mTatpl, Kal T@® TpecBuTepiw ws Tols atooToOXous: Tovs Sé PY t > , ra] ¢ 3) Coe ae t 5 \ \ ? vaxovous évtpétredOe ws Oeod evTornv. pndeis ywpis ér- / fal oKOTOU TL TpaccéTW THY aVYnKOYTwY Eis THY EKKANClaY. > £ / ] / e , (e e \ \ > / éxeivn BeBaia evyapiotia nyeicOw 7 vd Toy émicKoTroY be Ae A EEL b , a A CaS eee TZ ovaa, 7) @ ay avTOS ETiTpEWN. 2. OTToV av davy o éTiCKOTIOS, a \ tal ¢ ¢ A a éxet TO TAHO0S Ectw, WoTeEp OTrov av 7 Xpiatos "Inaods, Exet € \ , fe n Kalorik éexxrnola. ovK éEov éotw ywpis TOD émLaKdTroU yf / » ’ lal 7, A 3 Cal ovte Barrifew ote ayarnv troveiy: adr 0 av éxeivos Soxe- vi. 1 700 Ocod] Timoth. Anon-Syr..; om. GLAC; ai. g. AP, FATH., 9 S. Matt. XIx. 12. 130 THE EPISTLE OF S&S. IGNATIUS [vitt / aA \ n n EE f / , 4 9 4 pacn, ToUTO Kal T® Oe@ evapectov, iva achares 7} Kab “ A U BéBavov wav 0 mpaccere. bu / > 4 ? lel € ce ¢ v IX. Ev’doyov é€otiw Roirov avavirwvat nuds, wos [ere] \ ” I ® A a Le v \ 43 'f Katpov Exopev els Meov peravociv. Karas Eyes Qeov Kai éri- / ¢ a , , € \ lal oKoTrov eldéval. 0 Tim@Y emloKoTroV U7TO Beod TeTiunrac , / a“ / 6 Aabpa emicKoToU TL Tmpaccwy TH SiaBOrXAW RaTpeEver. / =| CO b] / / yw ‘ 2. TavTa ovv vuiv ev YapiTL TEpLaceEveT@, aELoL yap €oTE. / \ ¢ lal ,’ a i KaTa TavTa pe aveTravoate, Kal vas “Inoovs Xpioros. , / \ Ul , / +) ed id lal / , aTOvTAa pe Kal TapovTa nyaTnoate apelBor vpiv eds, bu « I > a / Ov TravTa VTopévovTes avTov TevEed Oe. }. Wite. a , , iA , X. Wirova kai “Paiov ’Ayaborovur, of émrnxodovOnoav fal a ’ / e / ¢ roe els NOyov cod, Karas erroinoate virodeEapevot ws Sta- ’ <7 n a, “a ‘ , a ~ s tg 4 Kovous [Xptotrov] Oeod" ot Kai evyapiorovaw TH Kupio virep ig fal f ,’ \ U Oh € r VUGY, OTL AUTOS GvEeTTAVTATE KATA TAVTa TpOTrOV. oOVOEV UpLiV b] \ ’ a , / ¢ “A \ an / \ ‘ OU 417) ATroNEiTAaL. 2. avTipUXOY VuwV TO TVED UA MoV, Kal TA / a , ¢ / =) \ > ‘ + > \ Seoua pou & ovy vUmepnpavncate ovdé emnayuvOnte’ ovde ¢ La) > f ¢ , / > a 4 Umas érravoxuvOnaeTat 7 TEdEla TriaTLs, Incovs XpicTos. c ¢ A > A \ 7 ‘ XI. °H rpocevyn vuav arndOev eri thy éexxdnolav THv ’ ’ / an / Ud év ’Avtioyeia THs Luplas’ bev dedeuévos Ocomperrectarois fal / ’ / ’ a wv > lad 3 ” Seopois Travtas aotralouat, ovK wv aktos éxeibev eivat, Erya- ’ lal a Dae \ Uz / , > f Tos avTav wv’ Kata OérXnpwa KaTnEvwOnv, ovK éx cuvELdoTos, > ’ U la) \ / a 6 > GX’ €x xapiTos Deod, iy evyopwat Tedelav pow SoChvat, iva év “ fal ¢ fal lal / 5S / id cal TH Tpocevyn vuwv Ocovd eritvyw. 2. iva ovv TédELov Va \ \ \ lel aN =) lel lA > \ yévntat TO Epyov Kal él yns Kal év oVpave, TpETrEL Els TLUND a ‘nd \ / ¢ a \ ®cod yerpotovncat THv ExKAnoLav vuov OeomrperhvTHy Eis TO , 4 , an ’ / , ryevouevov Ews Lupias avyyaphvat avrois bt. elpnvevovow \ > if N33 / \ > / b) a \ Kat améXaBov TO idtov péyeOos Kal atrexatecTtabn avTois TO ” a 3 f a wv a / idtov owpateiov. 3. epavn por ov akiov Tpadypa Tréprbat X a e / es) fal v / \ \ TWA TOV VpETepwY pET eTLTTOANS, va cuvdoEacy Tv KaTa \ ’ Tal f Jou Nef Md ots b] / Ocdv avrots yevowévnv evdiav, Kal Ort Atpévos Hdn ETUyYavoV aA a ¢ a I ” }- \ a / TH Tpocevyyn Vu@v. TédELOL OVTES TELELA Kal povette OE- € wn 5 / \ f ’ \ lal Nova yap viv ev Tpacoew Oeds ErToLpos Els TO Tapacyey. ’ U ¢€ lal ¢ , , A ’ r e > XII. "Aocraferat vyds 1 ayatn Tov aderpav tev év , f tart \ / a 3 / Tpwads, o0ev Kai ypadw vuiv dia Bovppovu, dv amecrteinate 1] TO S. POLYCARP. 131 s3 ne > / a b a ¢e AL wen \ ’ pet ewod dua Edecious tois adedpots vuav' 05 Kata TavtTa ? U 3 \ a poe avéerausev. xal ddpeAXov TavTes avTOY éulmovyTo, ovTa > la cr 7 3 , ’ \ ¢ / \ é€eutrAaptov Meod dvakovias. apeiretat avtov n xapis KaTa , b) / \ , / 2) 7 \ mavTa. 2. aomdatowat Tov akibeov éricKkorov Kat Oeorpe- \ / \ \ / PS) / \ més mpeaButépiov, [kai] Tovs cuvdovdAovs pov SvaKovous Kat an f Ee, ’ rn fal TOUS KaT avdpa Kal Kown TavTas, év ovopate Inood Xpicrod, fal 6) a lal o I \ ’ U Kal TH capKl avTov Kal TO aipatl, TWaVer TE Kal avacTaceL nr fal e , A se is Lal / CAapKLKH TE Kal TYEUpaTLKH, ev EvoTHTL cov Kal VOY. apis ¢ lal »- > / ¢ \ \ , Upiv, Edeos, eipnvn, VTomovn Sia TavTos. b , \ / al b) nr \ XIII. “Aoczatkouar tovs olxovs tov adeApaov pou avy \ \ f \ , ! yuvaély Kal Téxvots, Kal Tas TapVévous Tas Neyomévas ynpas. ” / , / ‘ = / ¢ lal / éppwabé por év Suvawes Tatpos. aomalerar vas Pirwv, N ? \ v > I? \ i oh \ ” avy euol ov. 2. adomafouat Tov oixov Laovias, iy ev yopat ,’ \ lal édpacOat tTiate. Kal ayaTn capKiKH TE Kal TvEevpaTLKy. > \ , aomalopar ”AXKnv, TO ToOnTOY pot dvopa, Kai Aadvov tov bl] by > davyKkpitov Kal Kitexvoy nai mavtas Kat dvoua. éppwobe év xapiTt @eov. meo> TIOAYKAPTTION: > f ITNATIO® 6 kai Qecodcpos, Wlorveaprm éricxoTe@ ’ / ~ ¢ A“ exkAnolas Xpupvaiwv, paddrov éericKoTnpévp UT Oeovd \ \ 3 A A a matpos Kat Inood Xpictov, treioTa yaipery. , / f \ ’ & A / c / =) I. “Arrodeyopuevds cov tHv év Oc@ yrdpnv 7)dpacmevny e > NN / b) , id U \ A ws émt méTpav axivyntov, UTepdoEalw Kkatatiw0eis Tov mpo- / an a a TWTOV GOV TOU Guwmov, ov ovaipny év Oecd. 2. TapaKarw > / e > , re a ff \ oe €V YyapiTe 4 evdédvcar Tpocbeivar TH Spoum@ cov, Kal / lal jTavTas Tapakanrelv iva cwlwvta. éKxdiKes cov TOY TOTTOV b] / ? / a an an / EV TAT ETLMEEia TAPKLKH TE Kal TVEVPATLKH. TIS EVWOEWS / Ks 7 povtige, Hs ovdev apewvov' tavtas Bactabe, ws Kai oe O t = / Dia ¢ a Kupios’ mavtwv avéyou év aya, OoTep Kal Toles’ 3. Tpoc- ral f ’ , a evyais oxodale adiadeirtos’ aitov cvverw TrElova 7S x 5 t aA a EXELS” YpNYOpeL akolwntovy mvetWa KEeKTHMEVOS’ TOiS KAT 9-24 S. Matt. KOs 132 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS {1 A ‘ Ul dydpa Kata oponBeray cod Rader TavTwY Tas vooous Pa- / / otate, os TéeXevos GOANTHS’ Otrov TAElwY KOTrOS, TOD KEpdos. 3 lol 4 e II. Kanrovs paénras éav pidys, xapis cot ovK Eat a 8 nA c ‘ oe] lol padAov TOUS AowmoTépous Ev TpaitnTL vTOTaccE. ov TaV Lal nw iol , A Tpadpa TH avTH euTracTpw Oeparreveta’ Tovs TapoEvapovs euBpoxats mave. 2. pdonimoc rinoy ac 6 dic év maow kal c c U \ la) - Akeépaloc eloael doc H Tepictepda. Ova TovTO capKiKos EL Kat ' > t pet i MVEUPLATLKOS, Va Ta HalvopEeva Tov Els TPOTwTTOY KONAKEVTS \ Sh oe? ” ¢/ A ts \ , \ Ta 6€ dopata aiter iva cor havepwOy iva pndevos ely, Kal if I< \ , lal ¢€ MTAVTOS Yaplopatos TepiccevysS. 3. O KALpOS aTrALTEL GE, WS lal > / \ ¢ / J > ‘ ~ KuBepyntas avéwous Kal ws yetpmatowevos Aipéva, eis TO Oeovd al lol e lal J toate \ / ’ / \ émitvxeiv. vide, os Oeod abdytns TO Oéua apOapcia Kat , ® \ / fw7 aiwvios, epi 7s Kal ov TéTELcal. KATA TavTa cou > / > \ \ \ , a ’ U advripuxov éy® Kai Ta Seopa pov a nyaTnoas. III. Of Soxotvtes a&sorictoe elvat Kai étepodidacKa- AodyTEs pn GE KaTaTAHTCETWCAY. oT7OL Edpaios, bs AKO / / > \ > le] \ W, \ lal TUTTOMEVOS. peyadou éotiv aOAnTOD [TO] SéperOat Kal viKav. / Ay ney: la) f € t? ¢ cal fr ivf \ pariota Sé évexey Ocod wavta vropévery nuas Sel, va Kal b] \ ¢ A € / / a U e - \ avrTos nas Vropelyn. 2. TA€ov oTrovoatos yivou ov El. TOUS \ , € Kalpovs KatauavOave: Tov UIrép KaLpoV TrpoTdoKa, TOY axpo- \ .7 \ b) € a c , A 3 / \ vov, TOY aopaTov, Tov OL Huds opaTov, Tov ayndadnTov, Tov 3 A \ ’ ¢ a / \ A / ll 3 atra0n, Tov dv nuds taOntov, Toy Kata TavTa TpoTrov & Has VTOmEeivavTa. IV. Xpar pr) apereicOwcav: peta Tov Kipiov od adtav \ 7 be v t / 6 be \ Ppovtistns Eco. pundev avev yvouns cov ywécbw, pndé od lal , lol dvev Ocovd yrouns TLTpacce Orrep ovSE Tpacces. evoTaber, ld 2. TuKVOTEpoY cUVaywyai ywéc0woav é& dvopaTos TavTasS Enter. 3. Sovrovs Kat dovAas pr) UTepndaver’ GrAXa pnde 3 \ , 3 cd A avTot duciovcOwaar, arr eis doE-av Oeod wréov SovrAeveTo- ” ’ > , STEEN A ' - \. vsmeu cay, iva Kpeittovos édevOepias ard Oeod tixwow" pur épa- 3 \ la) ae fo) vA A fal € a TWOAV ATO TOV KOLVOU EdevOepotva Aan, iva un SovrAL evpeOaow emOupias. \ la) A V. Tas xaxoteyvias qedye, waddov Sé tept TotTev opirlay trod. Tals adehgpais wou mpocdader ayatay Tov vit] TO: S:) POLYCARP: 133 an / ’ f NS \ Kupsov cat tois cvpBiows dpxeicbar capKi Kai mvevpare. lo ’ a f nd / ’ fal Opmolws Kal Tois adeAHois pov TapayyeArE Ev OvopaTte ‘Inoov rn ’ A c > ‘ Xpictod ayarav tas cupPBiovs, we 6 Kypioc THN EKKAHCIAN. i / fr ’ \ A ‘ lal 2. et Tis OUvaTaL ev ayvEla pévELY ELS TLLNVY THS TapKos TOD / \ , ’ , é Kupiov, év axavynoia pevétw’ ay Kavynontat, am@deTo a fal / lé , \ Kal €avy yvooOn mréov Tov éiaKOTrOV, EPOapTat. Tpé7res O€ a a a \ , fa TOLS yapovar Kal Tals yamovaals mETA YYM"NS TOU ETLTKOTTOU A oe ca vA ¢ / 7 i / \ \ Tv évwotw ToeicOat, iva o yapmos 4 Kata Kupsov cai py) + oe / / >? \ A / Kat émiOvupiav. tavta eis Tiny Ocod yivécOw. a vi \ ¢ a VI. To éemicxotm mtpocéxete, iva Kal 0 Ocds vyuiv. > ff b) x an ¢ ph a b / avTinyvyoy eyo THY VToTaccopévwn [TO] ericKoT@, TpEeTBu- > > lal Le , al Tépols, Suakovois’ MET AVT@V [LOL TO Epos YeVOLTO TYELY Tapa Oca A IANA Onret : €@. ouyKomidte adAndows, cvvabdelTe, TVVTPEXETE, TUP- a / € vs a \ TaoVeTEe, TvYKOUWLATOe, cuUVEyEelperOe, WS Deod oiKovopor Kal / \ € / ’ f ® f? ! ’ e Mapeopor Kal UIrnpéTat. 2. apéoKeTe © oTpaTEevedOe, ad’ ov \ \ > / / / € a ye id aA kat Ta Ofova Kopivecbe. puntis vuwv Secéptwp evpeb7. N / e lal , € ed ¢ ll ¢ TO Banrticpa Via pEveTwW WS OTTAA, n TiaTIs Ws TepLKEeda- , Cie c , enie Nene pss \ a Nala, 7 ayarn ws Sopu, n Vrropovn Ws TavoTTNla’ Ta SeTrOcLTA ¢ a A: € A 7 Ni ” ¢ A yy / UMOV TA Epya Vuar, va Ta axKeTTTAa Vuav déla Kopionabe. , 3 ’ > / nA paxpoOvpncate ovv pet adAnAwWY ev TpavTntl, oS 6 Oeds € A ’ ¢ fl MN pe? vudv. ovaiwny vuov Oia TavTos. 7 \ € > / ¢ 3 > / lal / VII. “Exesdn 9 éxxAnoia 9 ev “Avtioxeta THs Supias , / ¢ EO Wa Py XN lol lal € tal s) \ eipnvever, ws €OnAWOn pol, dia THS TpocEevyns vuav, Kayo 2 / 3 / a a evOumortepos éeyevounv év ayepivia Oeod, éavrep Sia Tod Lal fa) ? , > Ni ¢ hed / rd A ’ / mabey Ocod Eritiyo, eis TO evpeOnval pe ev TH aitnoe c a / / Ud Ld vpov pabytnv. 2. mpéret, LlodvKapre Oeopaxapiotorare, ’ b) a / cupBovr.ov ayayeiy GeompeTréctatoy Kal yYELpoToVical Tia av > \ fi ” \ v A , / Ov ayaTntoyv diay éxeTe Kai doKvoy, Os SuYnoeTat Yeodpopos lal a ’ KanreioGar- tovTov Katakidcat, iva tropevbeis eis Yupiav Ud ¢ ta) \ U ’ la Sofacn vuar thy aoxvov ayatny eis Sd€av Ocod. 3. Xpuote- \ e a / ’ a na avos cavTov é€£ovclay ovK éyet adda De@ ayorafer. TodTo \ * e fal 5) \ ¢ A e ON ’ , TO €pyov Weov eat Kal vuarv, btav avTO adtrapticnte. , s\ a , (74 C4 foie’, ’ ’ oh fol TLTTEVM Yap TH YapiTL, OTL ETowmot eaTe Els evTrotiay Oc@ Eph. v. 29. 134 S, IGNATIUS TO S. POLYCARP. [vir € lal ld lod b] dvnKkovoav. €l0Ws Uuay TO avVYTOVOY THS adnOelas Ov’ OAlywv VMAS YpaLpaTwov TapEeKdheaa. VIII. “Eset macas tats éexxrAnoiats ovK duvnOnv ‘ / tal > \ ypawat dia TO cEalpvns mreiv pe aro Tpwacos eis Neatronuy, ¢ \ t f U lal ” > ws TO OéAnpa mpoctaccer, yparpers Tals EumpocOev éxKAn- rn \ clas, oS Deod yropnv KexTnMEvOS, Els TO KAL AVTOVS TO AUTO an iy \ ‘ \ , € \ , ‘ momoat—ot pev Svvapevor Telods tréurpat, of b€ émurtoNas A Lal c iA Led dia Tov UTO cou TepTOpevor, Wa SoEacOnTe aiwvieo Epyo— € ” v ws a&ios wv. 2. "Acmratouar mavtas €E ovouatos, Kal thy Tov ’Erre- / ce a a , Tpotrov avy b\w TO OlKw a’THS Kai TAY TéxvwV' aoTrafowat "ArtaXov Tov ayarntov pou: aomalomat Tov “wéAXNOVTA KaTAE- tova Oat Tov ets Lupiav TopeverOar Ectar 1 yapis peT avTov dia TavTds, Kal ToD Téutrovtos avTov IloXvKaprov. ’ lel id Lal \ ‘ > lal if Aa > fal lal 3. epp@obar vuas ba Travtos év Oecd nyov “Incod Xpicta ’ lal lal eVyowat, ev @ Siapelvnte ev Eévotnte Beod Kat émicKoTy. > , vi \ f ” 4 3 aomafopar “AXKnv TO ToOnTov por dvoua. eéppwobe ev Kupio. GRANSLATION OF THE Merete rS OF S. IGNATIUS. f Mr vr 4 Oy ty fi i RIE, et Wi } ) A ba ath ; }) Ver Lae a Fey Niet yet as ‘iy ce a howd \ ® hy | i Eo Sim ia eal | amen vu be ny ( Dri ae tA cat bod Peaneriay iene aa 5 a ( Pan 4) 4, POA \ mo a oy } A Nie rt vA it i i i fil J i j hi { ‘ pip { ; Py yale ‘ } , " if f vi; ¥ 5 i 4 , k ( fi i k i i as Hn , r 1 . ) i | i i th 4 a Ny . ‘ at a | ay Died Wd ie ea i ce y j } t Ue ee Ai ae hwA (HF ; i i / 5 } i } % i} M i [ eh } 4 Ayan | mee } y f al i a + { Ky | ny : ; wa i (att " 1 i i j i i j i! | { I i, - | viely f Why Luk iy Bt ly i, i i ND i j } ‘ 1 i " | ‘ » \ H A} i | 7 ‘ f j Pest LES OF S..IGNAFIUS:. I. Pee Ee be STAN S:


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to the Ephesians

# Chapter 1

1.  While I welcomed in Elohim (God) [your] well-beloved name which ye bear by natural right, [in an upright and virtuous mind], by faith and love in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus) our Saviour—being imitators of Elohim (God), and having your hearts kindled in the blood of Elohim (God), ye have perfectly fulfilled your congenial work—for when ye heard that I was on my way from Syria, in bonds for the sake of the common Name and hope, and was hoping through your prayers to succeed in fighting with wild beasts in Rome, that by so succeeding I might have power to be a disciple, ye were eager to visit me :—seeing then that in Elohim's (God’s) name I have received your whole multitude in the person of Onesimus, whose love passeth utterance and who is moreover your bishop [in the flesh]—and I pray that ye may love him according to Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and that ye all may be like him; for blessed is He that granted unto you according to your deserving to have such a bishop :—
2.  But as touching my fellow-servant Burrhus, who by the will of Elohim (God) is your deacon blessed in all things, I pray that he may remain with me to the honour of yourselves and of your bishop. Yea, and Crocus also, who is worthy of Elohim (God) and of you, whom I received as an ensample of the love which ye bear me, hath relieved me in all ways— 138 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS even so may the Father_of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) refresh him—together with Onesimus and Burrhus and Euplus and Fronto; in whom I saw you all with the eyes of love. May I have joy of you always, if so be I am worthy of it. It is therefore meet for you in every way to glorify Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) who glorified you; that being perfectly joined together in one submission, submitting yourselves to your bishop and presbytery, ye may be sanctified in all things.
3.  I donot command you, as though I were somewhat. For even though I am in bonds for the Name’s sake, I am not yet perfected in. Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). [For] now am I beginning to be a disciple; and I speak to you as to my school-fellows. For I ought to be trained by you for the contest in faith, in admonition, in endurance, in long-suffering. But, since love doth not suffer me to be silent concerning you, therefore was I forward to exhort you, that ye run in harmony with the mind of Elohim (God): for Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) also, our inseparable life, is the mind of th the Father, even as the bishops that are settled in the farthest parts of the earth are in the mind of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ).
4.  So then it becometh you to run in harmony with the mind of the bishop; which thing also ye do. For your honourable presbytery, which is worthy of Elohim (God), is attuned to the bishop, even as its strings to a lyre. Therefore in your concord and harmonious love Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) is sung. And do ye, each and all, form yourselves into a chorus, that being harmonious in concord and taking the key note of Elohim (God) ye may in unison sing with one voice through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) unto the Father, that He may both hear you and acknowledge you by your good deeds to be members of His Son. It is therefore profitable for you to be in blameless unity, that ye may also be partakers of Elohim (God) always.
5.  For if I in ashort time had such converse with your bishop, which was not after the manner of men but in the Spirit, how much more do I congratulate you who are closely joined with him as the Church i is with Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and as Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) is with the Father, that all things may be harmonious in unity. Let no man be deceived. If ‘any one be not within the precinct of the altar, he lacketh the bread [of Elohim (God)]. For, if the prayer of one and another hath so great force, how much more that of the bishop and of the whole Church. Whosoever therefore cometh not to the congregation, he doth thereby show his pride and hath separated himself; for it is written, Elohim (God) resisteth the proud. Let us therefore be careful not to resist the bishop, that by our submission we may give ourselves to Elohim (God). TO THE EPHESIANS. 139
6.  And in proportion as a man seeth that his bishop is silent, let him fear him the more. For every one whom the Master of the household |, sendeth to be steward over His own house, we ought so to receive as Him that sent him. Plainly therefore we ought to regard the bishop as the Yahuah (Lord) Himself. Now Onesimus of his own accord highly praiseth your orderly conduct in Elohim (God), for that ye all live according to truth, and that no heresy hath a home among you: nay, ye do not so much as listen to any one, if he speak of aught else save concerning Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) in truth.
7.  For some are wont of malicious guile to hawk about the Name, while they do certain other things unworthy of Elohim (God). These men ye ought to shun, as wild-beasts; for they are mad dogs, biting by stealth ; against whom ye ought to be on your guard, for they are hard to heal. There is one only physician, of flesh and of spirit, generate and in- generate, Elohim (God) eran wae Lite d in death, Son of Mary and Son of Elohim (God), first passible and then impassible, Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our Lord.
8.  Let no one therefore deceive you, as indeed ye are not de- ceived, seeing that ye belong wholly to Elohim (God). For when no lust is established in you, which hath power to torment you, then truly ye live after Elohim (God). I devote myself for you, and I dedicate myself as an offering for the church of you Ephesians which is famous unto all the ages. They that are of the flesh cannot do the things of the Spirit, neither can they that are of the Spirit do the things of the flesh; even as faith cannot do the things of unfaithfulness, neither unfaithfulness the things of faith. Nay, even those things which ye do after the flesh are spiritual ; for ye do all things in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ).
9.  But I have learned that certain persons passed through you from yonder, bringing evil doctrine; whom ye suffered not to sow seed in you, for ye stopped your ears, so that ye might not receive the seed sown by them; forasmuch as ye are stones of a temple, which were prepared beforehand for a building of Elohim (God) the Father, being hoisted up to the heights through the engine of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), , which is the Cross, and using for a rope the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit); while your faith is your windlass, and love is the way that leadeth up to Elohim (God). So then ye are all com- panions in the way, carrying your Elohim (God) and your shrine, your Messiah (Christ) and your holy things, being arrayed from head to foot in the commandments of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). And I too, taking part in the festivity, am permitted by letter to bear you company and to rejoice with you, that ye set not your love on anything after the common life of men, but only on Elohim (God). i [ x a i \ 140 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS ro. And pray ye also without ceasing for the rest of mankind (for there is in them a hope of repentance), that they may find Elohim (God). Therefore permit them to take lessons at least from your works. Against their outbursts of wrath be ye meek ; against their proud words be ye humble; against their railings set ye your prayers ; against their errors be ye stedfast in the faith ; against their fierceness be ye gentle. And be not zealous to imitate them by requital. Let us show ourselves their brothers by our forbearance ; but let us be zealous to be imitators of the Yahuah (Lord), vying with each other who shall suffer the greater wrong, who shall be defrauded, who shall be set at nought; that no herb of the devil be found in you: but in all purity and temperance abide ye in —__— HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus), with your flesh and with your spirit.
11.  These are the last times. Henceforth let us have reverence ; let us fear the long-suffering of Elohim (God), lest it turn into a judgment against us. For either let us fear the wrath which is to come or let us love the » grace which now is—the one or the other ; provided only that we be found in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus) unto true life. Let nothing glitter in your eyes apart from Him, in whom I carry about my bonds, my spiritual pearls in which I would fain rise again through your prayer, whereof may it be my lot to be always a partaker, that I may be found in the company of | those Christians of Ephesus who moreover were ever of one mind with the Apostles in the power of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ).
12.  I know who I am and to whom I write. I ama convict, ye have received mercy: I am in peril, ye are established. Ye are the high-road of those that are on their way to die unto Elohim (God). Ye are asso- ciates in the mysteries with Paul, who was sanctified, who obtained a good report, who is worthy of all felicitation; in whose foot-steps I would fain be found treading, when I shall attain unto Elohim (God); who in every letter maketh mention of you in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus).
13.  Do your diligence therefore to meet together more frequently for thanksgiving to Elohim (God) and for His glory. For when ye meet together frequently, the powers of Satan are cast down; and his mischief cometh to nought in the concord of your faith. There is nothing better than peace, in which all warfare of things in heaven and things on earth is abolished.
14.  None of these things is hidden from you, if ye be perfect in your faith and love toward Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), for these are the beginning and end of life—faith is the beginning and love is the end—and the two being found in unity are Elohim (God), while all things else follow in their train TO THE EPHESIANS. 141 unto true nobility. No man professing faith sinneth, and no man _pos- sessing love hateth. Zhe tree is manifest from its fruit; so they that profess to be Messiah's (Christ’s) shall be seen through their actions. For the Work is not a thing of profession now, but is seen then when one is found in the power of faith unto the end.
15.  Itis better to keep silence and to be, than to talk and not to be. It is a fine thing to teach, if the speaker practise. Now there is one teacher, who spake and it came to pass: yea and even the things which He hath done in silence are worthy of the Father. He that truly possesseth the word of Yahusha (Jesus) is able also to hearken unto His silence, that he may be perfect; that through his speech he may act and through his silence he may be known. Nothing is hidden from the Yahuah (Lord), but even our secrets are nigh unto Him. Let us therefore do all things as knowing that He dwelleth in us, to the end that we may be His temples and He Himself may be in us as our Elohim (God). This is so, and it will also be made clear in our sight from the love which we rightly bear towards Him.
16.  Be not deceived, my brethren. Corrupters of houses shadl/ not inherit the kingdom of Elohim (God). If then they which do these things after the flesh are put to death, how much more if a man through evil doc- trine corrupt the faith of Elohim (God) for which Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) was crucified. Such a man, having defiled himself, shall go into the unquenchable fire; and in like manner also shall he that hearkeneth unto him.
17.  For this cause the Yahuah (Lord) received ointment on His head, that He might breathe incorruption upon the Church. Be not anointed with the ill odour of the teaching of the prince of this world, lest he lead you captive and rob you of the life which is set before you. And wherefore do we not all walk prudently, receiving the knowledge of Elohim (God), which is Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ)? Why perish we in our folly, not knowing the gift of grace which the Yahuah (Lord) hath truly sent ?
18.  My spirit is made an offscouring for the Cross, which is a stumbling-block to them that are unbelievers, but to us Salvation and life \ eternal. Where is the wise? Where is the disputer? Where is the boasting of them that are called prudent? For our Elohim (God), Yahusha (Jesus) the — Messiah (Christ), was conceived in the womb by Mary according to a dispen- ‘ sation, of the seed of David but also of the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit); and He was born and was baptized that by His passion He might cleanse water.
19.  And hidden from the prince of this world were the virginity of Mary and her child-bearing and likewise also the death of the Yahuah (Lord)— on Vv 142 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS three mysteries to be cried aloud—the which were wrought in the silence of Elohim (God). How then were they made manifest to the ages? A star shone forth in the heaven above all the stars; and its light was unutterable, and its strangeness caused amazement; and all the rest of the constel- lations with the sun and moon formed themselves into a chorus about the star; but the star itself far outshone them all; and there was per- plexity to know whence came this strange appearance which was so unlike them. From that time forward every sorcery and every spell was dissolved, the ignorance of wickedness vanished away, the ancient kingdom was pulled down, when Elohim (God) appeared in the likeness of man unto mewness of everlasting fe; and that which had been perfected in the counsels of Elohim (God) began to take effect. ‘Thence all things were per- turbed, because the abolishing of death was taken in hand.
20.  If Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) should count me worthy through your prayer, and it should be the Divine will, in my second tract, which I intend to write to you, I will further set before you the dispensation whereof I have begun to speak, relating to the new_man Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), which consisteth in faith towards Him and in love towards Him, in His passion and resurrection, especially if the Yahuah (Lord) should reveal aught to me. Assemble yourselves together in common, every one of you severally, man by man, in grace, in one faith and one Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), who after the flesh was s of David's race, who is Son of Adam and Son of Elohim (God), to the end that ye may obey the bishop and the presbytery without distraction of mind; breaking one bread, which is the medicine of immortality and the antidote that we should not die but. live for ever in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ).
21.  Iam devoted to you and to those whom for the honour of Elohim (God) ye sent to Smyrna; whence also I write unto you with thanksgiving to the Yahuah (Lord), having love for Polycarp as I have for you also. Remember me, even as I would that Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) may also remember you. Pray for the church which is in Syria, whence I am led a prisoner to Rome— I who am the very last of the faithful there; according as I was counted worthy to be found unto the honour of Elohim (God). Fare ye well in Elohim (God) the Father and in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our common hope. TO THE MAGNESIANS. 143 Pe


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to the Magnesians

# Chapter 1

1.  When I learned the exceeding good order of your love in the ways of Elohim (God), I was gladdened and I determined to address you in the faith of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). For being counted worthy to bear a most godly name, in these bonds, which I carry about, I sing the praise of the churches ; and I pray that there may be in them union of the flesh and of the spirit which are Yahusha HaMashiach's (Jesus Christ’s), our never-failing life—an union of faith and of love which is preferred before all things, and—what is more than all—an union with Yahusha (Jesus) and with the Father ; in whom if we endure patiently all the despite of the prince of this world and escape therefrom, we shall attain unto Elohim (God).
2.  Forasmuch then as I was permitted to see you in the person of Damas your godly bishop and your worthy presbyters Bassus and Apollonius and my fellow-servant the deacon Zotion, of whom I would fain have joy, for that he is subject to the bishop as unto the grace of Elohim (God) and to the presbytery as unto the law of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) :—
3.  Yea, and it becometh you also not to presume upon the youth of your bishop, but according to the power of Elohim (God) the Father to render unto him all reverence, even as I have learned that the holy presbyters also have not taken advantage of his outwardly youthful estate, but give place to him as to one prudent in Elohim (God); yet not to him, but to the Father of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), even to the Bishop of all. For the honour therefore of Him that desired you, it is meet that ye should be obedient without dissimulation. For aman doth not so much deceive this bishop who is seen, as cheat that other who is invisible ; and in such a case he must reckon not with flesh but with Elohim (God) who knoweth the hidden things.
4.  Itis therefore meet that we not only be called Christians, but also be such; even as some persons have the bishop’s name on their 144 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS lips, but in everything act apart from him. Such men appear to me not to keep a good conscience, forasmuch as they do not assemble them- selves together lawfully according to commandment. 5- Seeing then that all things have an end, and these two—life and death—are set before us together, and each man shall go /o his own place ; for just as there are two coinages, the one of Elohim (God) and the other of the world, and each of them hath its proper stamp impressed upon it, the unbelievers the stamp of this world, but the faithful in love the stamp of Elohim (God) the Father through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), through whom unless of our own free choice we accept to die unto His passion, His life is not in us :—
6.  Seeing then that in the aforementioned persons I beheld your whole people in faith and embraced them, I advise you, be ye zealous to do all things in godly concord, the bishop presiding after the likeness of Elohim (God) and the presbyters after the likeness of the council of the Apostles, with the deacons also who are most dear to me, having been entrusted with the diaconate of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), who was with the Father before the worlds and appeared at the end of time. Therefore do ye all study conformity to Elohim (God) and pay reverence one to another; and let no man regard his neighbour after the flesh, but love ye one another in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) always. Let there be nothing among you which shall have power to divide you, but be ye united with the bishop and with them that preside over you as an ensample and a lesson of incorruptibility.
7.  Therefore as the Yahuah (Lord) did nothing without the Father, [being united with Him], either by Himself or by the Apostles, so neither do ye anything without the bishop and the presbyters. And attempt not to think anything right for yourselves apart from others: but let there be one prayer in common, one supplication, one mind, one hope, in love and in joy unblameable, which is Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), than whom there is nothing better. Hasten to come together all of you, as to one temple, even Elohim (God); as to one altar, even to one Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), who came forth from One Father and is with One and departed unto One.
8.  Be not seduced by strange doctrines nor by antiquated fables, which are profitless. For if even unto this day we live after the manner of Judaism, we avow that we have not received grace: for the divine prophets lived after HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus). For this cause also they were perse- cuted, being inspired by His grace to the end that they which are disobedient might be fully persuaded that there is one Elohim (God) who mani- fested Himself through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) His Son, who is His Word that TO THE MAGNESIANS. 145 proceeded from silence, who in all things was well-pleasing unto Him that sent Him. g. If then those who had walked in ancient practices attained unto newness of hope, no longer observing sabbaths but fashioning their lives after the Yahuah's (Lord’s) day, on which our life also arose through Him and through His death which some men deny—a mystery whereby we attained unto belief, and for this cause we endure patiently, that we may be found disciples of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our only teacher—if this be so, how shall we be able to live apart from Him? seeing that even the pro- phets, being His disciples, were expecting Him as their teacher through the Spirit. And for this cause He whom they rightly awaited, when He came, raised them from the dead.
10.  Therefore let us not be insensible to His goodness. For if He should imitate us according to our deeds, we are lost. For this cause, seeing that we are become His disciples, let us learn to live as beseemeth Christianity. For whoso is called by another name besides this, is not of Elohim (God). ‘Therefore put away the vile leaven which hath waxed stale and sour, and betake yourselves to the new leaven, which is Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). Be ye salted in Him, that none among you grow putrid, seeing that by your savour ye shall be proved. It is monstrous to talk of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and to practise Judaism. For Christianity did not believe in Judaism, but Judaism in Christianity, wherein every tongue believed and was gathered together unto Elohim (God).
11.  Now these things I say, my dearly beloved, not because I have learned that any of you are so minded; but as being less than any of you, I would have you be on your guard betimes, that ye fall not into the snares of vain doctrine; but be ye fully persuaded concerning the birth and the passion and the resurrection, which took place in the time of the governorship of Pontius Pilate; for these things were truly and certainly done by Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our hope; from which hope may it not befal any of you to be turned aside.
12.  Let me have joy of you in all things, if I be worthy. For even though I am in bonds, yet am I not comparable to one of you who are at liberty. I know that ye are not puffed up; for ye have Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) in yourselves. And, when I praise you, I know that ye only feel the more shame; as it is written Zhe righteous man ts a self- accuser.
13.  Do your diligence therefore that ye be confirmed in the ordinances of the Yahuah (Lord) and of the Apostles, that ye may prosper in all 146 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS things whatsoever ye do in flesh and spirit, by faith and by love, in the Son and Father and in the Spirit, in the beginning and in the end, with your revered bishop, and with the fitly wreathed spiritual circlet of your presbytery, and with the deacons who walk after Elohim (God). Be obedient to the bishop and to one another, as Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) was to the Father [according to the flesh], and as the Apostles were to Messiah (Christ) and to the Father, that there may be union both of flesh and of spirit.
14.  Knowing that ye are full of Elohim (God), I have exhorted you briefly. Remember me in your prayers, that I may attain unto Elohim (God); and remember also the church which is in Syria, whereof I am not worthy to be called a member. For I have need of your united prayer and love in Elohim (God), that it may be granted to the church which is in Syria to be refreshed by the dew of your fervent supplication.
15.  The Ephesians from Smyrna salute you, from whence also I write to you. They are here with me for the glory of Elohim (God), as also are ye; and they have comforted me in all things, together with Polycarp bishop of the Smyrnzans. Yea, and all the other churches salute you in the honour of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). Fare ye well in godly concord, and possess ye a stedfast spirit, which is Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ).


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to the Trallians

# Chapter 1

1.  I have learned that ye have a mind unblameable and stedfast in patience, not from habit, but by nature, according as Polybius your bishop informed me, who by the will of Elohim (God) and of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) visited me in Smyrna; and so greatly did he rejoice with me in my bonds in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus), that in him I beheld the whole multitude of you. Having therefore received your godly benevolence at his hands, I gave glory, TO THE TRALLIANS. 147 forasmuch as I had found you to be imitators of Elohim (God), even as I had learned.
2.  For when ye are obedient to the bishop as to Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), it is evident to me that ye are living not after men but after Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), who died for us, that believing on His death ye might escape death. It is therefore necessary, even as your wont is, that ye should do nothing without the bishop; but be ye obedient also to the presbytery, as to the Apostles of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) our hope; for if we live in Him, we shall also be found in Him. And those likewise who are deacons of the mysteries of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) must please all men in all ways. For they are not deacons of meats and drinks but servants of the Church of Elohim (God). It is right therefore that they should beware of blame as of fire.
3.  In lke manner let all men respect the deacons as Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), even as they should respect the bishop as being a type of the Father and the presbyters as the council of Elohim (God) and as the college of Apostles. Apart from these there is not even the name of a church. And I am persuaded that ye are so minded as touching these matters: for I received the ensample of your love, and I have it with me, in the person of your bishop, whose very demeanour is a great lesson, while his gentleness is power—a man to whom I think even the godless pay reverence. Seeing that I love you I thus spare you, though I might write more sharply on his behalf: but I did not think myself com- petent for this, that being a convict I should order you as though I were an Apostle.
4.  Ihave many deep thoughts in Elohim (God): but I take the measure of myself, lest I perish in my boasting. For now I ought to be the more afraid and not to give heed to those that would puff me up: for they that say these things to me are a scourge to me. For though I desire to suffer, yet I know not whether I am worthy: for the envy of the devil is unseen indeed by many, but against me it wages the fiercer war. So then I crave gentleness, whereby the prince of this world is brought to nought.
5.  Am I not able to write to you of heavenly things? But I fear lest I should cause you harm being babes. So bear with me, lest not being able to take them in, ye should be choked. For I myself also, albeit I am in bonds and can comprehend heavenly things and the arrays of the angels and the musterings of the principalities, things visible and things invisible—I myself am not yet by reason of this a disciple. For we lack many things, that Elohim (God) may not be lacking to us. LO 148 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS
6.  I exhort you therefore—yet not I, but the love of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ)—take ye only Christian food, and abstain from strange herbage, which is heresy: for these men do even mingle poison with Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), imposing upon others by a show of honesty, like persons ad- ministering a deadly drug with honied wine, so that one who knoweth it not, fearing nothing, drinketh in death with a baneful delight.
7.  Be ye therefore on your guard against such men. And this will surely be, if ye be not puffed up and if ye be inseparable from [Elohim (God)] Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and from the bishop and from the ordinances of the Apostles. He that is within the sanctuary is clean; but he that is without the sanctuary is not clean, that is, he that doeth aught without the bishop and presbytery and deacons, this man is not clean in his conscience.
8.  Not indeed that I have known of any such thing among you, but I keep watch over you betimes, as my beloved, for I foresee the snares of the devil. Do ye therefore arm yourselves with gentleness and recover yourselves in faith which is the flesh of the Yahuah (Lord), and in love which is the blood of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). Let none of you bear a grudge against his neighbour. Give no occasion to the Gentiles, lest by reason of a few foolish men the godly multitude be blasphemed: for Woe unto him through whom My name ts vainly blasphemed before some.
9.  Be ye deaf therefore, when any man speaketh to you apart from Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), who was of the race of David, who was the Son of Mary, who was truly born and ate and drank, was truly persecuted under Pontius Pilate, was truly crucified and died in the sight of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the earth ; who moreover was truly raised from the dead, His Father having raised Him, who in the like fashion will so raise us also who believe on Him—His Father, I say, will raise us—in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus), apart from whom we have not true life. ro. But if it were as certain persons who are godless, that is unbelievers, say, that He suffered only in semblance, being themselves mere semblance, why am I in bonds? And why also do I desire to fight with wild beasts? So I die in vain. ‘Truly then I lie against the Yahuah (Lord).
11.  Shun ye therefore those vile offshoots that gender a deadly fruit, whereof if a man taste, forthwith he dieth. For these men are not the Father’s planting: for if they had been, they would have been TO THE ROMANS. 149 seen to be branches of the Cross, and their fruit imperishable—the Cross whereby He through His passion inviteth us, being His members. Now it cannot be that a head should be found without members, seeing that Elohim (God) promiseth union, and this union is Himself.
12.  I salute you from Smyrna, together with the churches of Elohim (God) that are present with me; men who refreshed me in all ways both in flesh and in spirit. My bonds exhort you, which for Yahusha HaMashiach's (Jesus Christ’s) sake I bear about, entreating that I may attain unto Elohim (God); abide ye in your concord and in prayer one with another. For it becometh you severally, and more especially the presbyters, to cheer the soul of your bishop unto the honour of the Father [and to the honour] of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and of the Apostles. I pray that ye may hearken unto me in love, lest I be for a testimony against you by having so written. And pray ye also for me who have need of your love in the mercy of Elohim (God), that I may be vouchsafed the lot which I am eager to attain, to the end that I be not found reprobate.
13.  The love of the Smyrnzans and Ephesians saluteth you. Re- member in your prayers the church which is in Syria; whereof [also] I am not worthy to be called a member, being the very last of them. Fare ye well in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), submitting yourselves to the bishop as to the commandment, and likewise also to the presbytery; and each of you severally love one another with undivided heart. My spirit is offered up for you, not only now, but also when I shall attain unto Elohim (God). For I am still in peril; but the Father is faithful in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) to fulfil my petition and yours. May we be found unblameable in Him. a tO riE ROMANS:


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to the Romans

# Chapter 1

1.  Forasmuch as in answer to my prayer to Elohim (God) it hath been granted me to see your godly countenances, so that I have obtained even more than I asked; for wearing bonds in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus) I hope to salute you, if it be the Divine will that I should be counted worthy to reach unto the end; for the beginning verily is well ordered, if so be I shall attain unto the goal, that I may receive mine inheritance without hindrance. For I dread your very love, lest it do me an injury; for it is easy for you to do what ye will, but for me it is difficult to attain unto Elohim (God), unless ye shall spare me.
2.  For I would not have you to be men-pleasers but to please Elohim (God), as indeed ye do please Him. For neither shall I myself ever find an opportunity such as this to attain unto Elohim (God), nor can ye, if ye be silent, win the credit of any nobler work. For, if ye be silent and leave me alone, I am a word of Elohim (God); but if ye desire my flesh, then shall I be again a mere cry. [Nay] grant me nothing more than that I be poured out a libation to Elohim (God), while there is still an altar ready ; that forming yourselves into a chorus in love ye may sing to the Father in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), for that Elohim (God) hath vouchsafed that the bishop from Syria should be found in the West, having summoned him from the East. It is good to set from the world unto Elohim (God), that I may rise unto Him.
3.  Ye never grudged any one; ye were the instructors of others. And my desire is that those lessons shall hold good which as teachers ye enjoin. Only pray that I may have power within and without, so that I may not only say it but also desire it; that I may not only be called a Christian, but also be found one. For if I shall be found so, then can I also be called one, and be faithful then, when I am no more visible to the world. Nothing visible is good. For our Elohim (God) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), being in the Father, is the more plainly visible. The Work is not of persuasiveness, but Christianity is a thing of might, whensoever it is hated by the world.
4.  I write to all the churches, and I bid all men know, that of my own free will I die for Elohim (God), unless ye should hinder me. I exhort TO THE ROMANS. I51 you, be ye not an unseasonable kindness to me. Let me be given to the wild beasts, for through them I can attain unto Elohim (God). Iam Elohim's (God’s) wheat, and I am ground by the teeth of wild beasts that I may be found pure bread [of Messiah (Christ)]. Rather entice the wild beasts, that they may become my sepulchre and may leave no part of my body behind, so that I may not, when I am fallen asleep, be burdensome to any one. Then shall I be truly a disciple of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), when the world shall not so much as see my body. Supplicate the Yahuah (Lord) for me, that through these instruments I may be found a sacrifice to Elohim (God). I do not enjoin you, as Peter and Paul did. They were Apostles, I am a convict ; they were free, but I am a slave to this very hour. Yet if I shall suffer, then am I a freed-man of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), and I shall rise free in Him. Now I am learning in my bonds to put away every desire.
5.  From Syria even unto Rome I fight with wild beasts, by land | and sea, by night and by day, being bound amidst ten leopards, even | a company of soldiers, who only wax worse when they are kindly! treated. Howbeit through their wrong doings I become more com-_ pletely a disciple; yet am I not hereby justified. May I have joy of: the beasts that have been prepared for me; and_I pray that I may find them prompt; nay I will entice them tha they may devour me, promptly, not as they have done to some, refusing to touch them | through fear. Yea though of themselves they should not be willing . while I am ready, I myself will force them to it. Bear with me. I, know what is expedient forme. Now am I beginning to be a disciple. | May naught of things visible and things invisible envy me ; that I may | attain unto Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). Come fire and cross and grapplings with | wild beasts, [cuttings and manglings,] wrenching of bones, hacking of limbs, crushings of my whole body, come cruel tortures of the devil to} assail me. Only be it mine to attain unto Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). FS
6.  The farthest bounds of the universe shall profit me nothing, neither the kingdoms of this world. It is good for me to die for Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) rather than to reign over the farthest bounds of the earth. Him I seek, who died on our behalf; Him I desire, who rose again [for our sake]. The pangs of a new birth are upon me. Bear with me, brethren. Do not hinder me from living; do not desire my death. Bestow not on the world one who desireth to be Elohim's (God’s), neither allure him with material things. Suffer me to receive the pure light. When I am come thither, then shall I be a man. Permit me to be an imi- tator of the passion of my Elohim (God). If any man hath Him within himself, 5/2 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS let him understand what I desire, and let him have fellow-feeling with me, for he knoweth the things which straiten me.
7.  The prince of this world would fain tear me in pieces and corrupt my mind to Godward. Let not any of you therefore who are near abet him. Rather stand ye on my side, that is on Elohim's (God’s) side. Speak not of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and withal desire the world. Let not envy have a home in you. Even though I myself, when I am with you, should beseech you, obey me not; but rather give credence to these things which I write to you. [For] I write to you in the midst of life, yet lusting after death. My lust hath been crucified, and there is no fire of material longing in me, but only water living tand speakingt in me, saying within me, Come to the Father. I have no delight in the food of corruption or in the delights of this life. I desire the bread of Elohim (God), which is the flesh of Messiah (Christ) who was of the seed of David; and for a draught I desire His blood, which is love incorruptible.
8.  I desire no longer to live after the manner of men; and this shall be, if ye desire it. Desire ye, that ye yourselves also may be desired. In a brief letter I beseech you; believe me. And Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) shall make manifest unto you these things, that I speak the truth—Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), the unerring mouth in whom the Father hath spoken [truly]. Entreat ye for me, that I may attain [through the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit)]. I write not unto you after the flesh, but after the mind of Elohim (God). If I shall suffer, it was your desire; if I shall be rejected, it was your hatred. 9g. Remember in your prayers the church which is in Syria, which hath Elohim (God) for its shepherd in my stead. Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) alone shall be its bishop—He and your love. But for myself I am ashamed to be called one of them; for neither am I worthy, being the very last of them and an untimely birth: but I have found mercy that I should be some one, if so be I shall attain unto Elohim (God). My spirit saluteth you, and the love of the churches which received me in the name of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), not as a mere wayfarer: for even those churches which did not lie on my route after the flesh went before me from city to city. to. Now I write these things to you from Smyrna by the hand of the Ephesians who are worthy of all felicitation. And Crocus also, a name very dear to me, is with me, with many others besides. As touching those who went before me from Syria to Rome unto the glory of Elohim (God), I believe that ye have received instructions ; whom also apprise that I am near; for they all are worthy of Elohim (God) TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 153 and of you, and it becometh you to refresh them in all things. These things I write to you on the gth before the Kalends of September. Fare ye well unto the end in the patient waiting for Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ).


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to the Philadelphians

# Chapter 1

1.  This your bishop I have found to hold the ministry which pertaineth to the common weal, not of himself or through men, nor yet for vain glory, but in the love of Elohim (God) the Father and the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). And I am amazed at his forbearance; whose silence is more powerful than others’ speech. For he is attuned in harmony with the commandments, as a lyre with its strings. Wherefore my soul blesseth his godly mind, for I have found that it is virtuous and perfect —even the imperturbable and calm temper which he hath, while living in all godly forbearance.
2.  As children therefore [of the light] of the truth, shun division and wrong doctrines; and where the shepherd is, there follow ye as sheep. For many specious wolves with baneful delights lead captive the runners in Elohim's (God’s) race; but, where ye are at one, they will find no place.
3.  Abstain from noxious herbs, which are not the husbandry of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), because they are not the planting of the Father. Not that I have found division among you, but filtering. For as many as are of Elohim (God) and of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), they are with the bishop; and as many as shall repent and enter into the unity of the Church, these also 154 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS shall be of Elohim (God), that they may be living after Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). Be not deceived, my brethren. If any man followeth one that maketh a schism, he doth not inherit the kingdom of Elohim (God). If_any man walketh i in strange doctrine, he hath no fellowship with the passion. A: Be ye e careful therefore to observe one eucharist (for there is one flesh of our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and one cup unto union in His blood; there is one altar, as there is one bishop, together with the presbytery and the deacons my fellow-servants), that whatsoever ye do, ye may do it after Elohim (God).
5.  My brethren, my heart overfloweth altogether in love towards you; and rejoicing above measure I watch over your safety; yet not I, but Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), wearing whose bonds I am the more afraid, because I am not yet perfected. But your prayer will make me perfect [unto Elohim (God)], that I may attain unto the inheritance wherein I have found mercy, taking refuge in the Gospel as the flesh of Yahusha (Jesus) and in the Apostles as the presbytery of the Church. Yea, and we love the pro- phets also, because they too pointed to the Gospel in their preaching and set their hope on Him and awaited Him; in whom also having faith they were saved in the unity of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), being worthy of all: love and admiration as holy men, approved of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) and num- bered together in the Gospel of our common hope.
6.  But if any one propound Judaism unto you, hear him not: for it is better to hear Christianity from a man who is circumcised than Judaism from one uncircumcised. But if either the one or the other speak not concerning Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), I look on them as tombstones and graves of the dead, whereon are inscribed only the names of men. Shun ye therefore the wicked arts and plottings of the prince of this world, lest haply ye be crushed by his devices, and wax weak in your love. But assemble yourselves all together with undivided heart. And I give thanks to my Elohim (God), that I have a good conscience in my dealings with you, and no man can boast either in secret or openly, that I was burdensome to any one in small things or in great. Yea and for all among whom I spoke, it is my prayer that they may not turn it into a testimony against themselves.
7.  For even though certain persons desired to deceive me after the flesh, yet the spirit is not deceived, being from Elohim (God); for zt knoweth whence it cometh and where it goeth, and it searcheth out the hidden things. I cried out, when I was among you; I spake with a loud voice, with Elohim's (God’s) own voice, Give ye heed to the bishop and the } TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 155 presbytery and deacons. Howbeit there were those who suspected me of saying this, because I knew beforehand of the division of certain persons. But He in whom I am bound is my witness that I learned it not from flesh of man; it was the preaching of the Spirit who spake on this wise; Do nothing without the bishop; keep your flesh as a temple of Elohim (God); cherish union ; shun divisions; be imitators of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), as He Himself also was of His Father.
8.  I therefore did my own part, as a man composed unto union. But where there is division and anger, there Elohim (God) abideth not. Now the Yahuah (Lord) forgiveth all men when they repent, if repenting they return to the unity of Elohim (God) and to the council of the bishop. I have faith in the grace of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), who shall strike off every fetter from you; and I entreat you, Do ye nothing in a spirit of factiousness but after the teaching of Messiah (Christ). For I heard certain persons saying, If I find it not in the charters, I believe it not in the Gospel. And when I said to them, It is written, they answered me That is the question. But as for me, my charter is Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), the inviolable charter is His cross and His death and His resurrection, and faith through Him; wherein I desire to be justified through your prayers. g. The priests likewise were good, but better is the High-priest to whom is committed the holy of holies ; for to Him alone are committed the hidden things of Elohim (God); He Himself being the door of the Father, through which Abraham and Isaac and Jacob enter in, and the Prophets and the Apostles and the whole Church; all these things combine in the unity of Elohim (God). But the Gospel hath a singular preeminence in the advent of the Saviour, even our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), and His passion and resurrection. For the beloved Prophets in their preaching pointed to Him ; but the Gospel is the completion of immortality. All things together are good, if ye believe through love. Io, Seeing that in answer to your prayer and to the tender sym- pathy which ye have in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus), it hath been reported to me that the church which is in Antioch of Syria hath peace, it is becoming for you, as a church of Elohim (God), to appoint a deacon to go thither as Elohim's (God’s) ambassador, that he may congratulate them when they are assembled together, and may glorify the Name. Blessed in Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) is he that shall be counted worthy of such a ministration ; and ye yourselves shall be glorified. Now if ye desire it, it is not impossible for you to do this for the name of Elohim (God); even as the churches which are nearest have sent bishops, and others presbyters and deacons, —_— 156 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS
11.  Butas touching Philo the deacon from Cilicia, a man of good report, who now also ministereth to me in the word of Elohim (God), together with Rhaius Agathopus, an elect one who followeth me from Syria, having bidden farewell to this present life; the same who also bear witness to you—and I myself thank Elohim (God) on your behalf, because ye received them, as I trust the Yahuah (Lord) will receive you. But may those who treated them with dishonour be redeemed through the grace of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). The love of the brethren which are in Troas saluteth you; from whence also I write to you by the hand of Burrhus, who was sent with me by the Ephesians and Smyrnzeans as a mark of honour. The Yahuah (Lord) shall honour them, even Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), on whom their hope is set in flesh and soul and spirit, by faith, by love, by concord. Fare ye well in HaMashiach Yahusha (Christ Jesus) our common hope.


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to the Smyrnaeans

# Chapter 1

1.  I give glory to Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) the Elohim (God) who bestowed such wisdom upon you; for I have perceived that ye are established in faith immova- ble, being as it were nailed on the cross of the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), in flesh and in spirit, and firmly grounded in love in the blood of Messiah (Christ), fully persuaded as touching our Lord that He is truly of the race of David according to the flesh, but Son of Elohim (God) by the Divine will and power, truly born of a virgin and baptized by John that ai righteousness \ might be fulfilled by Him, truly nailed up in the flesh for our sakes under Pontius Pilate and Herod the tetrarch (of which fruit are we—that is, of His most blessed passion); that He might set up an ensign unto all the ages through His resurrection, for His saints and faithful people, whether among Yahudim (Jews) or among Gentiles, in one body of His Church.
2.  For He suffered all these things for our sakes [that we might be saved]; and He suffered truly, as also He raised Himself truly ; not as TO THE SMYRNAANS. 157 certain unbelievers say, that He suffered in semblance, being themselves mere semblance. And according as their opinions are, so shall it happen to them, for they are without body and demon-like.
3.  For I know and believe that He was in the flesh even after the resurrection; and when He came to Peter and his company, He said to them, Lay hold and handle me, and see that I am not a demon without body. And straightway they touched Him, and they believed, being joined unto His flesh and His blood. Wherefore also they despised death, nay they were found superior to death. And after His resurrec- tion He [both] ate with them and drank with them as one in the flesh, though spiritually He was united with the Father.
4.  But these things I warn you, dearly beloved, knowing that ye yourselves are so minded. Howbeit I watch over you betimes to pro- tect you from wild beasts in human form—men whom not only should ye not receive, but, if it were possible, not so much as meet [them]; only pray ye for them, if haply they may repent. This indeed is diffi- cult, but Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), our true life, hath power over it. For if these things were done by our Lord in semblance, then am I also a prisoner in semblance. And why then have I delivered myself over to death, unto fire, unto sword, unto wild beasts? But near to the sword, near to Elohim (God); in company with wild beasts, in company with Elohim (God). Only let it be in the name of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), so that we may suffer together with Him. I endure all things, seeing that He Himself enableth me, who is perfect Man.
5.  But certain persons ignorantly deny Him, or rather have been denied by Him, being advocates of death rather than of the truth; and they have not been persuaded by the prophecies nor by the law of Moses, nay nor even to this very hour by the Gospel, nor by the suffer- ings of each of us severally ; for they are of the same mind also con- cerning us. For what profit is it [to me], if a man praiseth me, but blasphemeth my Lord, not confessing that He was a bearer of flesh? Yet he that affirmeth not this, doth thereby deny Him altogether, being himself a bearer of a corpse. But their names, being unbelievers, I have not thought fit to record in writing; nay, far be it from me even to remember them, until they repent and return to the passion, which is our resurrection.
6.  Let no man be déceived. Even the heavenly beings and the glory of the angels and the rulers visible and invisible, if they believe not in the blood of Messiah (Christ) [who is Elohim (God)], judgment awaiteth them also. 158 EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS He that receiveth let him receive. Let not office puff up any man; for faith and love are all in all, and nothing is preferred before them. But mark ye those who hold strange doctrine touching the grace of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) which came to us, how that they are contrary to the mind of Elohim (God). They have no care for love, none for the widow, none for the orphan, none for the afflicted, none for the prisoner, none for the hungry or thirsty. They abstain from eucharist (thanksgiving) and prayer, because they allow not that the eucharist is the flesh of our Saviour Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), which flesh suffered for our sins, and which the Father of His goodness raised up.
7.  They therefore that gainsay the good gift of Elohim (God) perish by their questionings. But it were expedient for them to have love, that they may also rise again. It is therefore meet that ye should abstain from such, and not speak of them either privately or in public ; but should give heed to the Prophets, and especially to the Gospel, wherein the passion is shown unto us and the resurrection is accomplished.
8.  [But] shun divisions, as the beginning of evils. Do ye all follow your bishop, as Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) followed the Father, and the presby- tery as the Apostles; and to the deacons pay respect, as to Elohim's (God’s) com- mandment. Let no man do aught of things pertaining to the Church apart from the bishop. Let that be held a valid eucharist which is under the bishop or one to whom he shall have committed it. Where- soever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be; even as where Yahusha (Jesus) may be, there is the universal Church. It is not lawful apart from the bishop either to baptize or to holdd@ love-feast ; but whatsoever he shall approve, this is well-pleasing also to Elohim (God); that everything which ye do may be sure and valid. g. It is reasonable henceforth that we wake to soberness, while we have [still] time to repent and turn to Elohim (God). It is good to recognise Elohim (God) and the bishop. He that honoureth the bishop is honoured of Elohim (God); he that doeth aught without the knowledge of the bishop rendereth service to the devil. May all things therefore abound unto you in grace, for ye are worthy. Ye refreshed me in all things, and Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) shall refresh you. In my absence and in my presence ye cherished me. May Elohim (God) recompense you; for whose sake if ye endure all things, ye shall attain unto Him.
10.  Philo and Rhaius Agathopus, who followed me in the cause of Elohim (God), ye did well to receive as ministers of [Messiah (Christ)] Elohim (God) ; who also give thanks to the Yahuah (Lord) for you, because ye refreshed them in every / ae ts 4 _ i ti ~ oe y-Trroe CO (2 tn. [UWA Kate (ee ee OY Yc y ee Air Te. ( l Cee naw , TO THE SMYRNAANS. 159 way. Nothing shall be lost to you. My spirit is devoted for you, as also are my bonds, which ye despised not, neither were ashamed of them. Nor shall He, who is perfect faithfulness, be ashamed of you, even Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). tz. Your prayer sped forth unto the church which is in Antioch of Syria; whence coming a prisoner in most godly bonds I salute all men, though I am not worthy to belong to it, being the very last of them. By the Divine will was this vouchsafed to me, not of my own complicity, but by Elohim's (God’s) grace, which I pray may be given to me perfectly, that through your prayers I may attain unto Elohim (God). Therefore that your work may be perfected both on earth and in heaven, it is meet that your church should appoint, for the honour of Elohim (God), an ambassador of Elohim (God) that he may go as far as Syria and congratulate them because they are at peace, and have recovered their proper stature, and their proper bulk hath been restored to them. It seemed to me therefore a fitting thing that ye should send one of your own people with a letter, that he might join with them in giving glory for the calm which by Elohim's (God’s) will had overtaken them, and because they were already reaching a haven through your prayers. Seeing ye are perfect, let your counsels also be perfect; for if ye desire to do well, Elohim (God) is ready to grant the means.
12.  The love of the brethren which are in Troas saluteth you; from whence also I write to you by the hand of Burrhus, whom ye sent with me jointly with the Ephesians your brethren. He hath refreshed me in all ways. And I would that all imitated him, for he is an ensample of the ministry of Elohim (God). The Divine grace shall requite him in all things. I salute your godly bishop and your venerable presby- tery [and] my fellow-servants the deacons, and all of you severally and in a body, in the name of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), and in His flesh and blood, in His passion and resurrection, which was both carnal and spiritual, in the unity of Elohim (God) and of yourselves. Grace to you, mercy, peace, patience, always.
13.  I salute the households of my brethren with their wives and children, and the virgins who are called widows. I bid you farewell in the power of the Father. Philo, who is with me, saluteth you. I salute the household of Gavia, and I pray that she may be grounded in faith and love both of flesh and of spirit. I salute Alce, a name very dear to me, and Daphnus the incomparable, and Eutecnus, and all by name. Fare ye well in the grace of Elohim (God). 160 EPISTLE OF 8. IGNATIUS


# The Epistle of S. Ignatius to S. Polycarp

# Chapter 1

1.  Welcoming thy godly mind which is grounded as it were on an immovable rock, I give exceeding glory that it hath been vouchsafed me to see thy blameless face, whereof I would fain have joy in Elohim (God). I exhort thee in the grace wherewith thou art clothed to press forward in thy course and to exhort all men that they may be saved. Vindicate thine office in all diligence of flesh and of spirit. Have a care for union, than which there is nothing better. Bear all men, as the Yahuah (Lord) also beareth thee. Suffer all men in love, as also thou doest. Give thyself to unceasing prayers. Ask for larger wisdom than thou hast. Be watchful, and keep thy spirit from slumbering. Speak to each man. severally after the manner of Elohim (God). Bear the maladies of all, as a perfect athlete. Where there is more toil, there is much gain.
2.  If thou lovest good scholars, this is not thankworthy in thee. Rather bring the more pestilent to submission by gentleness. All wounds are not healed by the same salve. Allay sharp pains by fomen- tations. Ze thou prudent as the serPent in all things avd guzleless always as the dove. Therefore art thou made of flesh and spirit, that thou mayest humour the things which appear before thine eyes; and as for the invisible things, pray thou that they may be revealed unto thee; that thou mayest be lacking in nothing, but mayest abound in every spiritual gift. ‘The season requireth thee, as pilots require winds or as a storm-tossed mariner a haven, that it may attain unto Elohim (God). Be sober, as Elohim's (God’s) athlete. The prize is incorruption and life eternal, concerning which thou also art persuaded. In all things I am devoted to thee—I and my bonds which thou didst cherish.
3.  Let not those that seem to be plausible and yet teach strange doctrine dismay thee. Stand thou firm, as an anvil when it is smitten. It is the part of a great athlete to receive blows and be victorious. But especially must we for Elohim's (God’s) sake endure all things, that He also may endure us. Be thou more diligent than thou art. Mark the seasons. TO ss, PBOLYCARP: 161 Await Him that is above every season, the Eternal, the Invisible, who became visible for our sake, the Impalpable, the Impassible, who suf- fered for our sake, who endured in all ways for our sake.
4.  Let not widows be neglected. After the Yahuah (Lord) be thou their protector. Let nothing be done without thy consent; neither do thou anything without the consent of Elohim (God), as indeed thou doest not. Be stedfast. Let meetings be held more frequently. Seek out all men by name. Despise not slaves, whether men or women. Yet let not these again be puffed up, but let them serve the more faithfully to the glory of Elohim (God), that they may obtain a better freedom from Elohim (God). Let them not desire to be set free at the public cost, lest they be found slaves of lust.
5.  Flee evil arts, or rather hold thou discourse about these. Tell my sisters to love the Yahuah (Lord) and to be content with their husbands in flesh and in spirit. In like manner also charge my brothers in the name of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) to love their wives, as the Yahuah (Lord) loved the Church. If any one is able to abide in chastity to the honour of the flesh of the Yahuah (Lord), let him so abide without boasting. If he boast, he is lost; and if it be known beyond the bishop, he is polluted. It becometh men and women too, when they marry, to unite themselves with the consent of the bishop, that the marriage may be after the Yahuah (Lord) and not after concupiscence. Let all things be done to the honour of Elohim (God).
6.  Give ye heed to the bishop, that Elohim (God) also may give heed to you. I am devoted to those who are subject to the bishop, the presbyters, the deacons. May it be granted me to have my portion with them in the presence of Elohim (God). Toil together one with another, struggle to- gether, run together, suffer together, lie down together, rise up together, as Elohim's (God’s) stewards and assessors and ministers. Please the Captain in whose army ye serve, from whom also ye will receive your pay. Let none of you be found a deserter. Let your baptism abide with you as your shield; your faith as your helmet; your love as your spear; your patience as your body armour. Let your works be your deposits, that ye may receive your assets due to you. Be ye therefore long-suffering one with another in gentleness, as Elohim (God) is with you. May I have joy of you always.
7.  Seeing that the church which is in Antioch of Syria hath peace, as it hath been reported to me, through your prayers, I myself also have been the more comforted since Elohim (God) hath banished my care; if so be I may through suffering attain unto Elohim (God), that I may be found a disciple AP. FATH. UE 162 S. IGNATIUS TO 8. POLYCARP. through your intercession. It becometh thee, most blessed Polycarp, to call together a godly council and to elect some one among you who is very dear to you and zealous also, who shall be fit to bear the name of Elohim's (God’s) courier—to appoint him, I say, that he may go to Syria and glorify your zealous love unto the glory of Elohim (God). A Christian hath no authority over himself, but giveth his time to Elohim (God). This is Elohim's (God’s) work, and yours also, when ye shall complete it: for I trust in the Divine grace, that ye are ready for an act of well-doing which is meet for Elohim (God). Knowing the fervour of your sincerity, I have exhorted you in a short letter.
8.  Since I have not been able to write to all the churches, by reason of my sailing suddenly from Troas to Neapolis, as the Divine will enjoineth, thou shalt write to the churches in front, as one possess- ing the mind of Elohim (God), to the intent that they also may do this same thing—let those who are able send messengers, and the rest letters by the persons who are sent by thee, that ye may be glorified by an ever memorable deed—for this is worthy of thee. I salute all by name, and especially the wife of Epitropus with her whole household and her children’s. I salute Attalus my beloved. I salute him that shall be appointed to go to Syria. Grace shall be with him always, and with Polycarp who sendeth him. I bid you farewell always in our Elohim (God) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), in whom abide ye in the unity and supervision of Elohim (God). I salute Alce, a name very dear to me. Fare ye well in the Yahuah (Lord). EP PIS) TB Or = POLVYCARP. II—2 mae EPISTLE OF 5S. POLYCARP., i HE Epistle of Polycarp was written in reply to a communication from the Philippians. They had invited him to address words of exhortation to them (§ 3); they had requested him to forward by his own messenger the letter which they had addressed to the Syrian Church (§ 13); and they had asked him to send them any epistles of Ignatius which he might have in his hands (Z2.). This epistle is intimately connected with the letters and martyrdom of Ignatius himself. The Philippians had recently welcomed and escorted on their way certain saints who were in bonds (§ 1). From a later notice in the epistle it appears that Ignatius was one of these (§ 9). Two others besides are mentioned by name, Zosimus and Rufus (7.). A not improbable conjecture makes these persons Bithy- nian Christians who had been sent by Pliny to Rome to be tried there and had joined Ignatius at Philippi. In this case they would be placed under the same escort with Ignatius, and proceed with him to Rome in the custody of the ‘ten leopards’ (Ign. Rom. 5). It is clear that Ignatius—probably by word of mouth—had given to the Philippians the same injunction which he gave to the churches generally (Phz/ad. 10, Smyrn. 11, Folyc. 7), that they should send letters, and (where possible) representatives also, to congratulate the Church of Antioch on the restoration of peace. Hence the request of the Philippians, seconded by Ignatius himself, that Polycarp would forward their letter to Syria. It is plain likewise, that they had heard, either from Ignatius himself or from those about him, of the epistles which he had addressed to the Churches of Asia Minor, more especially to Smyrna. Hence their further petition that Polycarp would send them such of these letters as were in his possession. The visit of Ignatius had been 166 THE EPISTLE OF S. POLYCARP recent—so recent indeed, that Polycarp, though he assumes that the saint has suffered martyrdom, is yet without any certain knowledge of the fact. He therefore asks the Philippians, who are some stages nearer to Rome than Smyrna, to communicate to him any information which they may have received respecting the saint and his companions (§ 13). Beyond these references to Ignatius there is not much of personal matter in the letter. Polycarp refers to S. Paul’s communications with the Philippians, both written and oral (§§ 3, 11). He mentions the fame of the Philippian Church in the primitive days of the Gospel, and he congratulates them on sustaining their early reputation (§§ 1, 11). Incidentally he states that the Philippians were converted to the Gospel before the Smyrnzans (§ 11)—a statement which entirely accords with the notices of the two churches in the New Testament. The fair fame of the Philippian Church however had been sullied by the sin of one unworthy couple. Valens and his wife—the Ananias and Sapphira of the Philippian community—had been guilty of some act of greed, perhaps of fraud and dishonesty. Valens was one of their presbyters, and thus the church was more directly responsible for his crime. Polycarp expresses himself much grieved. Though the incident itself is only mentioned in one passage, it has plainly made a deep impression on him. The sin of avarice is denounced again and again in the body of the letter (§§ 2, 4, 6, 11). The letter is sent by the hand of one Crescens. The sister of Crescens also, who purposes visiting Philippi, is commended to them (§ 14). The authorities for the text are as follows. (1) GREEK Manuscripts (G). These are nine in number (Vaticanus 859 [v], Ottobonianus 348 [0], Florentinus Laur. vii. 21 [f], Parisiensis Graec. 937 [p], Casanatensis c. v. 14 [c], Theatinus [t], Meapolitanus Mus. Nat. 1. a. 17 [n], Salmasianus [s], Andrius [a]), and all belong to the same family, as appears from the fact that the Epistle of Polycarp runs on continuously into the Epistle of Barnabas without any break, the mutilated ending of Polycarp § 9 dzofavdvra xai & yas vzo being TO) THE PHILIPPIANS: 167 followed by the mutilated beginning of Barnabas § 5 tov Aacv tov Kar- vov «.t.A. Within this family however the mss fall into two subdi- visions: (1) vopf, all Mss in which the Epistle of Polycarp is attached to the pseudo-Ignatian letters; and (2) céva (to which we may probably add s), where it stands alone. In the first subdivision, off have no independent authority, being derived directly or indirectly from v. Of the two subdivisions the former is slightly superior to the latter. (2) Latin Version (L). In the earlier part of the epistle this version is sometimes useful for correcting the text of the extant Greek Mss ; for, though very paraphrastic, it was made from an older form of the Greek than these. But the two are closely allied, as appears from the fact that this version is always found in connexion with the Latin of the pseudo-Ignatian letters and seems to have been translated from the same volume which contained them. For the latter part of the epistle, from § 10 onward, it is the sole authority; with the exception of portions of § 12, which are preserved in Syriac in passages of Timotheus and Severus or elsewhere, and nearly the whole of § 13, which is given by Eusebius in his Lclestastical History. The mss of which collations have been made for this part either by myself or by others are nine in number (egimensis 81 [r], Trecensis 412 [t], Pari- siensis 1639, formerly Colbertinus 1039 [c], Bruxellensis 5510 [b], Oxon. Balholensis 229 [0], Palatinus 150 [p], Florentinus Laur. xxiii. 20 [f], Vindobonensis 1068 |v], Oxon. Magdalenensis 78 [m)). It will have been seen that, so far as regards the Greek and Latin Mss, the Epistle of Polycarp is closely connected with the Long Recen- sion of the Ignatian Epistles. This fact, if it had stood by itself, would have thrown some discredit on the integrity of the text. It might have been suspected that the same hand which interpolated the Ignatian Epistles had tampered with this also. But the internal evidence, and especially the allusiveness of the references to the Ignatian Epistles, is decisive in favour of its genuineness. As regards external evidence, not only does Irenzus, a pupil of Polycarp, allude to ‘the very adequate epistle of Polycarp written to the Philippians,’ but the quotations of Eusebius, Timotheus, and Severus, with the other Syriac fragments, are a highly important testimony. They show that, wherever we have opportunity of testing the text of the Greek and Latin copies, its general integrity is vindicated. AGSH. 24. 1 Pet. i. 8. Eph. ii. 8, 9- WORE ens. 1REB bes 10 t Pet. 1. 21. Acts x. 42. 2 Cor. iv. Iq. WPOS POIAITTMHZEIOXeS: TOATKAPIIO® kai of avy aité mpecBvtepoe TH EK- r lal lal Cn A Krnola Tod Ocod Th mapoixoven Pirimrovs Edeos vyiv Kat elpyvn Tapa Ocod travtoxpatopos Kai “Inood Xpuctov tov a € “ / ToTHPOS Nwov TANOUVOEN. a an ] rf I. Luveyapny viv peyaros év Kupio nudv ‘Inood lal ’ A fal , Xpiotd, SeEapévors Ta pyunpata THs adnOods ayamns Kat / c ’ / id lal \ > / al mpoTrémpaciw, ws éméBarev vpiv, Tovs évetAnpévous Tots id / al tf / b] i lal 5 lol ayloTpeTréawv Secpois, atia éotiw Siadnpata Tov adnOas vo Ocod cal tod Kupiov nudyv éxredeypévov™ 2. Kal OTL 7H / lal / ¢€ a cs 3 , / / BeBaia THs Tictews vor pila, €€ apyaiwv KatayyedopEery xXpovev, wéexpe viv Svapéver Kal Kaprrodopet eis Tov Kipuov nav “Incody Xpiotov, Os vréuewev vTEép TOY apapTL@v nov €ws Oavatov KatavTnoat, ON Hreipen 0 Oedc AYcac TAC @AINAC TOY AdOy* 3. EIC ON OYK IAONTEC THICTEYETE YAPA ANEKAD- AHT@ Kal AEAOZACMENH Els HY TOAAOL érLOUpodow eicedOelr, ’ , ef ' Li a u > >? ey] > Ls f ELOOTES OTL YAPITI ECTE CECWCMENOI, OYK €Z EPTWN, AANA OeAnpate Ocod dia “Inoov Xpiotov. II. Aid anazwcdmenol Tac dchyac AoyAeycate TH Oew > ' ’ , \ EN @OBW Kal adnOelia, atroduTOVTES THY KEYnY jmaTato- Aoylav Kal THY TOV TOANRGY TAAVYHV, TICTEYCANTEC EIC TON ETEIPANTA TON KypioN HMODN ‘IHcoYN XpiCTON €K NEKPON KAI AONTA > nr Is \ / > Lol +) a. e e A \ ‘ AYT@ AOZAN Kai Opovoy éx SeEtov avTOv & UTEeTayn Ta TaVTa €moupavia Kal eriyela, & Taoa Tvon NaTpevel, Os EpyeTat \ U ‘ a & \ e 3 / € \ b] \ KPITHC ZHNT@N KAl NEKPON, OU TO alua éexEntnoer 6 Oeds aro Tov aTeOovrvT@Y avT@. 2. 0 A€ Erelpac avTov ex VEKP@V Kal v] TO THE PHILIPPIANS. 169 € a > AN A ? A \ VA \ / BI Him&c Erepel, €av Trov@uev avTov TO OéAnpua Kai Tropevepea év tais évToNais avTov Kal ayaTOpuev a nYyaTnoeEV, aTrexyopevor mTaons adikias, TAeoveEias, Pudapyupias, KaTadadas, Wevoo- poaptuplas’ MH ATTOAIAONTEC KAKON ANTI KAKOY H AOIAOPIAN ANTI Aoidopiac 7) ypovOov avti ypovOou 7 KaTdpay avti Katapas,
3.  pvnuovevovtes Sé by eltrev 6 Kupios didacKwy' MH KpineTe, ina MH KpIOATE’ AdieTe, Kal AdeOHceTal YMIN’ EAeATE, TNA EACH- OATe’ G METP@ METPEITE, ANTIMETPHOHCETAl YMIN’ Kal OTL MAKA- PIO! Ol TITWYO! Kal O1 AIWKGMENO! ENEKEN AIKAIOCYNHC, OT! AYTON €cTIN H BaciAela TOY Oeoy. III. Tadra, aderdoi, ovk euavt@ émitpéras ypadw viv \ A f > , 3 XN c al / / Tept THS SiKalocvYNS, GAN errEL VuEls TpoEeTTeKareaac OE jE. v AN > \ ” ” (vA > \ ‘
2.  oUTE yap éy@ ovTE GANS Gpmotos Ewot SVvaTaL KaTaKOXOv- fal lal / a / Nia / / a Ojcat TH copia Tov paxapiov Kai évdokou IavXov, ds yevo- pevos ev Vuiv KaTa TpOcwTOV TaY ToTE avOpoTwV édidakev akpiBas Kai BeBaiws Tov Tept adnOeias Aoyov, Os Kal aTrav ¢ al BA > / ’ a Sy ’ , , vp éyparrev etic TONas, els As éay éeyx’TrTnTe, SuvnOnoeaOe oixodopetabar eis THY Sobcicay viv ict’ 3. tHTIC écTIN MHTHP TIANTON HMON, €7raKoNouVovans THs €AmlOos, Tpoaryou- A ’ / A > \ \ \ SN , x ons THS ayarns THs els Oedv nai Xpiotov Kat eis Tov / >\ / / > \ > / b] \ TANTLOV. EAV Yap TLS TOUTWY EVTOS 7, TETANPWKEV EVTOAHV dikatoovyns’ 6 yap éxwov ayaTny pwaKkpay éoTLy Tacns awap- TLas. ITV. “ApyH Ae ANTON YAAETION CpiAaprypia. Eld0TES OvV OTL OYAEN EICHNETKAMEN €IC TON KOCMON, dAN OYAE EZENELKEIN TI EYOMEN, OTTALT@pe0a Tols bTAOLS THS StKaLocvYNS Kal Sida~éw- fev EavTovs mpaTov TropevecOar ev TH évtOAH TOD Kupiov'
2.  émeita Kal Tas yuvaikas vuav év TH b00cion avtais TicTeEL N 3 / \ e / , \ e a v ’ Kal ayaTn Kal ayvela, oTEpyovcas Tos éEavT@Y avdpas év Tac aN Q / x ’ , / 2& yy > / > n adnbeia Kat ayaTooas Tavtas €& icou év Tacn éyKpa- 7 AN \ / , \ / a) , a TELA, KAL TA Téxva TraldeveLy THY TraLdeiav TOD PoBou Tov a. \ , rn ®cod" 3. tas ynpas cwdpovaveas Tepl THv ToD Kupiou rictw, 3 , ’ evTuyxavovcas adiadeimTws Tepl TavTwV, paKkpav ovaas U na A / Taons OvaBonrjs, KaTadadias, Wevdouaptupias, dirapyuplas, I Pet. iii. 9, S.Matt.vil. I, 2. S. Luke vi. 36—38. S. Matt. v. 2510: Gal. iv. 26. 1 Tim. vi. in iikek 1 Cor. xiv.
25.  Gal. vi. 7. S. Markix. 35> 2 Tim. il. 12. 1 Pet. ii.11. Gal. v. 17. 1 Cor. vi. Q, 10. Ezek. XXXIV. 4. 2 Cor. Vili.
21.  Rom. xiv. IO, 12. 170 THE EPISTLE OF S. POLYCARP [iv la) a / rat Kal TaVTOS KAKOD' ywwoKovaas OTL elot OvctacTnpiov Oeod, IN Gd , a ‘ ls Soe Joe ” KQL OTL TAVTA MLWLOCKOTTELTAL, KAL AéANOev avTov ovdEev OvTE Aoyicwav oUTE EvVOLDV, OVTE TL TON KPYTITON TAC KAPAIAc. ' ‘.) V. Elédores ody ore Oedc oY myKTHPpIzEeTal, opelAopev akiws lal b] Lal bl] la) \ / lal € / U THs evTOAHS avTod Kal SdoEns TepiTaTeiv. 2. dpolws SvaKovot “ , ¢ Gpeymrro. KaTevorioy avtod THs SiKavoovyys, ws Deod Kai fa! > ‘ / Xpiotod Svaxovot, kai ove avOpoTav' pn SiaBorot, wy Si- a U by Roryor, adirapyupor, éeyKpateis epi Tavta, evoTrAyXVOL, , tal , \ ‘ ’ / 4 / aA CTLeNELS, Tropevomevot KaTa THY adnOevay Tov Kupiov, ds , ' ’ Ui tal fol éyéveTo MAKONOC TIANTON' @ €ay EeVapEeTTNTMpEV EV TO VOV id / aid, amodnyoueba Kal Tov pédXovta, Kabds vTéaxeETO r Lal Lal ‘ nmiv eyetpar nds ex vexpadv Kat Ott, édav TrodtTevowpeba a A / a&iws avTod, Kal CYMBACIAEYCOMEN aUT@, El'ye TeLoTEvOpeED. \ \ 3. Omolws Kal vedTEpoL AwEeTrToL ev Tac, TPO TaYTOS Tpo- a 4 lal 2) A ‘ voouvTes ayvelas Kal yadWwaywyodrTEs EavTOVS ATO TaVTOS Kakov. KaA0v yap TO avaxoTTecOat ato Tov émLOuvpLoY Ev. TO KOTMM, OTL TATA ETOBYMIA KATA TOY TINEYMATOC CTPATEYETAl, Kal OYTE TIOPNO! OYTE MAAAKO! OYTE APCENOKOITAI BaciA€lAaN Oeoy KAHPONOMHCOYCIN, OUTE Of TroLoDYTES TA AToTTa. 510 Séov aTé- yecOat avo TavTwY TOVTwY, VTOTATTOpEevoUs TOis mpecBuTE- \ / ¢ al A A A , b) pois Kal dvaxovois ws Oc@ Kai Xpictd: tas wapHEevovs év , f \ ¢. r f a apou@ Kal ayvy cvverdnoe: TepiTateiv. VI. Kai of wpecBvtepor Sé evorrAayyxvol, eis TavTas EXENMOVES, ETIICTPEPONTEC TA ATIOTIETIAANHMENA, 7 Lo KET TOMEVOL ’ a lo) an Nf TavTas acbeveis, un apedovvTes ynpas 7) dphavod } TévyTos, GNNG TIPONOOFNTEC AEl TOY KAAOY ENWTION OEof Kal ANOPWTTOON, 3 ' / ’ A / , be) / dmeyopmevol TAaONS Opyns, TpotwTorAnrias, Kpicews adiKov, paxpay ovtTes Taons pidapyuplas, wn Tayéws TLoTEvVoYTES / ’ KATA TLWOS, £1 ATrOTOMOL ev KpioeEL, ELOOTES OTL TraVTES OdeEL- 7, fal éTar eopev awapTias. 2. ei otyv Seduefa Tod Kupiov wa ¢ lol bi A ° / . ¢ na 2) / , , ‘ rn nuiv apn, opelopev Kat nuets adtevaty amevayvTs yap TwV A > A ' an tov Kupiov nai Qed éopev ofParpor, kai mdntac det Tapa- cTANA! TG) BHMaTI TOY XpicToY, Kal EkacTON ytrep EayTOY AdFON a f > , SA A Aofnal. 3. ovTws ovv SovrAEVTwWpEV a’Tw® peTAa PoBov Kal Ix] TO THE PHILIPPIANS. rit maons evAaBeias, Kabds avTos éveteihaTo Kal oi evayyedoa- ¢€ > / \ € lal € UJ PEvOL NAS aTrocTONOL Kai ol TpopHTat ot TpoKnpvéavTes Thv édXevowv Tod Kuplov nudv, &yrwtal epi TO KadOv, aTre- xomevot THY cKavdadwv Kal THY YrevdabéAdwv Kal TaV év ¢ U f Lt ee! a , ivf > UmoKpice hepovT@y TO dvowa Tov Kupiov, oitiwes amromXa- vOow Kevovs avOpwrrovs. VII. ds yap, dc &N mH OmoAorH “lHcoYN XpicTON €N CapKi 1 John iv. 2 ' Saran Tere Nvhac Wala RG At, eS 2, 3. EAHAYOENAI, ANTIYPICTOC ECTIN. KAL OS AV pn OMOoOYH TO wap- , A a b] a / b] / ReieN x TUpLov TOD oTavpod, ex Tod SiaBOAov EoTiv: Kai ds av pweGo- devn Ta Aoyra Tod Kupiov mpos tas idlas ériOupias, Kal éyes pte avactacw pte Kplow, obTOS TpwTOTOKOS ETL A a \ ’ / \ / fal tov Yatavad. 2. S16 aroduTOvTEs THY MaTALOTNTA TOY TON- al ’ a Ch Nav Kal Tas xevdodidacKanrlas eri tov €& apyns nulv Tapa- do0évta RAoyov émictpéyrmpev, NHONTEC TIPOC TAC EYYAC Kal 1 Pet. iv. 7. TporKapTepovvTes vnoTElass, Senoeow aiTovpevot TOV TavT- emoT7Tnv Oedv MH EICENEPKEIN HMAC EIC TIEIPACMON, KAOds eEt7reV S. Matt. vi. 6 Kupios: TO MEN TINEYMA TIPGBYMON, H Aé cApzZ ACOENHC a ptos YMA TIPOOYMON, pz a S. Matt. VIII. “Adsareirtws oty mpockaptepdpev TH éArib« ne nav Kal TO appaBave THs Sixavocvyns nuov, bs éoTL xiv. 38. Xpiotos “Inoods, 6c aNHNErKEN HM@N TAC AMaPTIAC TO iAdia x Pet. ii, ’ , a c ' ’ chur 22, 24- CMMATI €TTl TO ZYAON, OC AMAPTIAN OYK ETTOIHCEN, OYAE EYPEOH ‘ > “ U > ~ > \ >’ e A iv / ’ AGAOC EN TG cTOMATI aYTOY- GAA Se’ Aas, va Enowpev ev ? a > / A ¢ AUTO, TAaVTA VTréuewvey. 2. puyunTal ovv yevopmeOa THs VTFO- A > A Me / \ NL, ’ A / povns [avrod|: Kal édv macyaper bia TO ovoya avtod, So€a- Cwpey avtov. tTovTov yap nuly Tov vrroypaypov One bv EaUTOU, Kal Nmels TOUTO émLoTEevoaper. A Ge / ¢ A a A / IX. T[apaxare ody travtas vas TrePapyeiv TH Oye THs Sixavocvvys Kal aoKely TWacay Vropovnyv, nv Kal eldaTe eae \ > > a / ? M4 \ Kat opParpovs ov povov év Tots pakapiois ‘Iyvatio Kai 4 A A Zocip@ cat “Povde, adda cal év addos Tots €E Vudy Kal év > A lal nr avT@ lav Kal tots ANovrrois atrocToXoLs: 2. TrEeTELTMEVOUS, OTL ovTOL TayTEs OYK EIC KENON EAPAMON, GAN’ €v TioTeL Kal Phil. ii. 16. Sixatocvvyn, Kat btu eis Tov dhetdopevov avTots ToTov eicl \ fel an U . . tmapa T® Kupiw, 6 kal cuvérrafov. ov ydp TON NYN HratTH- 2 Tim. iv. 10. [72 THE EPISTLE OF S. POLYCARP [1x cal ¢ a CAN AIMNA, GANG TOV UITép NuaV aTroBavorTa Kai Sv nds UT la lal >) / tov @cov avactaytTa. 1 Cor. xv. X. In his ergo state et Domini exemplar sequimini, Be firmi in fide et tmmutabiles, fraternitatis amatores diligentes eee invicem, in veritate sociati, mansuetudinem Domini a/terutri 10 praestolantes, nullum despicientes. 2. Cum potestis bene- me " facere, nolite differre, quia Eleemosyna de morte liberat. Tobit iv. a Omnes vobis invicem subiecti estote, conversationem vestram Eph. v.21. irreprehensibilem Labentes in gentibus, ut ex bonis operibus Li " vestris et vos laudem accipiatis et Dominus in vobis non Ign. Zrall. blasphemetur. 3. Vae autem fer quem nomen Domini é blasphematur. Sobrietatem ergo docete omnes, in qua et vos conversamini. XI. Nimis contristatus sum pro Valente, qui presbyter factus est aliquando apud vos, quod sic ignoret is locum qui datus est ei. Moneo itaque vos, ut abstineatis vos ab avaritia et sitis casti veraces. Abstinete vos ab omni malo. 2. Qui autem non potest se in his gubernare, quo- modo alii pronuntiat hoc? Si quis non se abstinuerit ab avaritia, ab idololatria coinquinabitur, et tanquam inter Jer.v. 4. gentes iudicabitur, qui zguorant tudicium Domini. Aut TCOrnVL2 noscimus, quia sancti mundum iudicabunt? sicut Paulus docet. 3. Ego autem nihil tale sensi in vobis vel audivi, in quibus laboravit beatus Paulus, qui estis in principio 2Cor.iii.2. epistulae eius: de vobis etenim gloriatur in omnibus ecclesiis, dehines * quae solae tunc Dominum cognoverant ; nos autem non- dum cognoveramus. 4. Valde ergo, fratres, contristor pro illo et pro coniuge eius, quibus det Dominus poenitentiam 2Thess. veram. Sobrii ergo estote et vos in hoc; et non sicut a aig mmimicos tales extstimetis, sed sicut passibilia membra et errantia eos revocate, ut omnium vestrum corpus salvetis. Hoc enim agentes, vos ipsos aedificatis. XII. Confido enim vos bene exercitatos esse in sacris literis, et nihil vos latet; mihi autem non est concessum. x1v] TO THE PHILIPPIANS. 173 Modo, ut his scripturis dictum est, Jrascimini et nolite peccare, et Sol non occidat super tracundiam vestram. Beatus, qui meminerit; quod ego credo esse in vobis. 2. Deus autem et pater Domini nostri Jesu Christi et ipse sempiternus pontifex, Dei filius Yahusha (Jesus) Christus, aedificet vos in fide et veritate et in omni mansuetudine et sine iracundia et in patientia et in longanimitate et tolerantia et castitate; et det vobis sortem et partem inter sanctos suos, et nobis vobiscum, et omnibus qui sunt sub caelo, qui credituri sunt in Dominum nostrum et Deum Jesum Christum et in ipsius patrem quz resuscitavit eum a mortuts. 3. Pro omnibus sanctis orate. Orate etiam pro regibus et potestatibus et principibus atque pro persequentibus et odientibus vos et pro zuimucis crucis, ut fructus vester mantifestus sit in omnibus, ut sitis in illo perfecti. XIII. “Eypawaré pou cal vpets nal “Tyvarios tva, éav Ts amépyntar eis Lupiay, kal Ta Tap’ vuav atoKomlon ypaupata: o7rep Troinow, éav AaBw Kaipov evOeTor, elte eyo elite Ov Téa tpecBevoovta Kal mept budy. 2. Tas érrt- otonas ‘lyvatiov Tas Teudbeicas piv br avtod, Kal ddXas daas elyouev Trap Hiv, éméurrapev vuiv, Kabds évetetiacbe: airwes vtroteTaypévat eiol TH emicTOAH TavTy’ €& OY peyada opernOnvar Svvncecbe. Tepiéyovat yap That Kal vrromo- vv Kak Tacav oiKobopny THY eis TOY Kipcov jay avijKovear. et de ipso Ignatio et de his qui cum eo sunt, quod certius agnoveritis, significate. XIV. Haec vobis scripsi per Crescentem, quem in praesenti commendavi vobis, et nunc commendo: con- versatus est enim nobiscum inculpabiliter, credo autem quia et vobiscum similiter. Sororem autem eius habebitis commendatam, cum venerit ad vos. Incolumes estote in Domino Jesu Christo in gratia cum omnibus vestris. Amen. xii. 2 Dei filius] L (but add ecus rpmf); Deus Tim. Sey. PSaVarse Eph. iv. 26. Gal. i. 1. Eph.vi. 18. Limite 2 Matt. v. Phili 1.18. © elim ive 15. TRANSLATION OF THE Peto DLE, OF S..POLYCARE.


# The Martyrdom of S. Polycarp

# Chapter 1

1.  We write unto you, brethren, an account of what befel those that suffered martyrdom and especially the blessed Polycarp, who stayed the persecution, having as it were set his seal upon it by his martyrdom. For nearly all the foregoing events came to pass that the Yahuah (Lord) might show us once more an example of martyrdom which is conformable to the Gospel. For he lingered that he might be delivered up, even as the Yahuah (Lord) did, to the end that we too might be imitators of him, ot looking only to that which concerneth ourselves, but also to that which concerneth our neighbours. For it is the office of true and stedfast love, not only to desire that oneself be saved, but all the brethren also.
2.  Blessed therefore and noble are all the martyrdoms which have taken place according to the will of Elohim (God) (for it behoveth us to be very scrupulous and to assign to Elohim (God) the power over all things). For who could fail to admire their nobleness and patient endurance and loyalty to the Master? seeing that when they were so torn by lashes that the mechanism of their flesh was visible even as far as the inward veins-and arteries, they endured patiently, so that the very bystanders had pity and wept; while they themselves reached such a pitch of bravery that none of them uttered a cry or a groan, thus showing to us all that at that hour the martyrs of Messiah (Christ) being tortured were absent from the flesh, or rather that the Yahuah (Lord) was standing by and conversing with them. And giving heed unto the grace of Messiah (Christ) they despised the tortures of 204 THE LETTER OF THE SMYRNEANS this world, purchasing at the cost of one hour a release from eternal punishment. And they found the fire of their inhuman torturers cold : for they set before their eyes the escape from the eternal fire which is never quenched ; while with the eyes of their heart they gazed upon the good things which are reserved for those that endure patiently, things which neither ear hath heard nor eye hath seen, neither have they entered into the heart of man, but were shown by the Yahuah (Lord) to them, for they were no longer men but angels already. And in like manner also those that were condemned to the wild beasts endured fearful punishments, being made to lie on sharp shells and buffeted with other forms of manifold tortures, that the devil might, if possible, by the persistence of the punishment bring them to a denial; for he tried many wiles against them.
3.  But thanks be to Elohim (God); for He verily prevailed against all. For the right noble Germanicus encouraged their timorousness through the constancy which was in him; and he fought with the wild beasts in a signal way. For when the proconsul wished to prevail upon him and bade him have pity on his youth, he used violence and dragged the wild beast towards him, desiring the more speedily to obtain a release from their unrighteous and lawless life. So after this all the multitude, marvelling at the bravery of the Elohim (God)-beloved and Elohim (God)-fearing people of the Christians, raised a cry, ‘Away with the atheists; let search be made for Polycarp.’
4.  But one man, Quintus by name, a Phrygian newly arrived from Phrygia, when he saw the wild beasts, turned coward. Heit was who had forced himself and some others to come forward of their own free will. This man the proconsul by much entreaty persuaded to swear the oath and to offer incense. For this cause therefore, brethren, we praise not those who deliver themselves up, since the Gospel doth not so teach us.
5.  Now the glorious Polycarp at the first, when he heard it, so far from being dismayed, was desirous of remaining in town; but the greater part persuaded him to withdraw. So he withdrew to a farm not far distant from the city ; and there he stayed with a few companions, doing nothing else night and day but praying for all men and for the churches throughout the world; for this was his constant habit. And while praying he falleth into a trance three days before his apprehension; and he saw his pillow burning with fire. And he turned and said unto those that were with him: ‘It must needs be that I shall be burned alive.’ ON THE MARTYRDOM OF S. POLYCARP. 205
6.  And as those that were in search of him persisted, he departed to another farm ; and forthwith they that were in search of him came up; and not finding him, they seized two slave lads, one of whom confessed under torture ; for it was impossible for him to lie concealed, seeing that the very persons who betrayed him were people of his own household. And the captain of the police, who chanced to have the very name, being called Herod, was eager to bring him into the stadium, that he himself might fulfil his appointed lot, being made a partaker with Messiah (Christ), while they—his betrayers—underwent the punishment of Judas himself.
7.  So taking the lad with them, on the Friday about the supper hour, the gendarmes and horsemen went forth with their accustomed arms, hastening as against a robber. And coming up in a body late in the evening, they found the man himself in bed in an upper chamber in a certain cottage; and though he might have departed thence to another place, he would not, saying, Zhe wll of Elohim (God) be done. So when he heard that they were come, he went down and conversed with them, the bystanders marvelling at his age and his constancy, and wondering how there should be so much eagerness for the apprehension of an old man like him. Thereupon forthwith he gave orders that a table should be spread for them to eat and drink at that hour, as much as they desired. And he persuaded them to grant him an hour that he might pray unmolested; and on their consenting, he stood up and prayed, being so full of the grace of Elohim (God), that for two hours he could not hold his peace, and those that heard were amazed, and many repented that they had come against such a venerable old man.
8.  But when at length he brought his prayer to an end, after remembering all who at any time had come in his way, small and great, high and low, and all the universal Church throughout the world, the hour of departure being come, they seated him on an ass and brought him into the city, it being a high sabbath. And he was met by Herod the captain of police and his father Nicetes, who also removed him to their carriage and tried to prevail upon him, seating themselves by his side and saying, ‘ Why what harm is there in saying, Czesar is Yahuah (Lord), and offering incense’, with more to this effect, ‘and saving thyself?’ But he at first gave them no answer. When however they persisted, he said, ‘I am not going to do what ye counsel me.’ Then they, failing to persuade him, uttered threatening words and made him dismount with speed, so that he bruised his shin, as he got down from the carriage. 206 THE LETTER OF THE SMYRNA‘ANS And without even turning round, he went on his way promptly and with speed, as if nothing had happened to him, being taken to the stadium ; there being such a tumult in the stadium that no man’s voice could be so much as heard. g. But as Polycarp entered into the stadium, a voice came to him from heaven ; ‘ Be strong, Polycarp, and play the man.’ And no one saw the speaker, but those of our people who were present heard the voice. And at length, when he was brought up, there was a great tumult, for they heard that Polycarp had been apprehended. When then he was brought before him, the proconsul enquired whether he were the man. And on his confessing that he was, he tried to persuade him to a denial saying, ‘ Have respect to thine age,’ and other things in accordance therewith, as it is their wont to say; ‘Swear by the genius of Cesar; repent and say, Away with the atheists.’ Then Polycarp with solemn countenance looked upon the whole multitude of lawless heathen that were in the stadium, and waved his hand to them; and groaning and looking up to heaven he said, ‘Away with the atheists.’ But when the magistrate pressed him hard and said, ‘Swear the oath, and I will release thee; revile the Messiah (Christ),’ Polycarp said, ‘Fourscore and six years have I been His servant, and He hath done me no wrong. How then can I blaspheme my King who saved me?’ ro. But on his persisting again and saying, ‘Swear by the genius of Czesar,’ he answered, ‘If thou supposest vainly that I will swear by the genius of Cesar, as thou sayest, and feignest that thou art ignorant who I am, hear thou plainly, I am a Christian. But if thou wouldest learn the doctrine of Christianity, assign a day and give me a hearing.’ The proconsul said; ‘Prevail upon the people.’ But Polycarp said; ‘As for thyself, I should have held thee worthy of discourse ; for we have been taught to render, as is meet, to princes and authorities ap- pointed by Elohim (God) such honour as does us no harm; but as for these, I do not hold them worthy, that I should defend myself before them.’ 11, Whereupon the proconsul said; ‘I have wild beasts here and I will throw thee to them, except thou repent.’ But he said, ‘Call for them: for the repentance from better to worse is a change not per- mitted to us; but it is a noble thing to change from untowardness to righteousness.’ Then he said to him again, ‘I will cause thee to be consumed by fire, if thou despisest the wild beasts, unless thou repent.’ But Polycarp said; ‘Thou threatenest that fire which burneth for a season and after a little while is quenched : for thou art ignorant of the ON THE MARTYRDOM OF S. POLYCARP. 207 fire of the future judgment and eternal punishment, which is reserved for the ungodly. But why delayest thou? Come, do what thou wilt.’
12.  Saying these things and more besides, he was inspired with courage and joy, and his countenance was filled with grace, so that not only did it not drop in dismay at the things which were said to him, but on the contrary the proconsul was astounded and sent his own herald to proclaim three times in the midst of the stadium, ‘ Polycarp hath confessed himself to be a Christian.’ When this was proclaimed by the herald, the whole multitude both of Gentiles and of Yahudim (Jews) who dwelt in Smyrna cried out with ungovernable wrath and with a loud shout, ‘This is the teacher of Asia, the father of the Christians, the puller down of our gods, who teacheth numbers not to sacrifice nor worship.’ Saying these things, they shouted aloud and asked the Asiarch Philip to let a lion loose upon Polycarp. But he said that it was not lawful for him, since he had brought the sports to a close. Then they thought fit to shout out with one accord that Polycarp should be burned alive. For it must needs be that the matter of the vision should be fulfilled, which was shown him concerning his pillow, when he saw it on fire while praying, and turning round he said prophetically to the faithful who were with him, ‘I must needs be bumed alive.’
13.  These things then happened with so great speed, quicker than words could tell, the crowds forthwith collecting from the workshops and baths timber and faggots, and the Yahudim (Jews) more especially assisting in this with zeal, as is their wont. But when the pile was made ready, divesting himself of all his upper garments and loosing his girdle, he endeavoured also to take off his shoes, though not in the habit of doing this before, because all the faithful at all times vied eagerly who should soonest touch his flesh. For he had been treated with all honour for his holy life even before his gray hairs came. Forthwith then the instruments that were prepared for the pile were placed about him; and as they were going likewise to nail him to the stake, he said; ‘Leave me as I am ; for He that hath granted me to endure the fire will grant me also to remain at the pile unmoved, even without the security which ye seek from the nails.’
14.  So they did not nail him, but tied him. Then he, placing his hands behind him and being bound to the stake, like a noble ram out of a great flock for an offering, a burnt sacrifice made ready and ac- ceptable to Elohim (God), looking up to heaven said; ‘O Yahuah Elohim (LORD God) Almighty, 208 THE LETTER OF THE SMYRNAZZANS the Father of Thy beloved and blessed Son Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), through whom we have received the knowledge of Thee, the Elohim (God) of angels and powers and of all creation and of the whole race of the righteous, who live in Thy presence; I bless Thee for that Thou hast granted me this day and hour, that I might receive a portion amongst the number of martyrs in the cup of [Thy] Messiah (Christ) unto resurrection of eternal life, both of soul and of body, in the incorruptibility of the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit). May I be received among these in Thy presence this day, as a rich and acceptable sacrifice, as Thou didst prepare and reveal it beforehand, and hast accomplished it, Thou that art the faithful and true Elohim (God). For this cause, yea and for all things, I praise Thee, I bless Thee, I glorify Thee, through the eternal and heavenly High-priest, Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), Thy beloved Son, through whom with Him and the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) be glory both now [and ever] and for the ages to come. Amen,’
15.  When he had offered up the Amen and finished his prayer, the firemen lighted the fire. And, a mighty flame flashing forth, we to whom it was given to see, saw a marvel, yea and we were preserved that we might relate to the rest what happened. The fire, making the appearance of a vault, like the sail of a vessel filled by the wind, made a wall round about the body of the martyr; and it was there in the midst, not like flesh burning, but like [a loaf in the oven or like] gold and silver refined in a furnace. For we perceived such a fragrant smell, as if it were the wafted odour of frankincense or some other precious spice.
16.  So at length the lawless men, seeing that his body could not be consumed by the fire, ordered an executioner to go up to him and stab him with a dagger. And when he had done this, there came forth [a dove and] a quantity of blood, so that it extinguished the fire; and all the multitude marvelled that there should be so great a difference between the unbelievers and the elect. In the number of these was this man, the glorious martyr Polycarp, who was found an apostolic and prophetic teacher in our own time, a bishop of the holy Church which is in Smyrna. For every word which he uttered from his mouth was accomplished and will be accomplished.
17.  But the jealous and envious Evil One, the adversary of the family of the righteous, having seen the greatness of his martyrdom and his blameless life from the beginning, and how he was crowned with the crown of immortality and had won a reward which none could gainsay, managed that not even his poor body should be taken away ON THE MARTYRDOM OF S. POLYCARP. 209 by us, although many desired to do this and to touch his holy flesh. So he put forward Nicetes, the father of Herod and brother of Alce, to plead with the magistrate not to give up his body, ‘lest,’ so it was said, ‘they should abandon the crucified one and begin to worship this man’—this being done at the instigation and urgent entreaty of the Yahudim (Jews), who also watched when we were about to take it from the fire, not knowing that it will be impossible for us either to forsake at any time the Messiah (Christ) who suffered for the salvation of the whole world of those that are saved—suffered though faultless for sinners—nor to worship any other. For Him, being the Son of Elohim (God), we adore, but the martyrs as disciples and imitators of the Yahuah (Lord) we cherish as they deserve for their matchless affection towards their own King and Teacher. May it be our lot also to be found partakers and fellow- disciples with them.
18.  The centurion therefore, seeing the opposition raised on the part of the Yahudim (Jews), set him in the midst and burnt him after their custom. And so we afterwards took up his bones which are more valuable than precious stones and finer than refined gold, and laid them in a suitable place; where the Yahuah (Lord) will permit us to gather ourselves together, as we are able, in gladness and joy, and to celebrate the birth-day of his martyrdom for the commemoration of those that have already fought in the contest, and for the training and preparation of those that shall do so hereafter.
19.  So it befel the blessed Polycarp, who having with those from Philadelphia suffered martyrdom in Smyrna—twelve in all—is especially remembered more than the others by all men, so that he is talked of even by the heathen in every place: for he showed himself not only a notable teacher, but also a distinguished martyr, whose martyrdom all desire to imitate, seeing that it was after the pattern of the Gospel of Messiah (Christ). Having by his endurance overcome the unrighteous ruler in the conflict and so received the crown of immortality, he rejoiceth in company with the Apostles and all righteous men, and glorifieth the Almighty Elohim (God) and Father, and blesseth our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), the saviour of our souls and helmsman of our bodies and shepherd of the universal Church which is throughout the world.
20.  Ye indeed required that the things which happened should be shown unto you at greater length: but we for the present have certified you as it were in a summary through our brother Marcianus. When then ye have informed yourselves of these things, send the letter 210 THE LETTER OF THE SMYRNAFANS about likewise to the brethren which are farther off, that they also may glorify the Yahuah (Lord), who maketh election from His own servants. Now unto Him that is able to bring us all by His grace and bounty unto His eternal kingdom, through His only-begotten Son Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), be glory, honour, power, and greatness for ever. Salute all the saints. They that are with us salute you, and Euarestus, who wrote the letter, with his whole house.
21.  Now the blessed Polycarp was martyred on the second day of the first part of the month Xanthicus, on the seventh before the kalends of March, on a great sabbath, at the eighth hour. He was apprehended by Herodes, when Philip of Tralles was high-priest, in the proconsulship of Statius Quadratus, but in the reign of the Eternal King Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). To whom be the glory, honour, greatness, and eternal throne, from generation to generation. Amen.
22.  (1) We bid you Elohim (God) speed, brethren, while ye walk by the word of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) which is according to the Gospel; with whom be glory to Elohim (God) for the salvation of His holy elect; even as the blessed Polycarp suffered martyrdom, in whose footsteps may it be our lot to be found in the kingdom of Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ). (2) This account Gaius copied from the papers of Irenzus, a disciple of Polycarp. The same also lived with Irenzus. (3) And I Socrates wrote it down in Corinth from the copy of Gaius. Grace be with all men. (4) And I Pionius again wrote it down from the aforementioned copy, having searched it out (for the blessed Polycarp showed me in a revelation, as I will declare in the sequel), gathering it together when it was now well nigh worn out by age, that the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) may gather me also with His elect into His heavenly kingdom; to whom be the glory with the Father and the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) for ever and ever. Amen. The three preceding paragraphs as read in the Moscow MS. (2) This account Gaius copied from the papers of Ireneus. The same lived with Irenzeus who had been a disciple of the holy Polycarp. For this Irenzeus, being in Rome at the time of the martyrdom of the bishop Polycarp, instructed many; and many most excellent and orthodox treatises by him are in circulation. In these he makes ON THE MARTYRDOM OF S. POLYCARP. ZU mention of Polycarp, saying that he was taught by him. And he ably refuted every heresy, and handed down the catholic rule of the Church just as he had received it from the saint. He mentions this fact also, that when Marcion, after whom the Marcionites are called, met the holy Polycarp on one occasion, and said ‘Recognize us, Polycarp,’ he said in reply to Marcion, ‘Yes indeed, I recognize the firstborn of Satan.’ The following statement also is made in the writings of Irenzeus, that on the very day and hour when Polycarp was martyred in Smyrna Irenzeus being in the city of the Romans heard a voice as of a trumpet saying, ‘ Polycarp is martyred.’ (3) From these papers of Irenzus then, as has been stated al- ready, Gaius made a copy, and from the copy of Gaius Isocrates made another in Corinth. (4) And I Pionius again wrote it down from the copy of Isocrates, having searched for it in obedience to a revelation of the holy Polycarp, gathering it together, when it was well nigh worn out by age, that the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) may gather me also with His elect into His heavenly kingdom ; to whom be the glory with the Father and the Son and the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) for ever and ever. Amen. I4—2 rt Wi) hak DIDACHE, OR mEACHING OF THE APOSTLES. Ws { ite i ah 4 i ion) cub | Sa LT ite . AWA, Vey iy ANA Leo bun \ ’ ORIEN he (i MALE Vie) Nite ; mr CRE | \» | i {( hy \ ] x it i vit Wi ‘ h j } 4K by iy { ve ie TEACHING OF THE Pu ©) Sil). Je, To. I HE Didache is a church-manual of primitive Christianity or of some section of it. It is called ‘The Teaching of the Apostles’ or ‘The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles.’ The latter appears in the manuscript ; but the former is the designation in several ancient writers who refer to it. It is therefore adopted as the title here. The manual consists of two parts: (1) a moral treatise founded on an ancient work called ‘The Two Ways,’ and setting forth the paths of righteousness and unrighteousness, of life and death respectively. This first part is not necessarily altogether of Christian origin; indeed there is reason to believe that some portions of it were known to the Yahudim (Jews), and perhaps also to the Greeks, though it has undoubtedly gathered by accretions. (2) The second part gives directions affecting church rites and orders. It treats of baptism, prayer and fasting, the eucharist and agape, the treatment of apostles and prophets, of bishops and deacons, the whole closing with a solemn warning to watchfulness in view of the second coming of Messiah (Christ). The work is obviously of very early date, as is shown by the internal evidence of language and subject-matter. Thus for instance the itinerant prophetic order has not yet been displaced by the per- manent localized ministry, but exists side by side with it as in the lifetime of S. Paul (Eph. iv. 11, 1 Cor. xii. 28). Secondly, episcopacy has apparently not yet become universal; the word ‘bishop’ is still used as synonymous with ‘presbyter,’ and the writer therefore couples ‘bishops’ with ‘deacons’ (§ 15) as S. Paul does (x Tim. iii, 1—8, Phil. i. r) under similar circumstances. Thirdly, from the expression 216 THE TEACHING OF THE APOSTLES. in § 10 ‘after ye have been filled’ it appears that the agape still remains part of the Lord’s Supper. Lastly, the archaic simplicity of its practical suggestions is only consistent with the early infancy of a church. ‘These indications point to the first or the beginning of the second century as the date of the work in its present form. As regards the place of writing, opinion in the first instance had been strongly in favour of Egypt, because the Teaching was early quoted by Egyptian writers; but from the casual allusion in § g to the ‘corn scattered upon the mountains’ it will appear to have been written either in Syria or Palestine. The Didache was discovered by Bryennios in the same Ms with the complete copy of the Epistle of Clement mentioned above (p. 4) and called the Constantinopolitan or Hierosolymitan ms. Besides the Teaching and the Genuine and Spurious Epistles of Clement in full, this document contained Chrysostom’s Synopsis of the Old and New Testa- ment (incomplete), the Epistle of Barnabas, and the Long Recension of the Ignatian Epistles. The ms is dated a.D. 1056. But though a list of the contents of this document was announced by Bryennios in 1875, eight years elapsed before the Didache itself was published. Meanwhile, as a work of this name is mentioned by Eusebius and others among early apocryphal writings, a hope was excited in the minds of those interested in such studies that this might be the book alluded to, and that it would throw some light on the vexed question of the origin of the Apostolical Constitutions. When at length in 1883 it was given to the world, its interest and importance were proved to exceed the highest expectations. It has been generally admitted to be the work mentioned by Eusebius and also quoted by Clement of © Alexandria as ‘scripture.’ It is the basis of the seventh book of the Apostolical Constitutions. In language and subject-matter it presents close affinities to many other early documents, notably the Ecclesi- astical Canons and the Epistle of Barnabas. A fragment of a Latin translation has also been discovered by Gebhardt, and is printed below (p. 225). Thus though there is but one extant Ms of the Didache in its present form, the incorporation of a great part of it into patristic writings and early church-manuals renders the problem of its origin and development a peculiarly interesting one. AYAAXH TON” ATTOZTOAON. AIAAXH Kupiov dia tév dwdexa atrocToAwy Tois €Ovecwv. I. “Odoi dvo eici, pia THs Coys Kat pia Tod Oavarou, Stahopa dé oA petaed TOV dVo odor. 2. “H pév ody OACC Jer. xxi. 8. THC ZwWAC é€oTiv avTn* mpeTov, AramtHceic TON QOeON Tor S. Matt. ' / Seu \ , < Fie aby Xxll. 37,30- TOLNTAVTA GE CEVTEPOV, TON TIAHCION COY WC CEAYTON’ TIANTA : Ley. xix. d€ dca €AN Oe€AHCHC MH [INECOAl col, Kal CY AAG) MH TIOIEl. eae 1U lv. 3. TovTwy dé Tov Aoyov 7 Sidayn éotLy avTn: EyAoreite 15. 2 S. Matt. v. \ ' ¢ ‘ ’ ¢€ \ A > nan TOYC KATAPWMENOYC YMIN Kal TrPoceyyecbe vmép THY éeyOpav i 46. ¢€ A / Xue \ tal ’ c a ' \ ’ uke Upav, vyTTEvETE SE YTIEP TAN MKONTWN YMAC. TIVIA TAP YAPic, ?- Aaa EAN AfATIATE TOYC APATINTAC YMAC; OYYI KAl TA EONH TO AYTO 32s 33) 35- TIOIOYCIN ; YMEic Ae AraTTATE TOYC MICOYNTAC YMAC Kal ovy é£eTeE éxyOpov. 4. améyou Tay capKixkav Kal cwpaTiKav éeTOumLov. EAN TIC COI A@ PaATTICMA EIC THN AEZIAN CIATONA, CTPEYON AYT® S. Matt. KAl THN AAAHN, Kal Eon TéXELOS* EAN APPApeYCH Cé TIC MIAION EN, S. ake Ymare MET ayTOY Ayo" EAN ApH TIC TO IMATION COY, ADC AaYTE Vie 2% 30- Kal TON YIT@NA’ EAN ASBH Tic Amd coy TO CON, MH Amraiter ovdé yap Svvaca. 5. TANTI TH aiTOYNTI ce AiAOY Kal MH Amaiter maot yap Oérer Sidocbar 6 watnp éx Tav idiov xapicwatwv. paxapios 6 Sid0s Kata THv évToAnv’ aOdos yap éotw. oval T@ AauPavovte ei pev yap ypelav Exov AapBaver tis, dOdos Eotar’ 6 Se pu) ypelav Exwv Sdces dixnv, wa ti éaBe Kal eis Tir ev cuvoyh Sé yevopuevos eEetacOncetat mepl av émpake kal ok ézZeAeyceTal EKEIOEN, S. Matt. méeXpic OY ATTOAG) TON écyaTON KOAPANTHN. 6, GAA Kal Tepl ” a S. Matt. Vv. 33: Lev. xix. ial tis Jude 22. Lev. xix.
26.  S. Matt. Vers Is. Ixvi. 2. 218 THE TEACHING [1 TouTou 6€ elpntat’ ‘lApwTAT@ H EAEHMOCYNH COY EIC TAC YEIPAC coy, MEXpIC AN FN@C TINI A@C. II. Aeurépa dé évtorn THs dudayjs: 2. OY coneyceic, oY MOIYEYCEIC, OU TraLdopOopynaess, oU Tropvevaets, OY KAEWEIC, Ov payevoess, ov pappaxevoess, od hovevoers téxvov év pOopa ovde yevynOévta drroKxTevets, OYK ETIOYMHCEIC TA TOY TAHCION, 3. OYK EMIOPKHCcEIc, OY YEeyAOMAPTYPHCEIC, OU KaKOAOYNCELS, OU prnoiaknoes’ 4. ovK éon Suyvwpwv ovde SiyAwacos: Tayis yap Oavarov 7 duyAwocla. 5. ovK érTat 6 Aoyos cou >evdys, ’ , > \ , D eee , ov KEVOS, GAAG meperTwpEevos paket. O. ovK Eon TAEOVERTNS ove dprrak ovdé UroKpiTns ovde KaKonOns ovde UTEpnpavos. ov Ann Povr)v movnpay Kata ToD TAnclov gov. 7. OF , U xv > ‘ a sy > ' \ \ ? MICHCEIC TravTa avOpwrrov, AAA OYC MEN EAELZEIC, TrEpL dé dv mpoceven, oc A€ AraTHcelc virép THY WruynY cov. III. Téxvov pov, hedye amo mavtos movnpod Kai amo mavtTos Opolov avTov. 2. pn yivov opyidos: odnyel yap 1 ’ \ \ \ s \ \ \ > \ \ Opyn pos Tov ovovy pnde Enrwrns pnde epiotixos punde Oupixos: éx yap ToUT@Y atravTwy ovo. yevvavTat. 3. TEKVOV ov, 7) yivou ériOupntys: odnyet yap 7 érOumla tpos TV mopvelav? pndé aiaxporoyos pndé virynrodOarpos* ex yap TOUT@Y aTavT@Y polyelaL yevY@VYTAL. 4. TEKVOY pov, MH rINOY Oi@NOCKOTIOC’ émreLd7n Odnyel els THY EldwAOXaTpiaV" \ > A \ \ \ / \ pnde émaoidds pnoé pabnwatixos unde Treptxa0aipwy pndé Oéxe aita Brérreww" €x yap TovTwy aTavTwy cidwAoXaTpia yevvatat. 5. TéKvoY pov, 1) yivou WrevaTns: émreLbr OOnyEt TO Wedopa eis THY KAOTHY: unde Hidapyupos unde KevodoEos €x yap TOUT@Y aTayTwY KoTai yevyY@vTal. 6. TEKVOY MOU, A Y 4 f > 4, 2 al > \ / + 1) ylvou yoyyucos: émreid2 Odnyel els THY BrXachdnpiav: pnde b] / \ / > \ / is / avOadns pndé Tovnpodpwv: ex yap TovTwy atravTwy Bra- f A y \ BA 3 \ c - obnpias yevvavtar. 7. icOe dé pais: eel oi Tpacic KAHPO- NOMHcoYc! THN TAN. 8. yivou paxpodupos Kal éXenwov Kal akakos Kal Hicyyioc Kal ayabos Kal TpEM@N TOY Adroyc bua iii. 2 dpyos] conj. Bryennios; dpyi\os Ms. 3 yevvavrat] conj. Bryennios; yev@vrat MS. Iv] OF THE APOSTLES. | 219 / a wv > id , \ 1Oe Py / TavTos, ovs NKovaas. YQ. ovY tripoces TeavTOY ovde dwcELS A fol € / \ Th Wuxn cov Epacos. ov KorrAnOnoeTar 1 Yruyxn cou peTa € Lal 3 \ \ / \ A >’ / Vpnr@v, GdrAd peta Sikalwy Kal TaTeWwov avactpadynon. ¢ > \ / 10. Ta cupBaivovta cou évepynpata ws ayaba mpocdéén, 2 be) “ v an 3 \ 4 eldws OTL aTEp Ocod ovdév yiverat. IV. Téxvov pov, tof AddAofNTéc col TON AdfON TOY Ocoy Heb. xiii, , \ Ne eat, 5 , \ Sunn e D 7: MNHCOHCH VUKTOS Kal ruepas’ TLunoeLs dé avTOY ws Kupior d0ev yap 7 KupLoTns Aareirat, exet Kipids eotw. 2. €x&nT- 5 ‘ lal ¢ > an ces 6€ Kal?’ nuépay Ta TpocwTa THY aylwy, iva erravaTrans Tots AGyous avTaY. 3. OV Troimnoers oHicpa, Elpnvedcers Oé / na ee > / / ’ / payouevous. xpweis Sixaiws, ov ANN Tpocwrov EréyEat emt maparTa@pacw. 4. ov Supuynoers, TOTEpoy Extas 7) ov. 5. MH FINOY TIPOC MEN TO AA@BEIN EKTEINDN TAC YElpAac, TIPOC A€ Ecclus. iv. \ a haw 2\ ” \ A A , 3I. TO AOFNAI cycTION’ 6, édv Exns dia TOY yYeLpav cov, SdéceELs AVTpwcLW awapTidv gov. 7. ov diatacets Sodvas ovdé S.idovs yoyyvoes’ yvoon yap Tis éotuv 6 Tod picOod Kaos avTaTo- dorns. 8. ovK atrootpadnon Tov évdedpevov, cvyKoWwarvncels \ / n > led \ b] > a » ~ ? \ bd] . O€ TavTa TO GdENPH gov Kal ovK EpeEls AIA EINAI E¢ yap ev Acts iv. wb , ae , a > a A 32. TO abavat@ Kowv@vol éoTe, TOTM padXoV év Tots OvNTOIS; Q. ovK dpeis THY yelpa cov amo Tod viod cov } amd THs Ouyatpés gov, aAXa aro veoTnTos Sidakers Tov PoBov Tod @cod. 10. ove emitakes SovAw cov 7) TaldicKy, Tots ETt TOV Ste \ > / > / , \ / avtov eov édrifovary, ev TiKpia cov, pntroTe ov un poByOn- covTat Tov eT auwhotépors Qeov: ov yap EpxeTat Kata Tpoc- wtrov Kadécat, adr’ ed’ ods TO TVEDMA NTOlwaceV. II. Upeis \ Ls nr ¢ / lal / ¢ A ¢ Uy al 5é of SodAoL VrotaynoecOe Tois KUplois UudY ws TUT Ocod év aicyvvn Kai PoBo. 12. ploncers Tacayv vToKpLoWW Kal en Day \ tal mav 0 un apectov TH Kupiw. 13. ov pr) éyxatarirns \ ¢ évtodds Kupiov, durakes O€ & mapéraBes, unte mpoatibels ‘ > A , ’ / ’ / \ , BYTE adaipov. I4. ev exkANola eEoporoynon Ta TaAPaTTO- / MATa gov, Kal ov Tpocedevon éeTl Mpocevyny cov év cuveEt- / A / A a Snoet Tovnpa. avTn éativ 7 Odds THs Cwns. iv. 3 wojces] conj. Hilgenfeld; woOjoes Ms. 7 6] conj. Bryennios ; 7 MS. 11 buav] conj. Bryennios; 7uav MS. Rom. xii. 9. S. Matt. XXVill. 19. 220 THE TEACHING [v rn ,’ A V. ‘H &€ rod Pavarou 660s éotw attn: mpdTov TavTev / , nr movnpa éoTt Kal KaTapas peotn: Povot, pmoryetat, ErrOupias, rt / > / “ ¢ ig d Topvetat, KNOTAL, ELOWAOAAT PIAL, Wayeial, Pappakial, apTayal, / € / / / € / arevdopwaptupiar, Vroxploes, SuTdoKapoia, doXos, Urepnpavia, kakia, av0adea, mreoveEla, aicyporoyia, SnrotuTia, Opa- auTns, vos, ddrafovelar 2. Sudxtat ayabdv, pucobvvTes adnOevav, ayarravTes Weidos, ov ywwwoKovtes picOov diKavo- TUVNS, OV KOAAMENO! 47A0@ ovdEe Kpices Sixala, aypuTVOdYTES ’ ’ Aa / ’ , > \ i. 2 \ AA ovK Els TO aya0oV, AX Els TO TrOYNpOY" WY waKpay TpavTNS > a Kal UTrom“ovn, waTaLa ayaTayTes, SiwKovTES avTaTrodopa, OvK fo) , rf édeodvTes TTwXOV, ov TovodvTes éml KaTaTrovoULev@, OU yiweoKovTes TOV ToLncavTa avToUs, poveis Téxvav, POopets mrdopatos Oceov, atootpepopevor Tov évdeopevov, KaTa- movouvtes TOV OALBomEevoy, TAOVTiwY TapaKANTOL, TEVTOV dvomo. kpital, TavOayaptntor puabeinre, Téxva, ato TOUTMY ATAVTOD. VI. "Opa pr} tis ce TAaVHTH ao TavTNS THs 6600 THs a > \ \ lel / > A \ didayys, érel tapextos Peod ce didacKe. 2. eb pev yap U / vA \ \ lal / J yy dvvacat Bactacat orXov Tov Evyov Tov Kupiou, TéXevos én’ ’ ’ ,’ / \ , a / et © ov dvvacat, 0 duvn TOTO TroteEL. , a ’ 3. Ilept dé tis Bpwcews, 0 Svvacar Bdotacoyv’ azo 6é rf / / a Tod elOwroOUToU Alay mpocexye RaTpEela yap eat Oedv VEKP@D. VII. Ilept 8& tod Barticpatos, ovtw Barticate’ TadTa > \ a ‘ mavta TpoetovTes Barticate cic TO ONOMA TOY TlaTpoc kal a . \ n ' , al toy Yio¥ Kal Toy Arioy TINeymatoc év UdaTe EavTt. 2. éav Sé un eyns Udap Fav, eis Gro vdwp Bamrticov’ et & ov / > a b] a xX \ S / \ Sivacar ev Wuypa, ev Oepp@. 3. éav Sé audotepa pn exns, SYA J ‘ \ \ ef >’ v \ \ éxyeov els THY Kepadny Tpis Vdwp eis dvoya Ilatpos Kai fo) ¢ / \ rf Tiod Kat dyiov Ilvevpatos. 4. mpd S€ tod Batricpatos U ¢ / NES. U4 \ v mpovnatevaatw 0 Bartifwv Kal o Pamrifopevos Kal et TWeES t a Gvnrou SUvavtar. Kerevers 56 vnoTedoat Tov Bamrifopevov \ a Tpo pas 7 Svo. e cal ¢ a “ VIII. Al dé vnotetar vuov pn Ectwcav peta TeV UTo- x] OF THE APOSTLES. 22k mee , \ , , \ , 3 KpiTav’ vynotevovor yap Sevtépa caBBatov Kxal réurty ‘ vets € vnoTevcaTe TeTpAda Kal TapacKevHY. 2. unde Tpoc- evyecOe wc oi ymoKpital, GAN ws exédevoev 6 Kupios év T@ S. Matt. ’ 7 ’ A a , A ’ c a cus: > Vi. 16. evayyedi@ avTov, oyTwc mpoceyyecbe’ Tlatep HMON 6 EN TOS. Matt. OYPAN®, ATIACOHT@) TO GNOMA COY, EABETW H BaciAElA COY, FENH- rae O@HTO TO BEAHMA COY WC EN OYPAN@ Kal €TTl TAC’ TON APTON Xi. 2—4. HM@N TON €TTIOYCION AOC HMIN CHMEPON, Kal Acbec HMIN THN OEIAHN HMG@N GC KAI HMEIC AdIEMEN TOIC OeElAETAIC HMON, > , ca c a KAl MH €1CENETKHC HMAC €iC TIEIPACMON, AAAA pYcat HMAc ATO TOY n / la) > » id f A e / , \ .A TIONHPOY OTL Gov éoTl H dUVamLs Kal n SdEa els TOs aidvas. 3. Tpls THS NuEepas OVTwW Tpocevyer Oe. lel ’ / IX. Ilepi dé THs evyapiotias, o'tw evyapiotnoate’ a / ,’ a 2. Tp@tTov wept Tod wotnpiov: Evyapictobpév cot, Ilarep ¢ a e \ A € / ’ / \ a , ? NUOV, UTEP THS aylas aurédov Aaveld tod mados cov, Hs > , spe NS le} A Uu 7 \ £ , ° éyvopicas nutv dia “Incod tod maidos cov’ col 7 dd£a eis % IA \ \ rn , - >] fol / Tous ai@vas. 3. wept S€ Tod KNacpaTos’ Evyapictobpév ‘ cS A ¢ uA lal Lal \ / e 3 , cot, Ilatep nuadv, urep THs Fons Kai yveoews, Hs eyvepicas e a p>) \ al Lal A PS “) ni ¢ PS) / > \ , A npiv ota Inoov Tov masdos cov’ col » do&a els Tors aidvas. 4. doTrEp HY TOVI0 10 KAaopa SvecKopTicpévoy erdve TOV Cpéov Kal auvaybev éyéveto &v, ota avvayOntw cov 7 > / ’ \ A / lal lal > \ \ he 7 EKKANTLA ATO TOV TEepaTwY THS yhs els THY anv Bactrelav ¢ ¢ / , a he lal OTe cov éotiv 7 S0€a Kal » Svvapus 1a Inaood Xpictod eis lal \ Tovs aimvas. 5. pndels dé hayéro pnd TueTW amd THs b} 7 ¢ A , ,’ e / > ” / evyaploTias vuav, adXX ot Barricbévtes eis Ovowa Kupiov. / ¢ ‘ A“ kal yap Tepi TovTov elpnxey 6 Kupios* MH Adte TO SrION S. Matt. Bs ' vii. 6. TOIC KYCI. X. Mera 6€ Td éeurrncOivar obtas evyapiotnoate’ > lal la / sf ¢ \ A e / > /, 4 2. Evyapiototpév cot, Ilatep aye, vrép Tod aylov dvouaros gov, OU KaTEsKnVYwWGas év Talis Kapdials nuar, Kal UTép THS Uy. a yrooews Kal rictews Kal aOavacias, is éyvaepicas jyiv Sua a | n A Py / S \ e 8 , ] \ IA , nov TOD TaLo0s gov’ aol 7 Soka els Tovs aidvas. 3. ov, / la déorota TavtToKxparop, ékTicas Ta Tavta évexey Tod dvdua- Vili. 2 *yevn0yTw] conj. Bryennios; yevynOjTw Ms. ix. 4 70] insert Gebhardt after rovro, X. 2 740] conj. Bryennios; tudy Ms. 1 Joh. iv. 18. S. Matt. XXivV. 31. 1 Cor, xvi.
22.  222 THE TEACHING [x , / \ bl lal bl] / > TOS gov, Tpopyy Te Kal ToTOv EdwKas Tois avOpwrrois Ets amovxavow iva cou evyaptoTncwow, jpiv 6 éyaplow Tvev- \ \ \ \ \ \ > / \ r 60 patixny tpopny Kal TroTov Kat Cwry aidvioy dia Tov TraLoos lal / cov. 4. Tpo TavTwy evyaploTodpéy cot OT SuvaTos el ov" \ ¢ / > ‘\ 1n / ’ lal , cot » doka eis Tors aidvas. 5. pvnoOnt, Kupie, ths €K- fa >’ lal KAnolas cov Tod picacOat a’Tny amo TavTos Tovnpod Kal TeAcl@cal avtTny én TH drdTH cov, Kal CYNAZON aUTHY Amd TON TECCKPWN ANEMWN, THY ayLacOeioay eis THY anv Bact- / a c ' Sse. it wer \ c , \ c Nelav, Nv NToiwacas aT Ott cod eat 7 Svvams Kal 7 d0&a eis tos aidvas. 6. éMéTw yapis Kal wapedOéTw O / e c \ fal fal / ” A / b Koopos ovTos. waavva TH Oe@ Aaveid. et Tis ays éoTw, b] / = ” > b] , , ‘ > U > / epxécOw ef tus ovK éoti, weTavoeiTw. MAPAN A04. apmnD. a \ / b] / > lal ig4 / 7. Tois dé mpodytais éritpéTeTe evyapioteiy Oca Oédovow. XI. “Os av otv €dXOdv didaEn tuds TadtTa Tavta Ta \ mpoeipnueva, déEacGe ad’tTov' 2. é€av 5é av’tos 6 bidoKwv \ ’ ca) fal otpagels SudacKyn adAdAnv Sidaynv Els TO KaTAaADGAL, pH AUTOD axovonte eis S€ TO mpocbcivar dixatoctyny Kal yvdow, Kupiov, dé£ac8e avtov ws Kupiov. 3. epi d€ tev amo- / \ lal \ \ / lal b) Ul A oTOA@Y Kal TpodnTay Kata TO Soypa Tod EvayyEdlov OUTWS fal / \ 7 Touoate. 4. mas 6€ amdcTtoAos épyouevos mpos vpas ! ¢ , E > AISA Nee? (PE TY SeyOntw ws Kupios’ 5. ov pevel d€ ef px) nuépay pilav’ €av Wales / ‘\ \ bls 3 a \ Ps, , 5é 7 xpela, Kal thy GddAnv’ Tpels S€ eay peivy, revdorpo- ¢€ > dntns eotiv’ 6. éEepyopevos S€ 0 amocToAos pndev Rap- , > \ oo» o e > Ae HSIN v9 , Sihics Bavérw ef pr) aptov, Ews ov avdicby édv Sé apyvprov aith, Wevdorpodnrns éoti. 7. Kal mavta tpodyntnv AadodvTa év >] fal rl TVEUMATL OU TELPATETE OVSE SiaKp_EiTE’ Tdca yap apapTia ’ , iA s\ oy e / ’ bi / ’ lal adeOnoetat, aly S€ 1 apaptia ove adeOncetat. 8. ov was 5€ 6 Nadav ev TrevpaTt TpopyTys éoTiv, addr éav Eyn Tods / / > \ > Lal / / € tpotrouvs Kupiov. “Amd otv tTaév TpoTwv yvwcbnoeTaL oO \ c / a , Wevdorrpodytns Kal 6 mpodynTns. 9. Kal Tas mpodyrns c / / 2) , ’ ul . > ’ lal > A opifov tpamefav é€v mvevpats ov hayeta at avtTns: ef b€ / a unye, yrevdotpodytns éotiv. 10. was 5é€ mpodyntns Sida- x. 4 gol] insert Harnack after ov. xi. 5 ef um] insert Harnack. 9 dplgwv] conj. Bryennios; 6 pifwv Ms. xiv] OF THE APOSTLES. 222 ] lal oxov THY adnGevav ef & SiddoKes ov Trove, Wrevdorpodyntns éoTlv. 1. as dé rpodyrns SedoKxipacpévos adnOwvods Tovdv els pouotynploy Koopikov éxxrdnolas, pr SudacKkwv Sé Trovety ivé a. \ an , / b] ’ ¢€ lal \ lal \ »” dca avTos Trovel, ov KpLOnceTas Ef Vudv" peTa Deod yap Exee THY Kpiow" woavTws yap éroinaay Kai of dpyaios mpopHras. a cdl ae A v > / / ’ / A Oo / 12. 05 8 av ELT EV TVEUMLATL* Aos fol apyupla 1) ETEpa TLVa, 7) ’ , ’ an .\ \ \ v ¢ / ” ovK axovoecOe avtod: éayv S€ Tepl G\AwY VoTEpo’YTwY Ely dodvat, wndels avTov KpivéTo. XII. lds dé 6 épydmenoc én GNdmati Kypioy SeyOnrar Ps. cxviii. - 5 i aN i i Nii (cxvii) 26. éresta Sé Soxipacavtes avTov yvdoerOe. civerw yap eeTE S. Matt. Sefsd on) ! 2 ae \ Bt ’ € 9 r Xxi. Q. eftav Kal apiotepdy. 2. ef pev Tapodi0s EoTW O EpYopEVos, orp 4. a > a / 4 > a \ \ ¢ a ? \ : Bondeire avtT@ dcov Suvacbe ov pevet 5é mpds vyds ef pr) See . Luke fal , ¢ dvo 1) TpEis Nuépas, Eav 7 avayKn. 3. ef dé OédXee pos vpas xix. 38. Ka0jcba, Texvirns ov, épyalécOw kal dayéro. 4. ef O€ ove éyes TEXVNV, KATA THY TUVETLW VLaY TPoVvonaaTEe, TOS 1) apyos me? vuadv Enoetat Xpiotiavos. 5. et O ov Oérer ot Tw TOLL, YPLITEWTOPOS EOTLY’ TPOTEYETE ATO TOV TOLOVTMD. XIII. ds 8€ rpodyrys adrnOuvos Oérwv KaOjobat mpos Upas AzZC ECTIN THC TpodAc ayTof. 2. waavTws didacKanos S. Matt. ? , > > \ wd Wa Cie) ' a ay kewh@s adnOuwvos EcTIN AZ1I0C Kal avTOS, WoTrEp O EPraTHc, TAC TpodAc ayTOY. 3. Tacav ovyv aTapyny yevynuatav Anvod Kal ddro- n ‘ / \ / \ , \ lal vos, Bowy Te Kal tpoBatwv AaBav Saces THY aTapynY Tots mpodntais’ avtol yap elaw ot apytepets Vay. 4. edy O€ pr éynte tpodyntny, doTe Tols mTwyols. 5. €av oLTiav TroLNs, TH aTapynv AaBev Sos KaTa THY évTOAnV. 6, woaa’Tws / ” x > / ’ / \ > \ \ \ Kepapov oivov 7 édXaiov avol~as tTHv atapynv haBoev Sos Tois Tpopntas’ 7. apyuplov bé€ Kal iwaticpod Kal TavTos / \ Ni > / e wv / \ \ \ KTnLATOS NaBwv THY aTTapYXnV, WS aV TOL 50En, dds Kata THY EVTOAND. XIV. Kara xvpraxny && Kupiov cvvaybévtes KXaoate aptov Kal evyapiotnoate mpoeEomoroynoduevot TA Trapa- / ¢ lel t/ \ ¢ / ¢€ aA ba an \ TTOWATA vuoV, OTwS KaSapa 7 Ovcia vua@Y 7H. 2. Tas Sé xil, 1 éfere] conj. Bryennios; éferau MS. _— xiv. 1 mpoetouodoynodmevoc] conj. Hilgenfeld ; rpocetouoroynodmevor MS. buy sec.] con}. Bryennios ; 7uav Ms. Mal. i. 11, Tac S. Matt. XXV. 13. S. Luke xli. 35, 40. S. Matt. Xxiv. IT,
24.  S. Matt. XXiv, I0, 30; 24- S. Luke XXl. 12. S. Matt. XXIV. 13. 224 THE TEACHING [x1v »” \ b) / \ ne / ! lal \ / eyou Thy aupiBorlay peta Tod éETaipov avTod pn cvvEeOéTw Le ev e tal ~/ \ lal ¢ / € tal vpiv, Ews od dSiartrayoow, iva pn Kowwwbn 7 Ovoia vpor. dd if ] € lal ¢ \ / a ‘ ' 3. avtTn yap é€otw 1 pnOetca vio Kupiov' “En manti TO- TT KAl ypONGd TIPOCdEepEIN MOI OBYCIAN KABAPAN’ STI BaciAeyc mérac eimi, Aérel Kypioc, kal TO ONOMA MOY BAYMACTON EN TOIC EONECI. XV. Xepotovncate obv éavtois éricKorovs Kal diaKko- es lal 1 ae / v la \ ’ / \ vous akious Tov Kupiov, avdpas mpacts kai adpidapypous Kat ’ fal \ / ~! id r \ lal \ adnbeis Kat Sedoximacpuévous’ viv yap RevToupyovat Kal avTol Tv AevTouvpyiav THY TpopynTav Kal bidacKddov. 2. pn ovv vrepidnte avTovs’ avTol yap eiow of TeTLNmevoL ig a \ a tal \ f UuaY peta TOV TpopyTay Kal SidacKarov. 3. "Eréyxete 5é aAdHAOVS fe) ev Cpyh, GAN ev eipnvy, ws éyeTe ev TH EvayyeNiw Kal TavTl adoToYobYTL KaTa TOD e / \ / \ 2 <2 Lal ’ / 7 > Erépou pnoels AarelT@ pnd Tap’ Vudv aKovéTw, Ews OU pEeTa- vonon. 4. Tas S€ evyds vudv Kal Tas édenwoovvas Kal Tacas Tas mpakes olTws ToimoaTe, WS ExyeTE EV TH EVAY- / fe) / c lal yedi@ Tod Kupiouv nuor. XVI. [puropeite vrrép tijs Sais vudv" ol AYYNOI YMON MH CBECOHT@CAN, KAI Al OcyYec YM@N MH EKAYECOWCAN, AAAA ' a » o > > c , « ~ rinecOe ETOIMOI’ OY FAP OIAATE THN GopaN, EN H O Kypioc HM@N ” r Cal ’ / épyetal. 2. rucvas S& cuvayOnoeobe Enrobvtes Ta avnKovTa a lal ¢ lel > \ > , ¢ a ¢ a / tais yuyais vuaov. ov yap whednoe Vuds 0 Tas xXpoVvos THS TisTews UMOY, Edy pn ev TO EcXATH KaLP@ TEAELWOATE. 3. é€v yap Talis éoyatais nuépats TANOvVOncovTaL o| peydo- ~ nN e A \ / \ / > TPOmATal Kal of POopeis, Kat oTpadnoovtat Ta TpoBata ets / niin 33 aa ' > a : ’ , AUKOUS, Kal 7 ayaTyn oTpadynoeTat Eis picos’ 4. avEavovons yap THS avopias MICHCOYCIN AAAHAOYC Kal AlG@ZOYCIN KAl TrApa- A@COYCl. Kal TOTE PAaNHceTal 6 KoTpoTAAaV?S Ws vids Ocod Kat ? tal \ ' ¢€ A , rf TIOINCEl CHMELA KAl TEPATA, KAL 7 7) TapadoOnceTat Els yYeEtpas fal a IQs a avtod, Kal troiumoes abéwita, & ovdétroTe yéyovev €& aidvos. 5. TOTe HEee 9 KTiots TOV avOpworTwy eis THY TUpwcLW TIS Soximacias, Kal cxavdaricOnoovtat ToAXO! Kal atroNovYTaL, co , b) Lal , e a O] A€é YTTOMEINANTEC ev TH TWioTEL AVT@VY CWOHCONTAI UT AUTO xvi] OF THE APOSTLES. 225 Tod Katabéwatos. 6. Kal TOTE aNHceTal TA CHMEIA 775 GAq- S. Matt. Oeias’ mpwetov onpetov exmetdcews ev ovpave, celta onueiov >~ povns cadtiyyos, Kal TO TpiTov avacTacts vexpov' ov Tav- Tov 5é, aAN ws éppéOn’ “HZe1 6 Kypioc Kal ANTEC Oo Arlo! Met” Zech. xivs ayToy. 7. TéTe dyeTal 6 Kdapos Tov Kupsov épydmenon éAnw & Matt. TON NEMDEADN TOY OYPANOY. XX1V. 30. DOCTRINA APOSTOLORUM. Viae duae sunt in seculo, vitae et mortis, lucis et tene- brarum. In his constituti sunt angeli duo, unus aequi- tatis, alter iniquitatis. Distantia autem magna est duarum viarum. Via ergo vitae haec est: Primo diliges Deum aeternum, qui te fecit. Secundo proximum tuum, ut te ipsum. Omne autem, quod tibi non vis fieri, alii ne feceris. Interpretatio autem horum verborum haec est: non moe- chaberis, non homicidium facies, non falsum testimonium dices, non puerum violaveris, non fornicaveris, non *male- facies, non medicamenta mala facies ; non occides filium in abortum, nec natum succides. Non concupisces quidquam de re proximi tui. Non perjurabis, non male loqueris, non eris memor malorum factorum. Non eris duplex in con- silium dandum, neque bilinguis; tendiculum enim mortis est lingua. Non erit verbum tuum vacuum nec mendax. Non eris cupidus, nec avarus, nec rapax, nec ’adulator nec... (the MS here breaks off.) 1 malefacies] maofacies MS. ? adulator] adolator Ms. a PATH. 15 TRANSLATION OF THE meee nING OF THE APOSTLES. ise


# The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles (Didache)

# Chapter 1

2.  And this is the second commandment of the teaching. Zhou shalt do no murder, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not corrupt boys, thou shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt 230 THE TEACHING not deal in magic, thou shalt do no sorcery, thou shalt not murder a child by abortion nor kill them when born, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's goods, thou shalt not perjure thyself, thou shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not speak evil, thou shalt not cherish a grudge, thou shalt not be double-minded nor double-tongued ; for the double tongue is a snare of death. Thy word shall not be false or empty, but ful- filled by action. Thou shalt not be avaricious nor a plunderer nor a hypocrite nor ill-tempered nor proud. ‘Thou shalt not entertain an evil design against thy neighbour. Zhou shalt not hate any man, but some thou shalt reprove, and for others thou shalt pray, and others thou shalt Jove more than thy life.
3.  My child, flee from every evil and everything that resembleth it. Be not angry, for anger leadeth to murder, nor jealous nor contentious nor wrathful; for of all these things murders are engendered. My child, be not lustful, for lust leadeth to fornication, neither foul-speaking neither with uplifted eyes; for of all these things adulteries are en- gendered. My child, de 2o dealer in omens, since it leads to idolatry, nor an enchanter nor an astrologer nor a magician, neither be willing to look at them; for from all these things idolatry is engendered. My child, be not a liar, since lying leads to theft, neither avaricious neither vainglorious; for from all these things thefts aré engendered. My child, be not a murmurer, since it leadeth to blasphemy, neither self- willed neither a thinker of evil thoughts; for from all these things blasphemies are engendered. But be meek, since ‘he meck shall inherit the earth. Be long-suffering and pitiful and guileless and guiet and kindly and always fearing the words which thou hast heard, Thou shalt not exalt thyself, neither shalt thou admit boldness into thy soul. Thy soul shall not cleave together with the lofty, but with the righteous and humble shalt thou walk. The accidents that befal thee thou shalt receive as good, knowing that nothing is done without Elohim (God).
4.  My child, thou shalt remember him that speaketh unto thee the word of Elohim (God) night and day, and shalt honour him as the Yahuah (Lord); for whencesoever the Lordship speaketh, there is the Yahuah (Lord). Moreover thou shalt seek out day by day the persons of the saints, that thou mayest find rest in their words. Thou shalt not make a schism, but thou shalt pacify them that contend ; thou shalt judge righteously, thou shalt not make a difference in a person to reprove him for transgres- sions. ‘Thou shalt not doubt whether a thing shall be or not be. Be not thou found holding out thy hands to receive, but drawing them OF THE APOSTLES. 231 in as to giving. If thou hast ought passing through thy hands, thou shalt give a ransom for thy sins. Thou shalt not hesitate to give, neither shalt thou murmur when giving; for thou shalt know who is the good paymaster of thy reward. Thou shalt not turn away from him that is in want, but shalt make thy brother partaker in all things, and shalt not say that anything is thine own. For if ye are fellow-partakers in that which is imperishable, how much rather in the things which are perish- able? Thou shalt not withhold thy hand from thy son or from thy daughter, but from their youth thou shalt teach them the fear of Elohim (God). Thou shalt not command thy bondservant or thine handmaid in thy bitterness, who trust in the same Elohim (God) as thyself, lest haply they should cease to fear the Elohim (God) who is over both of you; for He cometh, not to call men with respect of persons, but He cometh to those whom the Spirit hath prepared. But ye, servants, shall be subject unto your masters, as to a type of Elohim (God), in shame and fear. Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy, and everything that is not pleasing to the Yahuah (Lord). Thou shalt never forsake the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord) ; but shalt keep those things which thou hast received, neither adding to them nor taking away from them. In church thou shalt confess thy transgressions, and shalt not betake thyself to prayer with an evil conscience. This is the way of life.
5.  But the way of death is this. First of all, it is evil and full of a curse ; murders, adulteries, lusts, fornications, thefts, idolatries, magical arts, witchcrafts, plunderings, false witnessings, hypocrisies, doubleness of heart, treachery, pride, malice, stubbornness, covetousness, foul- speaking, jealousy, boldness, exaltation, boastfulness; persecutors of good men, hating truth, loving a lie, not perceiving the reward of righteousness, not cleaving to the good nor to righteous judgment, wakeful not for that which is good but for that which is evil; from whom gentleness and forbearance stand aloof; loving vain things, pursuing a recompense, not pitying the poor man, not toiling for him that is oppressed with toil, not recognizing Him that made them, murderers of children, corrupters of the creatures of Elohim (God), turning, away from him that is in want, oppressing him that is afflicted, advocates of the the “wealthy, unjust_judges of the poor, altogether sinful. May ye be be delivered, my children, from all these things.
6.  See lest any man lead you astray from this way of righteousness, for he teacheth thee apart from Elohim (God). For if thou art able to bear the 232 THE TEACHING whole yoke of the Yahuah (Lord), thou shalt be perfect ; but if thou art not able, do that which thou art able. But concerning eating, bear that which thou art able; yet abstain by all means from meat sacrificed to idols; for it is the worship of dead gods.
7.  But concerning baptism, thus shall ye baptize. Having first recited all these things, baptize zm the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) in living (running) water. But if thou hast not living water, then baptize in other water; and if thou art not able in cold, then in warm. But if thou hast neither, then pour water on the head thrice in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit). But before the baptism let him that baptizeth and him that is baptized fast, and any others also who are able; and thou shalt order him that is baptized to fast a day or two before.
8.  And let not your fastings be with the hypocrites, for they fast on the second and the fifth day of the week; but do ye keep your fast on the fourth and on the preparation (the sixth) day. Neither pray ye as the hypocrites, but as the Yahuah (Lord) commanded in His Gospel, thus pray ye: Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done, as in heaven, so also on earth; give us this day our daily bread ; and forgive us our debt, as we also forgive our debtors ; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one ; for Thine is the power and the glory for ever and ever. Three times in the day pray ye so. g. But as touching the eucharistic thanksgiving give ye thanks thus. First, as regards the cup: We give Thee thanks, O our Father, for the holy vine of Thy son David, which Thou madest known unto us through Thy Son Yahusha (Jesus); Thine is the glory for ever and ever. Then as regards the broken bread: We give Thee thanks, O our Father, for the life and knowledge which Thou didst make known unto us through Thy Son Yahusha (Jesus); Thine is the glory for ever and ever. As this broken bread was scattered upon the mountains and being gathered together became one, so may Thy Church be gathered together from the ends of the earth into Thy kingdom ; for Thine is the glory and the power through Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ) for ever and ever. But let no one eat or drink of this eucharistic thanksgiving, but they that have been baptized into the name of the Yahuah (Lord); for concerning this also the Yahuah (Lord) hath said: Give not that which ts holy to the dogs. ro. And after ye are satisfied thus give ye thanks: We give Thee OF THE APOSTLES. 233 thanks, Holy Father, for Thy holy name, which Thou hast made to tabernacle in our hearts, and for the knowledge and faith and im- mortality, which Thou hast made known unto us through Thy Son Yahusha (Jesus); Thine is the glory for ever and ever. Thou, Almighty Master, didst create all things for Thy name’s sake, and didst give food and drink unto men for enjoyment, that they might render thanks to Thee; but didst bestow upon us spiritual food and drink and eternal life through Thy Son. Before all things we give Thee thanks that Thou art powerful; Thine is the glory for ever and ever. Re- member, Yahuah (Lord), Thy Church to deliver it from all evil and to perfect it in Thy love; and gather it together from the four winds—even the Church which has been sanctified—into Thy kingdom which Thou hast pre- pared for it; for Thine is the power and the glory for ever and ever. May grace come and may this world pass away. Hosanna to the Elohim (God) of David. If any man is holy, let him come; if any man is not, let him repent. Maran Atha. Amen. But permit the prophets to offer thanksgiving as much as they desire.
11.  Whosoever therefore shall come and teach you all these things that have been said before, receive him; but if the teacher himself be perverted and teach a different doctrine to the destruction thereof, hear him not; but if to the increase of righteousness and the know- ledge of the Yahuah (Lord), receive him as the Yahuah (Lord). But concerning the apostles and prophets, so do ye according to the ordinance of the Gospel. Let every apostle, when he cometh to you, be received as the Yahuah (Lord); but he shall not abide more than a single day, or if there be need, a second likewise ; but if he abide three days, he is a false prophet. And when he departeth let the apostle receive nothing save bread, until he findeth shelter; but if he ask money, he is a false prophet. And any prophet speaking in the Spirit ye shall not try neither discern; for every sin shall be forgiven, but this sin shall not be forgiven. Yet not every one that speaketh in the Spirit is a prophet, but only if he have the ways of the Yahuah (Lord). From his ways therefore the false prophet and the prophet shall be recognized. And no prophet when he ordereth a table in the Spirit shall eat of it; otherwise he is a false prophet. And every prophet teaching the truth, if he doeth not what he teacheth, is a false prophet. And every prophet approved and found true, if he doeth ought as an outward mystery typical of the Church, and yet teacheth you not to do all that 234 THE TEACHING he himself doeth, shall not be judged before you; he hath his judg- ment in the presence of Elohim (God); for in like manner also did the prophets of old time. And whosoever shall say in the Spirit, Give me silver or anything else, ye shall not listen to him; but if he tell you to give on behalf of others that are in want, let no man judge him.
12.  But let every one ¢hat cometh in the name of the Yahuah (Lord) be received ; and then when ye have tested him ye shall know him, for ye shall have understanding on the right hand and on the left. If the comer is a traveller, assist him, so far as ye are able; but he shall not stay with you more than two or three days, if it be necessary. But if he wishes to settle with you, being a craftsman, let him work for and eat his bread. But if he has no craft, according to your wisdom provide how he shall live as a Christian among you, but not in idleness. If he will not do this, he is trafficking upon Messiah (Christ). Beware of such men.
13.  But every true prophet desiring to settle among you zs worthy of his food. In like manner a true teacher zs also worthy, like the work- man, of his food. Every firstfruit then of the produce of the wine-vat and of the threshing-floor, of thy oxen and of thy sheep, thou shalt take and give as the firstfruit to the prophets; for they are your chief-priests. But if ye have not a prophet, give them to the poor. If thou makest bread, take the firstfruit and give according to the commandment. In like manner, when thou openest a jar of wine or of oil, take the firstfruit and give to the prophets; yea and of money and raiment and every possession take the firstfruit, as shall seem good to thee, and give according to the commandment.
14.  And on the Yahuah's (Lord’s) own day gather yourselves together and break bread and give thanks, first confessing your transgressions, that your sacrifice may be pure. And let no man, having his dispute with his fellow, join your assembly until they have been reconciled, that your sacrifice may not be defiled; for this sacrifice it is that was spoken of by the Yahuah (Lord); Jz every place and at every time offer Me a pure sacrifice; for I am a great king, saith the Yahuah (Lord), and My name is wonderful among the nations.
15.  Appoint for yourselves therefore bishops and deacons worthy of the Yahuah (Lord), men who are meek and not lovers of money, and true and approved ; for unto you they also perform the service of the prophets and teachers. Therefore despise them not; for they are your honour- able men along with the prophets and teachers. OF THE APOSTLES. 235 And reprove one another, not in anger but in peace, as ye find in the Gospel; and let no one speak to any that has gone wrong towards his neighbour, neither let him hear a word from you, until he repent. But your prayers and your almsgivings and all your deeds so do ye as ye find it in the Gospel of our Lord.
16.  Se watchful for your life; let your lamps not be quenched and your loins not ungirded, but be ye ready ; for ye know not the hour in which our Lord cometh. And ye shall gather yourselves together fre- quently, seeking what is fitting for your souls; for the whole time of your faith shall not profit you, if ye be not perfected at the last season. For in the last days the false prophets and corrupters shall be multiplied, and the sheep shall be turned into wolves, and love shall be turned into hate. For as lawlessness increaseth, they shall hate one another and shall persecute and betray. And then the world-deceiver shall appear as a son of Elohim (God); and shall work signs and wonders, and the earth shall be delivered into his hands; and he shall do unholy things, which have never been since the world began. Then all created man- kind shall come to the fire of testing, and many shall be offended and perish; but they that endure in their faith shall be saved by the Curse Himself. And then shall the signs of the truth appear; first a sign of a rift in the heaven, then a sign of a voice of a trumpet, and thirdly a resurrection of the dead; yet not of all, but as it was said: The Yahuah (Lord) shall come and all His saints with Him. Then shall the world see the Yahuah (Lord) coming upon the clouds of heaven. ma he wh cd Ate Maen Te, Se Date RN " aes)? ma) Pe PL: erernenne eth \stare fay r © 1 i ee ae) pepe a a eevee ; +o ; hie eas, ) id j ine 1 meee Mee Vy a ; prety j 7a . Srey E PTS TIE OF Peake NAB AS, ¥ rey OA 8 OV WA) Ree ct a Mi Pe ROLLA Mk |: Pe" id i stay ie Aalt ne i My) Lays i nna i ee Ms \ 7 ” ' an \ of yy i nit aU, ae ie ai ; ‘ us i oh ) ig in a pi) Ra Ne an) fae EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. I. HE Epistle which bears the name of Barnabas stands alone in the literature of the early Church. The writer is an uncompromising antagonist of Judaism, but beyond this antagonism he has nothing in common with the Antijudaic heresies of the second century. Unlike Marcion, he postulates no opposition between the Old Testament and the New. On the contrary he sees Christianity everywhere in the Lawgiver and the Prophets, and treats them with a degree of respect which would have satisfied the most devout rabbi. He quotes them profusely as authoritative. Only he accuses the Yahudim (Jews) of misunder- standing them from beginning to end, and intimates that the ordinances of circumcision, of the sabbath, of the distinctions of meats clean and unclean, were never intended to be literally observed, but had through- out a spiritual and mystical significance. Who then was the writer of this Epistle? At the close of the second century Clement of Alexandria quotes it frequently, and ascribes it to the ‘Apostle,’ or the ‘Prophet Barnabas,’ identifying the author with ‘Barnabas who himself also preached with the Apostle’ (i.e. St Paul) ‘in the ministry of the Gentiles.’ Yet elsewhere he does not hesitate to criticize the work, and clearly therefore did not regard it as final and authoritative. A few years later, Origen cites the Epistle with the intro- ductory words, ‘It is written in the catholic (ie. general) Epistle of Barnabas.’ The earliest notices however are confined to the Alexandrian fathers, and the presumption is that it was written in Alexandria itself. It will be observed that the writer nowhere claims to be the Apostle Barnabas ; indeed his language is such as to suggest that he was wholly unconnected with the Apostles. The work therefore is in no sense apocryphal, if by apocryphal we mean fictitious. How the name of Barnabas came to be associated with it, it is impossible to say. An early tradition, or fiction, represents Barnabas as residing at Alexandria; 240 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. but this story might have been the consequence, rather than the cause, of the name attached to the letter. Possibly its author was some unknown namesake of the ‘Son of Consolation.’ That Alexandria, the place of its earliest reception, was also the place of its birth, is borne out by the internal evidence of style and inter- pretation, which is Alexandrian throughout. ‘The picture too which it presents of feuds between Yahudim (Jews) and Christians is in keeping with the state of the population of that city, the various elements of which were continually in conflict. But the problem of the date is a more difficult one. The Epistle was certainly written after the first destruction of Jerusalem under Titus, to which it alludes; but, had it been composed after the war under Hadrian ending in the second devastation, it could hardly have failed to refer to that event. The possible limits therefore are A.D. 70 and A.D. 132. But within this period of sixty years the most various dates have been assigned to it. The conclusion depends mainly on the interpretation put upon two passages which treat of quotations from the prophets. (1) The first is in § 4, where Daniel vii. 7 sq is quoted as illustrating the great scandal or offence which, according to the writer, is at hand. The date will depend on the interpretation put upon the ‘three kings in one’ (pets vd’ &v Tov Bact Aéwv), or ‘three great horns in one’ (v¢’ &v tpia Tav peyadwv kepatwv) and ‘the little excrescence’ or ‘offshoot horn’ (pxpov Képas tapadva- dvov). And here no theory yet propounded appears quite satisfactory. Weizsacker, who dates the Epistle in Vespasian’s reign (A.D. 70—79), is compelled to consider that emperor as at once one of the great horns and the little horn; Hilgenfeld, who places it under Nerva (a.D. 96— 98), arbitrarily omits Julius and Vitellius from the list of Czesars, that he may make Domitian the tenth king; while both alike fail to re- cognize in Daniel’s little horn a prophecy of Antichrist and there- fore a persecuting emperor. Volkmar’s date (A.D. 119—132), besides other serious objections, depends upon the enumeration of the three kings over and above the ten, whereas the language suggests that they were in some sense comprised within the ten. The solution, which follows, and which we are disposed to adopt provisionally, has not, we believe, been offered before. We enumerate the ten Cesars in their natural sequence, with Weizsacker, and arrive at Vespasian as the tenth. We regard the three Flavii as the three kings destined to be humiliated, with Hilgenfeld. We do not however with him contemplate them as three separate emperors, but explain the language as referring to the as- THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 241 sociation with himself by Vespasian of his two sons Titus and Domitian in the exercise of supreme power. So close a connexion of three in one was never seen in the history of the empire, until a date too late to enter into consideration. The significance of this association is commemorated in several types of coins, which exhibit Vespasian on the obverse and Titus and Domitian on the reverse in various attitudes and with various legends. Lastly, with Volkmar, we interpret the little horn as symboliz- ing Antichrist, and explain it by the expectation of Nero’s reappearance which we know to have been rife during the continuation of the Flavian dynasty. (2) The second passage is the interpretation in § 16 given to Isaiah xlix. 17, where it is foretold to the Yahudim (Jews) that ‘those who pulled down this temple themselves shall build it up,’ and the interpretation goes on to say that ‘this is taking place (ytverau). Because they went to war it was pulled down by their enemies ; now also the very subjects (vnpérac) of their enemies (the Romans) shall build it up!’ This is taken by interpreters generally to refer to the material temple at Jerusalem, and they explain it of the expectations of the Yahudim (Jews) at one epoch or another that the Romans would rebuild the temple—the epoch generally chosen being the conquest of Hadrian, at which point consequently very many place the writing of the Epistle. This conflicts with any natural interpretation of the three horns and the little horn. But (i) no satisfactory evidence has been adduced that Hadrian had any such intention, or that the Yahudim (Jews) had any such expec- tation in his time ; and (ii) there is the still more formidable objection that this interpretation runs counter to the general teaching of this writer, who reproaches the Yahudim (Jews) with their material interpretations of prophecy, and to the whole context, which is conceived in his usual vein. He explains at the outset that the Yahudim (Jews) are wrong in setting their hope on the material building. Yet here, if this interpretation be correct, he tells them to do this very thing. Moreover, lest there should be any mistake, he assures them that there zs a temple, but this temple of the Yahuah (Lord), predicted by the prophets, is a spiritual temple ; for it is either the Church of Messiah (Christ), or the soul of the individual believer, wherein the Yahuah (Lord) dwells. Whether with & we read a second kai after avroi or not, this spiritual interpretation must be correct; but the context suggests its omission. Thus the passage has no bearing at all on the date. For these reasons we should probably place the date of the so-called Epistle of Barnabas between a.p. 7o—79; but the ultimate decision must be affected by the view which shall commend 242 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. itself of the origin of those chapters, which the epistle has in common with the Teaching of the Apostles. Dee The authorities for the text are as follows: (1) GREEK MANUSCRIPTS. 1. The famous Sinaitic Ms (&) of the fourth century, where, in company with the Shepherd of Hermas, it occurs in a complete form, following the Apocalypse, as a sort of appendix to the sacred volume. 2. The Constantinopolitan ms (C) of Bryennios, an eleventh century document (see above, pp. 4, 216); here also the epistle is found complete. 3. The series of nine Greek mss (G), all of one family, enumerated above, p. 166sq; in this collection of manuscripts the first four chapters and part of the fifth are wanting. There is also (11) a LATIN VERSION (L) extant in a Ms of the ninth or tenth century (etropolitanus Q. v. 1. 39, formerly Corbezensis). This Ms omits the last four chapters, which apparently formed no part of the version in question. Lastly, the quotations in Clement of Alexandria, comprising as they do portions of §§ 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 16, 21, and those passages in §§ 18— 21 which this Epistle has in common with the Didache and other documents, open out additional considerations which must not be dis- regarded in the formation of the text. BAPNABA ETTIZ TOAH. I. XAIPETE, viot kai Ouvyatépes, év ovowate Kupiov b] A > / TOU ayarnoavTos nmas, év elpnvn. 2. Meyarov péev dvtT@v kal Trovciwy Tov ToD Ocod / > € r ¢ fi \ > ¢e \ Ly Sixat@patav eis Uuas, vTép TL Kal KaP vrrepBornv varEpev- ppaivouat ert Tois waxapious Kal évddkous vudv Trevpacuy: df »” a fal a / > , ovTws éuhuTov THs Swpeds TvevpaTiKnS Yap EiAnpaTe. 3. 610 Kal padrov ovvyaipw éeuavTd édrrifov cwOHvat, OTE bs fal Fi ’ Ch > / > \ le) t a GdXnO@s BréTr@ ev viv ExKEeXUpLEVOY ATO TOV TOVTLOV THS amnyns Kupiov tvedpa ed? vuds. otTw pe é&érrAnEev emi Umov » éemitroOnTn ovis Uma. 4. TeTEecpévos Ooty TOTO \ \ b] an > ¢ a , \ b] / Kal TVVELOWS E“avTe@, OTL ev Viv AaANoAS TOAKG EéTricTAamat eo > \ / > COA , / \ , OTL Emo TuVmdEVcEV EV 0O@ SiKatocvyns Kupios, Kal TavTes ia) > al A dvaykalomat Kayo els TOUTO, ayaTray Vuds UTép THY YruynY pov: OTL peyarn TiaTis Kal ayarn éyKaToLKel ev Uuiv dr iOL fms avTov' 5. Aoyioapevos ovV TOUTO, OTL éav pedXnon pmoL \ id rn fal , A ’ ’ eo wv »” TéEpl VLaY TOD pépos TL peTadodvat ad’ od EXaBor, bTL éctat € / fol TOLOUTOLS TYEVLATLY UTNpETHTAVTL Els Lobo”, éoTrovdaca \ a lal KATA piKpoV viv Tréutrew, Wa peTa THS TicTEwWS UVMOV TE- Aelav Eynte Tv yvaow. 6. Tpla ody dSoypata éotiv Kupiov' al , 2 \ \ / Uj ¢ Als. \ , + fans édrris, apyn Kal TédXos TicTews Nov’ Kai SuKatoovyn, , > \ Oi yey she) ae 5) / WS ! Kploews apyn Kal TéXos’ ayarn evppociyns Kal ayaddLaceas, épyav Sixaroovvns paptupiat. 7. éyvopicey yap uly o / a Seomrorns Sia Tév Tpodntav Ta TapedAnrvoota Kal Ta éve- A \ A / \ ’ \ (AEE / e CTOTA, Kal TOV perddovTwy Sovs aTrapyas nuiv yevoews. OV i, 2 ovTws] conj. Hilgenfeld; of ro NC; sic L. 16—2 Is. 1. 1I— Jer. vii. 22,
23.  Zech. viii. 17. Ps. li. 19. ? 244 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. (1 ta Kal’ Exacta PrérrovTes evepyovpeva, Kabas éedXadNCEV, / lal dpethopev TAOVTLMOTEpOY Kal UynAOTEpoY Trpocaye TH PoB@ avrov. 8. éya Sé ody ws SidacKaros arr os els €& tpyov UobelEw Oriya, Sv dv év Tots Trapodow evppavOncedOe. Il. “Hyepdv ody ovodv rovnpdv Kai avtod tod évep- Le »” \ > / bd /- e lal / yoovtos éyovtos tiv é£ovclay, ofethouev EavTois mpocé- xyovtes extnteiy Ta Sixardpata Kupiov. 2. ris obv rictews ¢ Lod pen ‘ U \ id / \ \ r npav eialy BonBoit hoBos Kai vropovn, Ta bé€ cvvypayovyTa npiv paxpoOupmla Kal éyKpateia* 3. TOUT@Y MEVOYTMY TA TPOS Kupwov dyvas, cvvevppaivorvtar avtois copia, ovvects, émt- oTnuN, yuo. 4. wepavépwKeyv yap nuiv ova TavTwV TOV mpopytav oT ote Ovoidy oUTE OMoKAVTWULATwY OTE TpOC- popav ypnter, Néyou oTé pév' 5. Ti mol TAAG0C TAN OYCIGN YMON; Aéret Kypioc. TAHPHC EIMI OAOKAYTWMAT@N, KAl CTEAP APN@N KAl AIMA TAYPWN KAl TPATWN OY BoYAOMal, OYA’ AN EPyHCOE OOANAI MOI. TIC Ap EZEZHTHCEN TAYTA EK TN YEIP@N YMON ; TIATEIN MOY THN AYAHN OY TrIpOcOHcecbe’ "EAN cepHTe CEMIAAAIN, MATAION' OYMIAMA, BA€AYTMA MOI ECTIN' TAC NEOMHNIAC YM@N Kal TA CABBaTA OYK ANEyOMal. 6. TadTa ody KaTHpynoeEV, va 6 xt , lal / ¢€ lal >] fal la wv lal Kawwos vouos Tov Kupiov nudv ‘Incov Xpictov, avev Cvyov > / v \ b] , by4 \ / "4 avaykns By, un avOpwrotrointoy éyn THY Tpoapopayv. 7. dé- ret 5€ maduv mpos avtovss MH Erdy ENETEIAAMHN TOIC TIATPACIN YM@N €kTropeyomenoic €k PAc Airyttoy, TpoceNérkal Mol OAOKAY- TOMATA Kal OBYcilac; 8. AAN H TOYTO ENETEIAAMHN ayTOIC’ “Eka- CTOC YM@N KATA TOY TIAHCION €N TH KaPAIA AYTOY KAKIAN MH MNHCIKAKEIT@, KAl OPKON YeYAA MH draTtéte. 9. AlicOaverPar Ly ba /- Xf: > / \ / lal ’ , ovv odelNoper, 7) OVTES GovVETOL, THY yYoOuNV THS ayabworvns Tod TaTpos nuav: OTL uly Aeéyet, OéXwv nuds pr) dpolws TravwpEevous exeivors CnTEly TOS TPOTAywpEV AUTO. 10. Huiv ovy ovTws Aéyer: Oycia TH Oed kapAla CYNTETPIMMENH, GCMH ey@Aiac TH Kypi@ Kapdia AOZAZOYCA TON TETAAKOTA AYTHN. axpiBevecOat otv odeiropuer, aderAdol, wept THs cwTnpias LOY, va [Ln 0 ToVNpos Tapeicdvaw TAAVNS ToLNncas ev Huiv a Shean! a a ¢ a exagevdoovncyn nas ato THS Cons Nuov. 1v] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 245 III. Aéyes ody radu mepi tovTwyv pos avTovs’ “Ina TI Is. lviii. MOI NHCTeyeTe, Aérel Kypioc, @c CHMEPON AKOYCOANAI EN KpayrH one THN QWNHN YM@N3 OY TAYTHN THN NHCTEIAN €fd> éZeAeZMHN, Aéret Kypioc, oYK AN@pwrTON TATIEINOFNTA THN YyHN ayTOY, 2. OYA AN KAMYHTE GC KPIKON TON TPAyHAON YM@N, KAl CAKKON ENAYCHCOE KAl CMOAON YTTOCTPWCHTE, OYA OYTWC KAAECETE NH- CTEIAN AEKTHN. 3. mpos nuas Sé Neveu “lAoY aYTH H NHCTEIA HN €ray €Z€AeZAMHN, A€rel Kypioc’ AYe TAN CYNAECMON AAIKIAC, AIXAYE CTPArPAAIAC BIAI@ON CYNAAAAPMATON, ATTOCTEAAE TEAPAYCMENOYC €N AMECE!, KAI TIACAN AAIKON CYNFPArIN AldcTIA. AIAOPYTITE TIEIN@CIN TON APTON COyY, KAl TYMNON €AN IAHC, TrepiBade’ AcTéroye elcare Eic TON OIKON Coy, Kal EAN TAHC TATIEINON, OYY YTTEPOYH AYTON, OYAE AIO TAN CIKEIWN TOY cTeEpmaTdc coy. 4. TéTe parHceTal TIPWIMON TO t@c coy, Kal TA IAMATA COY TAYéwWC ANATEAE!, Kal TIPOTTOpeYCeTAl EMTIPOCHEN COY H AIKAIOCYNH, KAl H AdZA TOY Ocoft TrepicTeAel ce’ 5. TUTE BOoHcelc, Kal 6 Oedc émakoyceTal coy, eT! AdAOYNTOC coy épel, lAoy TApemr EAN AcEAHC ATTO COY CYNAECMON KAl YEIPOTONIAN Kal PAMA TOFPYCMOY, Kal A@C TIEIN@NTI TON APTON coy €k YyYyfic coy, Kal pYYHN TETATTIEINDMENHN €AcHCHC. 6, ets TOUTO ovy, ddeAhoi, 0 waxpdOupmos TpoBrkYras ws ev aKepato- WN TLOTEVTEL O NaS dV HTOlwaceEV ev TO HyaTTNUEVw aUTOD, mpoehavépwcev nuiv Tept TavTwv, iva pa) Tpecpnocwpeba OS eTNAUTOL TO ExElVOV VOM. IV. Aci oty nuds rept tov évertotwy émuTodd épav- vovtas éextnteiv Ta Svvayeva nuds ooblew. dhvywpev ovv TEXNELWS ATO TAVTMV TOY épywY Tis avouias, ynTOTE KaTa- AaBy nuas Ta épya THS avomias: Kal plonow@pey THY TAVNY TOU voy KaLpov, iva eis TOV péAAOVTA ayarrnOapev. 2. pu) S@uev TH Eavtdv >Wuyh avecw, wate éxew avTnv é€ovctay PETA GUAPTWADY Kal TovnpwY cuVYTpEexELV, pNTTOTE OpoLw- Oapev avtois. 3. Td TédeLov cKavdadov IyyiKev, Tept od yéyparrat, ws “Evoy réyet. eis tTodTo yap 6 Seamorns TUVTETUNKEY TOS KaLpovs Kal Tas Huépas, va Taydvn 6 nyamnpévos adtod Kab él tiv KAnpovomiay HEn. 4. Aéycu Dan. vii.
24.  Dan. vii. Bs Ex. xxxl. 18, xxxiv.
28.  Ex. xxxii. 7: : Deut. ix. 2. 246 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [1v Sé obtws Kal 6 mpodynrns: Bacideiat A€KA ETT TAC rAc BactAey- COYCIN, KAl €@ZANACTHCETAI OTTICBEN AYT@N MIKPOC BaciAeyc, OC TATIEINCE] TPEIC Yc) EN T@N BACIAEWN. 5. Op"olws Tepl TOD a ‘ ? ’ ' avrov reyes Aavinds Kai €lson TO TETAPTON BHPION TIONHPON KAl ICYYPON KAl YAAETI@TEPON TIAPA TIANTA TA OHPpIA TAC FAC, Kal dc €2 aYTOY ANETEIAEN AEKA KEPATA, KAI €Z AYT@N MIKPON KEPAC TIAPAYAAION, KAl GC €TATIEINWCEN Ys EN TPIA TON META- AWN KEPATWON. 6. cuVLevat ody opetreTe. “Erte b€ Kai TOTO 5 fol id lal € > ¢ tal v 97 \ \ / ’ tal épwT® vuds ws els €€ vudv By, idiws 6€ Kal TavTas ayaTOv brép THv Wuyny wou, Tpocéxew viv EavTois Kai 7) oporoda bat Tio WwW, eric@pevovtas Tals apwaptias Uuav, NéyovTas OTL 7 Ova- fa} , ¢ an / > / ¢ lel Tin > > > Lal cA > NKN NOV LEVEL EKELVOLS* NUMVY MEV" AAN EKELVOL OVTWS ELS réXos aTw@recay avTny, \aBdvTos 75n TOD Mwicéws. 7. Eyer yap 7 ypadn Kai HN Mayciic én TH Opel NHCTEYWN HMépac TEC- CEPAKONTA Kal NYKTAC TECCEPAKONTA, KAl EAABEN THN AIAOHKHN ATTO Toy Kypioy, TAdKac AI@INAC TerpAaMMENAC T@ AaKTYAG@ THe yeEIpoc Toy Kypioy. 8. adda éeriotpadertes Eri Ta cidwra aTrwdecav avTnv: Réyer yap ovtws Kupios: Mawych MoycA, kataBHet TO TAxOC, GTI HNOMHCEN O Aadc coy, OYC €ZHrarec €k rAc AirynToy. Kat ovrvpxev Mavors nal épupev tas dv0 mAaKas Ex TOV xYElp@v avTod: Kal ouveTpiBn avTdv n diaOynKn, iva 7 Tod nyarnuévov Incod éveatacdpayicOn eis THY Kapdiay nuadv év ed7ridt THS Tlatews avTod. 9. IloAAa S€ Oérwv ypadew, ovy ws didadcKanos, GAN ws TpérEr dyaravT. ad’ dv Exopev pn éAXElrrev, ypadew éorrovdaca, Tepiynua vuov. 616 mpocéyaper év Tals eoxatals nuépars. ovdev yap wdedyoes nas 6 Tas xpovos THS TiaTews Nudy, Eady pun voV ev TO b / a x lal Ls / e / dvop@ Kaip@ Kal Tois pédXovolv cKavdddols, ws TpETEL tia a b led if \ a ! c / viois Ocod, avtictapev, iva un oxn Tapeicdvow 6 pédas. 10. diyomwev ATO TagNsS MATALOTHTOS, wLonTw"EV TEAELWS TA » a a c fol aN ae A BJ / Ul Epya tis jwovnpas 6600. M7 Ka éavtods évdvvovtes pova- ¢ ” / > b] bee \ ule IN , fete ws 7)6n Seduxatwmpévol, ANN Eri TO avTO cuUVEpYoMEVoL iv. 6 judy wéver éxelvois* nuwy wév] conj. Harmer; juav wey &;3 vuor vuiy pever C3; illorum et nostrum est. nostrum est autem L. v] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 247 tal \ a auvgnretre Tepl TOU Kowh oupdépovTos. II. Neyer yap 7 ypady OYai ol cyNeTO! EayTOIC KAI ENGTHION EAYT@N ETTICTHMONEC. Is. v. 21. , , , \ r A a 94? yevouc0a mvevpatixol, yevoOmeOa vaos TédeLos TH Oecd. eh al lal / an fal dcov cotiv év piv, pereTOuev Tov PoBov Tod Oecod [Kal] , ’ ‘ A ’ \ ~) fal e/ 3 Lal guraccew aywvitwpeba tas évTodkas avTod, iva ev Tots / , nr > lol ¢€ / > Sixatopacw avtod evppavOdpev. 12. 6 Kupios atpocw- ToAnUTTwS KpivEel TOY KOcMOV. ExacTos Ka0as érrolnceD cal > fal Komeira. éav 7 ayabos, n Sixacocvyvn a’rod tponyncerat aA \ “ auto’ é€ay 7 Trovnpds, 6 pcos THs Trovnpias EumpooOev avTov 13. Wa pnrrote éravatravopevot Ws KANTOL eTriKAbD- nr n \ TVaTwpeV Tals awapTials Nua, Kal 6 Trovnpos dpyav NaBov \ Fe a 3 / ] / c oa ’ \ a thy Kab nuov éfovclay arwontar nuas ato THs Bacidelas Tov Kupiov. 14. "Ete 5é xaxeivo, ddeXdol pov, voeite: bTav Prérrere peta THALKADTA oHpeia Kal Tépata yeyovota év T@ Iopanr Kal ovTws éveataderelpOar avTovs’ Tpocéyapmev os por pote PNTOTE, WS YéeypaTTaL, TOAAOL KAHTO!, OAirol Aé €@kAEKTO! S. Matt. ¢ a Xxli. 14. evpeOoper. V. Eis rodto yap virréuewev 6 Kiptos rapadodvar tv / > / ivf a > / a e fal id fal capka eis KatadpGopayr, iva TH adpéces THY apapTiav ayvicda- al a ? a bev, 0 €oTW ev TO aipaTe Tod pavTicpaTos avTod. 2. yéyparr- \ \ ’ rn a \ \ \ > / \ \ \ Tat yap Tepi avtod & pév pos Tov “Iapanr, & Sé pds nas. Réyer 5€ oUTws’ *EtpaymaticbH Ald Tac ANOMIAC HMON Is. lili. 5, KAI MEMAAAKICTAI AIA TAC AMAPTIAC HM@N, TG) MATH AYTOY HMEIC z a7 c ’ eS ‘ \ c > \ » IABHMEN. WC MPOBATON ETT] CCbATHN HY9H KAI WC AMNOC ACOdNOC ’ an ' ‘ , la] ~ ENANTION TOY KEIPANTOC AYTON. 3. oUKODY UrrepevyapLoTeEty opetdomev TH Kupio, 67t kal Ta TapedynrvOdTa nyiv éyvo- nr a e lal plioev, Kal év Tois évert@ow nuas éoodicer, Kal eis Ta , > / MéANOVTA OVK écpeV aovVETOL. 4. Aéyer SE n ypadry: OY«K Prov.i. 17. AAIKMC EKTEINETAI AIKTYA TITEPWTOIC. TOTO Aéyer StL SiKalas 5 a ” “wv »” c an / f atronettat avOpwrros, ds eywv 00d Sitxatoovyns yvoow, e 4 > c \ / ’ IZ ” \ \ lal €auTov els OOo oKdTOVs atrocuvéyet. 5. "Ete 5é Kali TodTO, adedpot pov: ei 6 Kupwos vréuewev trabeiv mepl ths wuyis c lel n \ rn / ys e C2 € \ b x 7LOV, WY TavTOS Tov Kocpou Kuptos, @ eimev 6 Meds aro KataBorhs Koopov' TToiHica@MeN ANOPOTION KAT EIKONA Kal KAO Gen. i. 26. S. Matt. ib JE Zech. xiii. a. S. Matt. XXVI1. 31. IPSs cxite Qi CX1Ks 120, XXil. Is. 1. 6, 7. lish db Gy Is. xxviii. 16. 248 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [v « U , 2 A = € ¢ OMOIWCIN HMETEPAN’ Iws odV UIréweElVEY UTO YeLpos avOpwTraV a ’ ra a eee , la \ mabeiv; wabete. 6. 01 Tpopntat, ar avtod exovTes THV xXapw, eis avTov érpopyntevoay. adTos bé Wa KaTapynon tov Oavatov kal thv €x vexpov avactacw Sei—n, bTL év \ ” ’ \ “ € / vA \ lal capKi eer avroy davepwOnvat, vrépewev, 7. Wa Kal Tols TaTpacw THy éTayyedXlav aTrob@ Kal avTos éavT@ TOV Aaov \ c , > / > \ A lal v a \ Tov Kawvov éTowalwy émideiEn, emi THS YRS @V, OTL THD advactacw avTos Tomaas Kpivel. 8. Tépas yé ToL dibacKwv tov Iopanr Kai THALKadTa Tépata Kal oOnpela TroL@Y ExNnpUT- id / ,’ / ¢ \ ‘ ’ / > / cev, Kal UTEepnyatrncev avToV. Q, OTE O€ Tovs idlovs aTroaTd- Rous TOS MEANOVTAS KNpVTTEW TO EVayyéNLov avToD é£erEEaTO, dvtas UTép Tacay apaptiay avouwrépous, iva deiEn OTL OYK HAOEN KAAEcal AIKAlOYC AAAA AMAPTWAOYC, TOTE epavépwoeD €avTov eivat viov Oeod. 10. Ei ydp un ndrAOev ev capKi, ovd’ ” ee ia Wale s ay ee ey. \ av tes of avOpwro éowOncav BrétrovTEs avTov' OTE TOV HéAXOVTA jn) Elvat HALOV, Epyov TOV YELPaV avTOd UTrapyoVTa, > / , > / ’ \ a A b) lal s éuPréErrovtes ovK iayvouvow eis Tas axTivas avToD avtopOar- noat. 1. ovKody 6 vids Tov Beod eis TovTO ev capKl Ar\OGev, Wa TO TéXELOY TOY GwapTiaY avaKkeparalwon Tois / ] / \ ‘ ’ lal > r ’ Siwkaow év Oavatw tos tpopytas av’Tov. 12. ovKodY Eis lal ig ik / \ ec \ \ \ ipl \ TOUTO UTémetvev. Réyer yap 0 Beds tTHy TANYHVY THS TapKos avtov OTe €& avtav’ “OTaN TATAZCIN TON TIOIMENA EAYTOON, TOTe ATOAEITAI TA TIPOBATA THC TIOIMNHC. 13. Autos d€ HOEAnceEV oUTw mabeiv. ede yap iva éri EvrXov aby. éyer yap oO mpodntevav eT avT@ Peical moy TAc pyyAc A110 pom@aiac’ Kat" Ka@HAwcoN MOY TAC CAPKAC, STI TIONHPEYOMEN@N CYNATODTAI €MIANECTHCAN MOI. 14. Kal maduw Aéyer lAoy TéBEIKA MOY TON N@TON €IC MACTIFAC, TAC AE ClArONAC MOY EIC PaTTICMATA, TO AE TIPOCWTTON MOY EOHKA GC CTEPEAN TIETPAN. VI. “Ore ody érroincey tiv évtorny, Ti réyer; Tic 6 KpI- NOMENOC MOI; ANTICTHT@ MOI’ H TIC 6 AIKAIOYMENOC MOI; EffICAT@ Th traidi Kypioy. 2. OYal YMIN, OT! YMEIC TIANTEC GC IMATION TIAAAI@OHCECHE, KAI CHC KATADATETAI YMAC. Kal TaALY Neyer O \ iY mpodntns, émel bs AlOos iayupos éTéOn eis cuvtprBnr" “lacy v1] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 249 EMBAAG) CIC TA BEMEAIA ZION AION TIOAYTEAA, EKAEKTUN, AKPOFO- NIAION, ENTIMON. 3. ELTa TL Aéyer; Kai dc éAmicel éT” aYTON , > \ 7A > \ / Ss ¢€ al ¢ > lA \ , ZHCETAI EIC TON AIMNA. ert ALGov ovY nuav n édXTis; pn Yé- > let | \ > > , / \ , ’ lal / vowTo. GNX’ érrel ev ioxyvs TéDELKEY THY TapKa avTod Kupuos. Reyer yap: Kai EOHKEN ME WC CTEPEAN TIETPAN. 4. AEyes O€ Is. 1. 7. madnw 60 tpodntns: AiGon ON ATTEAOKIMACAN O1 OIKOAOMOYNTEC, Ps. exviii. ’ > \ ' = 22. OYTOC €feNHOH cic KEAAHN FONIAC. Kal Taduv Aéyeu: AYTH Ps. exviii. ECTIN H HMépA H MEPAAH Kal OAYMACTH, HN eETToIHceN 6 Kypioc. 7* € / Ca / ivf / b) \ / 5. AzrdAovotepov viv ypapo, iva ovvinre, éyo Tepinua al >) / € Led / > / U ¢ / ee THS ayaTns vuwv. 6. TL ov Neyer Tad Oo TpodyTns ; TMepi- Ps.xxii.17, ! \ ' as ' reve er Cxvili. 12. ECYEN ME CYNATWFH TIONHPEYOMENDN, EKYKA@CAN ME GCEl MEAIC= cal KHPION’ Kad: “Ertl TON iMaTICMON MOY €BAAON KAAPON. 7. €v Ps. xxii. 19: \ Sr ’ a / a \ / GapKi ovv avTov wédrovTOS Hhavepovabat Kai TaayeEL, TpoE- / \ / , \ € f > \ \ ’ / gpavepwOn To mabos. Reyer yap 6 Tpopyrys él Tov lopannr: Oyai TH yyy ayTan, Sti BeBoYAeyNTal BOYAHN TIONHPAN KO” éay- Is. iii. 9, a > , ! ‘ , a , Cae. > ' Io. TON, eiTTONTec’ AHCWMEN TON AIKAION, OTI AYCYPHCTOC HMIN €CTIN. 8. Ti NEyes O Aros Trpodyntns Mwians avtois; *lAoy Tdde Ex. xxxiii. ! , c ' aE le > \ A \ > ' a I 3° Aéret Kypioc 6 Oedc: EicéA@ate cic THN FAN THN AraOHN, HN - @mocen Kypioc TG) “ABpadm kal ‘Icadk Kal “lakooB, Kal KATAKAHPO- , 2 , a ene ' \ ' / \ / ¢ NOMHCATE AYTHN, FAN PEOYCAN [AAA KAl MEAL Q. TL OE A€yet 1) A / / > \ ss ) \ / yvaows; wabere. €dtricate évl TOV év capKl pédAXOVTA dave- povobar vuiv “Incody. avOpwios yap yn éotiv macyovca: am™0 Tpocwouv yap THS ys n TAA Tod "Adam éyéveTo. IO. ti ovv déyeur Eic THN PAN THN AraOHN, FAN PéoycaN dda Ex. xxxiii. KAl MEAl; EvNOYNTOS 6 Kupios nudv, adergol, 6 codiav Kal oa lal / * ¢ Lal lal / b) lal / \ e voov Oéwevos é€v nyiv tov Kpudiwy avTov. Réyes yap o mpopytns Tapaornv Kupiouv: tis vonoer, ef un codes Kal emioTHuwV Kal ayatav Tov Kuptov avrod; 11. "Exel ovv ékalvicev Nuas ev TH abéoes TOY apapTLav, éTOlncEV Nas wv: t e , 4 \ / ¢ x \ > GOV TUTOV, ws Traldioy ExeLy THY Wuyny, Ws av On ava- , > ar _¢ A f \ ¢ NX \ ¢ A TANATTOVTOS AVTOD Huds. 12. éyel yap 7 ypadn Tepl nuar, ws EyeL TO vig: TloiicwMeN KAT EIKONA KAl KAO’ OMOIWCIN Gen. i. 26. HM@N TON ANOPA@TION, Kal APYET@CAN TN OHPION TAC TAC Kal T@N TIETEIN@N TOY OYPANOY KAI TON iXOY@N TAC BAdAdCCHC. Kat Gen. i. 28. ?5. Matt. XX eOs Ex. xxxiii. I, 3: HZ, Xie 1.0; XXXVi. 26. ibe ditty 3} Ps.xxil.23. Gen. 1. 28. 250 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [vi elev Kupios idov TO Kadov TAacHAa nud’ AyZANECBE KAl ’ ‘ ~ nr / TIAHOYNECOE KAI TIAHP@CATE THN TAN. TavTa mpos Tov vIOP. lal ¢ lal 13. manu coe eridelEw mas Tpos Nuas Neyer [Kvpuos]. dev- Tépav Tracw em eoyatwv éeTroincey. Réyer S€ Kupsos’ ’lA0y TIOID TA ECYATA DC TA TIPATA. Els TOUTO ovY éexnpvEEV 6 TrpO- dytns EicéAdate eic AN péoycan [AAA KAl MEAI, KAI KATAKYPIEY- cate ayTAc. 14. le ody nels avatreTTAacpEOa, KaOa@s TadwW év érépw tmpopyntn reyes “ldoy, Aérei Kypioc, EZEAM TOYTON, TovTéoTL wv mpoéBrerev TO mvedua Kupiov, tac MM@iNAC ’ \ > a U vd a4 > \ ” KAPAIAC KAl EMBAAG CAPKINAC. OTL AUTOS EY TapKL EwEeAdEV pavepodoba: Kai €v nuiv KaToiKely. 15. vaos yap Garytos, iO aN , ° K 4 \ / ¢ a fal 66 aderhot pou, TH Kuplo TO KaTountnpioy nudv THs Kapoias. 16. Néyes yap Kupsos maduv" Kai EN TINI OOHcomal TH Kypio TH Old moy Kal AoZAcOHcomal ; "EZoMOAOPHCOMal CO! EN EKKAHCIA > a \ a > ' > ' 6 it J la) AAEAMON MOY KAl YAAG) CO] ANAMECON EKKAHCIAC ATION. OUKOVY e A 2) sy a 3 / zd \ n \ bd / / ‘ nels Expev Os Elonyayev els THY YHV THY ayaOnv. 17. TL s \ U \ \ I 5 Uys lal \ / Ui 3 OU TO YAXa KAL TO MEAL; OTL TPWTOV TO Talolov MéNITL, ELTA rf nr fal / lal yaraxte Cworroteitar. oU’Tws ovY Kal nueis TH TioTEL THS érrayyertas Kal TO AROYH CwoTroLovpevot Enoopev KaTaKUpLEv- ovTes THS yns. 18. mpoecpnkapev Sé éerrava’ Kai ayzZanecbw- CAN Kal TTAHOYNECO@CAN Kal APYETMCAN TON IYOYWN. Tis OUY O na x > lal a Suvapevos [viv] dpxyew Onpiwy 7 ixOvav 7 TeTewav TOD 3 lal ’ / A ’ } ed \ ” , id ovpavov; aicGavecOar yap opetAomev OTe TO apyey éEovatias 3 , ~/ > / U > 5 > / éotiv, Wa tis émutaéas Kuplevon. 19. Eb ovv ov yiveTat a la ” Cc oA ” , Fis \ b] \ lal TovTO vov, dpa nuiv elpnKey TOoTe OTaV Kal aUTOL TEhELWOG- pev KANpovopot THS SiaOHKns Kuplov yevér Oat. VII. Ovxodv voeire, téxva evppoovvns, OTe TavTa 6 4 Uy / Cours ivf A e \ Kados Kuptos mpoepavépwoey nuiv, va yvopev & Kata fa I. a e TavTa evyapiaTourTEs oeidomev aivety. 2. EL Ov O Vids Tov Ped, dv Kupios Kal wédrov Kpivey COvtas Kat vexpovs, ” A ec \ ’ an , Con , o érabev iva ) TANY) aVTOD SwoTronon nuas, TicTEVTwpEV OTL 6 vids TOU Med ovK ndvvaTo TraGety ei un OL Huds. 3. AANA \ \ 3 / v \ a 2) / lal \ Kal oraupwbels éroriveto d£eu Kai yoNH. aKxovoate mas Trepl cant, a lol na TovTou TepavépwKay ol lepeis TOU vaod. yeypampévns évTo- vir] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 251 Ajs’ “Oc AN MH NHCTeEYCH THN NHCTEIAN, @anNdT@ €Z0AEOpeyOH- Lev. xxiii. b) I Ku 5) \ \ SEEN Pa a ¢ , 29- ceTal, everethato Kupuos, éret Kal avtos vmép Tay nueTépwv ¢ al ” \ lal lo) , , GpLapTLov e“edrev TO TKEvOS TOU TVEvpaTOS Tpoadépely Ov- 7 ¢ A ciay, iva kal 0 TUTOS 6 yevouevos eri load Tod Tpocevex- \ / a Oévros emt TO Ovovactnpiov Tees OH. 4. Ti ody reyes ev TH / A \ ul > nw U Lal , n mpopyty ; Kai maretwcan &k TOY Tpdroy TOY Mpocdepomenoy TH ? NHCTEIQ YTTEP TIAC@N TON AMAPTION. ‘TpowéyeTe axptBas’ Kai ? areT@can oi iepeic MONO! TANTEC TO ENTEPON ATTAYTON META OZ0yc. 5. mpos Ti; émrerdn ewe, UTEP awapTiay péAXOVTA rn A an an / TOU NaOV pov TOV KaLVod Tpochépety THY TAapKa fLoV, “éEAXETE y \ \ v / e lal f fa) a motive YoAnv peta O€ous, paryete vets povot, TOD aod vynoTevovtos Kal KoTTTOMévou él GaKKOU Kal otrobot' wva belEn Gru Set avtov Tabeiy UT avTdv. 6. & évete(NaTo Tpoc- éyete’ AdBeTe AYO TpéroYC KAAOYC Kal OMOIOYC Kal TIPOCENELKATE, Lev. xvi. 7, Kal AaBETW 6 lepeyc TON ENA eEic GAOKAYTOMA YTTED AMAaPTION. 2° 7. Tov O€ éva TL Toinowow; “Emikatdpatoc, dno, 6 eic. Lev. xvi.8. mpooéyeTe TMS 0 TUTTOS TOD “Inood davepodrar’ 8. Kai éumty- CATE TIANTEC KAI KATAKENTHCATE, KAI TrEpIbETE TO EPION TO KOK- \ \ \ > n \ a > By] , KINON TTEPI THN KEQAAHN AYTOY, KAl OYTOC EIC EPHMON BAHOHTOD. ety é / e/ wv ¢ U \ / ’ \ Kal OTay yévnTtat oUTas, ayer 6 Bactalwv Tov Tpayov eis THY a N > lal Ae Tee \ b] / 2 \ b] \ ie épnuov, Kal adaipet TO Eptov Kal émuTiOnow avTo ert ppv- \ Ll € / ®. \\ \ \ Sai yavov TO Neyouevoy payia, ov Kal Tos BAacTOVs ei@Oapev A e WA Tpeyew ev TH ySpa evpicKoyTES. OVTW pdVNS THS payou ot a -; an KapTol yAuKEls Eloiv. 9. TL OUY TODTO éoTLV; TpocéyeTe’ TON MEN ENA ETT] TO BYCIACTHPION, TON AE ENA ETTIKATAPATON, KQL Lev. xvi.8. a \ > > / pe Ni, 35/, PEN OTL TOV éTLKaTapaTtoy éaTehavwpévoy’ emrELdn OrpovTat avToV hi ¢€ TOTE TH) Nmepa TOY Todnpn EXOVTA TOY KOKKLVOV Trepl THY fa] 7 tal capka, Kal épodow Ovx obrds éotw bv Tote nels ecTaupa- eee} ! b) ! aA I A ? 5 c capev Kal e€ovlernocapev eutrtvcaytes; dAnOads ovTOS HV O s / e \ e\ an a i 9 An \ vA TOTE NEY@Y EaVTOV VLOV TOU Ocod civat. 10. Tas yap omotos fal c ' 3 / Exelv@ 3 ELS TOUTO OMOIOYC TOYC TPArOYC, KAAOYC, IcoyC, va OTaV idwow avTov TOTEe épyopmevoy, ExTAaYOoL eT TH OpmoloTHTe vii. 8 paxla] conj. Gebhardt; paxyrA &; paxn C3 paxtt G3; rubus L. paxou] conj. Voss; pdxous NG; faxyjs C; al. L. Ps. xviii. Os ene Is. xxxiii. 13. 252 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [vir lal / =) n 16 \ , lal ft / TOU Tpayov. OUKOUY LOE TOY TUTTOV TOU pEAAOVTOS TragyeELV rn / n nr *Inoovd. 11. Té d€ Ore TO Eptov pécov Tav axavOav TWWéacw ; / >’ \ lal li lel A 3 Dy Lf Oé vA a .\ Oar TUTros éotly Tod “Inood TH éxKrAnoia Oépevos, OTL Os éav OAH \ »” s \ / ” , \ \ lal 4 A TO €piov apat TO KOoKKLvVoY, Eber avTOY TOAAa Trabeiy Sia TO elvat doBepav thy axavOav, kat OuBévta KuUpLedoaL avTod. Otro, dyaiv, of OérXovtés pe iSeiv Kal Gyracbai pou rns Bact- Me lal Nelas odeidovaw OrLBévTEs Kal TaOovTes NaPetv pe. VIII. Tiva dé Soxetre ritov eivat, OTe évtéradtat TO / ‘ *Iopanr mpoohéper Sapadw Tors avdpas év ols eiclv apap- \ tiat Tédevat, Kal opakavTas KaTakaiew, Kal aipew ToTE Ta / \ \ f ’ ” \ / \ oo qatdla omrooov Kat Banrnrew els ayyn, Kat TrepLTLOévat TO EpLov \ , b) A / ” / € Uy c lal lal A TO KoKKLvoV ert Evov (ide TAAL O TUTTOS 6 TOU aTaUpOU Kal \ ” \ / \ Nee: \ ao € / TO €plov TO KOKKLVOV) Kal TO VacwToV, Kai OUTwS pavTifew \ / 9 ev, \ / / ¢ / ’ \ A ¢ Ta Talia Ka? éva TOV aor, iva ayvifwvTat ato TOY apap- TLV; 2. voeiTe TaS Ev ATOTHTL AéyeTaL Viv’ 6 pmoaVos > a > / e / ” ¢c \ e Incods éotiv, of mpoodépovtes avdpes apwapTtwArol ot mpoc- evéyKavtTes avTov émt THv ohaynv. feita ovKéte avopes, ovKeTL apaptwrov 7» do€a.f 3. Ol pavtifovtes raids of € a lal x evayyeducapevor nuivy thy adecw TeV apapTidy Kal TOV m \ ”- bt. e ed r > / \ bs ayvicwov THs Kapdlas, ols EbwKev Tov evayyedtov THY éEov- a a lf ciav, ovow Sexadvo eis paptipiov Tév hura@v (OTL Sexadvo gurat tov “lopannr), eis TO Knpvocew. 4. Siati O€ TpeEls a € i¢ / 3 / > Ul b) / > matoes of pavTiCovtes; eis paptuptov “ABpaap, ‘Icadk, "la- K@B, OTL OUTOL weyador TO Dew. 5. “Oru dé TO eptov emi TO Evrov" OTe 7 Bacirela ‘Inood éri Evrov, Kal OTe of EXsrilovtes eS) 3 \ / ’ \ vA i. Va ey, es ém avtov Cncovtat els Tov ai@va. 6. Avati dé aya To éptov NaN SCY = Ge 2 A B Wes ee ee y” Kal TO VoowTrov; oT ev TH Bacidela avTov nuépat Ecovtat \ Ne (fees) ® e€ - f er yf C3 a Tovnpal Kal puTrapai, év als nels c@Onoopeba OTL 6 adyov capka O1a Tov pi’ToU TOU Vacwrou idtalt. 7. Kal Ota TOTO OUTS Yevomeva Huiy péev EoTLV Pavepa, ExElvois 5é TKOTELVG, 4 , A a i OTL oUK 7KOVcaY dwvns Kupiov. \ f \ a ’ IX. Aéyes yap mahi tept Tov WTlwv, Tas TEpLéTEwev is A \ / , Ud bd lel > > 1 nav THv Kapdiav. déyer Kupios €v tO trpodytn: Eic AKoHNn > ' c , ’ \ Ud , > ales ' € Q@TIOY YTHKOYCAN MOY. KQ@L TadLV Reyer: Axori AKOYCONTAI O1 1x] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 253 TIOPPWOEN, d ETTOIHCA FN@CONTAI Kal+ TlepiTMHOHTE, Aéyes Kuv- Jer. iv. 4. plos, TAC KapAlac YMON. 2. Kal maduv Aéyerr “Axoye, “IcpatA, Jer- vii. 2, ’ c ' ' ec ! A 3° Ot! TAAe A€re! Kypioc 6 Oedc coy. Tic écTiIN 6 BEAWN ZAcal EIC Ps, xxxiv. TON AI@NA; AKOH AkOYCAT@ TAC wNAc TOY Talddc Moy. 3. Kal F* 46 mar. Eyer “Akoye OYpané, kal EN@TIZOY FA, Ot! Kypioc €AAAH- Is. i. 2. lal > , \ / fe > , U . CEN TAYTA EIC MAPTYPION. Kal mraduv Evers “AkoYcate AdrON Is. i. 10. Kypioy, Apyontec TOY Aaof Toytoy. Kal madu réye Axoycate, Is. xl. 3- TEKNA, WNAC BowNTOc EN TH EPHM®. 4. OUKODY TepLéTEpweV NOV Tas akoas, (va akovcayTes AOYOY TLaTEVTwWpmEV NuEls. "AXAG Kal 7 TepiToun ep 7 TeTolWacwW KaTHpynTaL TreEpt- \ \ 7 ’ \ n > \ / TONY yap ElipnKev ov capKos yevnOnvat. adda TapéBycar, é ov \ ’ Lf ’ , / \ ’ tee TL ayyeXos Trovnpos Ecodifev avTous. 5. EEL POS AVTOUS Taade Aére: Kypioc 6 Oedc yman (bde evpicxw évtToAnv): MH Jer. iv. 3, 4. CTIEIPETE ETT AKANOAIC, TEPITMHOHTE TH Kypiw YMON. Kal TL Aéyes ; TeprrmH@ute THN CKAHPOKAPAIAN YMON, KAl TON TPAYHAON Deut. x. A c , > , , , U 10. YMGN OY CKAHpyNeite. AaBe mare: “ldoy, A€re! Kypioc, MANTA Jer. ix. 26. TA €0NH [AtTepITMHTA] AKPOBYCTIAN, O AE AAdC OYTOC ATTEPITMHTOC KapAiac. 6. GAN épetss Kal pny mepitétuntat 6 ads eis aodpayida. addda Kal mas Lvpos Kal”Apaw Kai Tavtes of e A Aa > , be Le > na ’ a , ’ a lepels TOV ciO@AwWY. apa ovY KaKeivou éx THS StalynKys avTa@v elolv; adda kal of Aiyvirtiot év TeptTopy eiciv. 7. Madete 5S t > / \ Ud / (v4 , \ ovv, TéexVa ayaTns, Tepl TavTwy TAovoiws, OTe “ABpadw A \ \ 3 , / > \ ’ TpOTos Tepitouny Sovs év mvevpate TpoBr€ Was eis Tov 'In- cody Teptéreuev, AaB@v TpLaV ypaupaTwv Soypata. 8. é- yee yap: Kai tepietemen “ABpadm €K TOY OIKOY AYTOY ANAPAC Gen. xiv. \ \ ’ , > c 5 6 A sn A 7 14, XVll. AEKAOKTG KAI TPlaKOcioyc. Tis ovv 9 Ooleica avT@ yvaats ; 23" pabete Ott Tovs SexaoxTO mpoTovs, Kal SidoTnwa Troincas Reyer Tplakociovs. TO Sexaoxt@ [I déxa, H oxra]: éxers 2 A c/ Nee \ > lal ” ” \ , Inoovv. bts dé 0 ctaupos ev TO T 7pedrev Eve THY Yapur, Reyes Kal Tpraxocious. Sndrol odv tov pev “Incody év Tots ducly ypaypacty, kal év TH Evi TOY oTavpov. YQ. oldev O THY ” \ a , > le} / bd Com , \ éugutov Swpeav THs StaOnkns avTod Oépmevos ev nuiv: ovdets / ” JELED HE'D, a / 3 \ ay a yi ! yvnowwtepov Ewabev am euod Oyov: adda oida OTL aEvoL éoTe vpels. Lev. xis'7; 10,13—I5- Deut. xiv. 8, 10, 12—I4. Deut. iv. TO} ,03) Lev. xi. 13—I5. Deut. xiv. I2—I4. Weve xi. 5. 254 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. (x ” an ’ Saad ” > ‘ X. “Ors d6¢ Mavans eirevs OY parecbe YoIpON OYTE AETON » » OYTe OZYTITEPON OYTE KOPAaKA, OYTE TIANTA IYOYN OC OYK EXEl c o fal rf AeTtiAa €N EayT@, Tpla EXaBev ev TH cvvéces Soypata. 2. TE- pas yé To: Néyet avTots év TH Aevtepovopios Kai AiaBHcomal TIPOC TON AAON TOFTON TA AIKAIGMATA MOY. dpa ovUY OvK EOTW x Pi 1 €vtoX) Oeod TO pn Tpwyewv, Mwiaons dé év mvedpate EXadn- \ > / A fal ». b] / gev. 3. TO ovv Yoltplov mpos TovTO eizev" ov KoAdAHONCN, / dnciv, avOpwrrots TovovToLs, oiTiwés Elo Gpotor yoipwr" , vA Lal > / fa! / TouTéoTW OTav omatadoow, éTiAavOavovtar Tod Kupiov, oray Sé voTepodyTal, emiyweoKovaw Tov Kvpiov, os Kat O Lal / > xotpos OTav Tpwryel TOV KUPLOV OUK oider, OTav bé TEWG Kpav- an ' 1 ‘ yater, kat AaBwv madw ovwTd. 4. Oyte ddérH TON A€TON OYAE TON GZYTITEPON OYAE TON IKTINA OYAE TON KOPAKA’ OU py}, dyciv, eorAANOnTH ovSE OpoLtwOnon avOpwro.s ToLovToLS, oi- re rn \ TWWes OUK oldactW Sia KOTTOU Kal LOp@Tos EavTois Topifew THY Tpopnv, dAXa aprralovew Ta addoTpLa ev avouia avTdY Kat eTLTNpOdaLY, EY AkKEpaloovVn TEpliTaToOvVTES, Kal TrEpLBNé- , 5) , \ \ / ¢€ \ \ uv TovTat Tiva éxdvowow Ota THY TAEoVEELaY, WS Kal Ta OpvEea a / € a > / \ , > yea \ , TavTa ova éavTots ov Tropifer THY TpopHnv, adda apya KaOn- ’ a lal ? / / / ” \ a peva exfnTel ToS adXrOTpPLas capKas hayyn, OvTa oma TH 4 ’ lal ‘ > U / ' 2 AY ' Tovnpla avTwy. 5. Kal oy arn, pyncow, CMYPAINAN OYAE TI@= AyTIa OYAE CHTTIAN’ ov un, Hnoiv, OpotwOnan avOpedrrots ToLov- 4 > A a > a \ / v lal Tol, olTives els TéXOS eloly doeBEis Kal KEKpLmevoL ON TO A / Oavat, os Kal Tadta Ta ixOvdia mova éTiKaTapata év TO BvOG vnxeTat, wn KoNUUBaVTA WS TA NoLTTa, Gra ev TH YF Kato Tov BvO0d Katoikel. 6. "AXXG Kal TON AacyTTOAA OY MH ' aN / > \ , f >) \ 4 / ar. pos TL; ov pn yévn TatdoPOopos, ovdé opowwOnon a U / \ Cal TOUS TOLOUTOLS. OTL O AayYwOS KAT évLaUTOY TAEOVEKTEL THY agpodevow: boa yap étn €h, ToravTas eyes TpUTas. 7. AAA ‘ ' b] / Lé OYAE THN YAINAN ArH’ ov un, Hyoiv, yévn povxyos ovdée POo- , Joe ig fa} 4 cad / \ / ad \ fal pevs, OvdSé OpotwOnon Tots ToLoVTOLS. Tpds TL; OTL TO Edov r by >) \ tA / \ / A \ \ v TOUTO Tap éviavTOY adNaooeL THY PicL, Kal TOTE MeV AppED, lel te > mote d¢ Onrv yiverar. 8. “Adda Kal THY yadnv éuioncer fa] > / Ly a an 7 > f > Kaas. ov un, dyoly, yevnOns ToLovTos, oiovs axovomev avo- x1] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 255 re A > a / > bl] , 3QN pilav Trovodvtas év T@ oTomat. 80’ axabapciay, ovde KOAAN- / aA a Onon tais axabaptos tais THY dvouiay Towovcas ev TO \ a oTopatt. TO yap Céov Tod’TO TH oTOmaTs KEL. QO. TrEpt meV Tov Bpwopatov AaBov Mavons tpia Soypata ovTas év Tvev- > / e 8a 3 > 6 / a \ ¢ \ att eXadnoev, ol O€ KAT ETLOUMiaY THS TAapKoS WS TeEpL / a A A Bpodcews mpocedéEavto. 10. AapPaver dé Tdv avtév Tpidy Soypatov yvoow Aaveid, cal déyerr Makdpioc andp 6c oyYK Ps. i. x. YH y > 2 , > n > a \ \ ( > / f é€TropeyOH EN BoyAH AceBON, KaOds Kal of LyOvEs TropevovTaL > t > \ ' Wb GALS ns a > ” \ év okoTet els TA BAO, Kal EN OAD AMAPTMADN OYK ECTH, KAAS e fa! A \ U ¢c / ¢e ¢ al ot SoxodvTes poBetcbar Tov Kupiov auaptavovew ws 6 xoipos, \ nat ! a > > ' \ \ \ \ Kal €TTl KAOEAPAN AOIM@N OYK EKABICEN, Kab@s Ta TeTEWa TA he > ¢ ‘ ” / \ \ a / KaOnueva eis aptraynv. exyeTe Tedelws Kal Tepl THs Bpo- aews. 11. [aku réyee Mavons: Pdrecbe TAN AIYHAOYN Kal Lev. xi. 3. , , , ¢ \ \ t 3 \ Deut. xiv. MAPYKQMENON. Ti A€yer; O THY Tpodny AauwBaverv oidev TOY 6. / ’ / \ b] > > nw b] / >) / TpépovTa avTOV, Kal eT aUVT@ avaTravopevos evppaiver Oat doxel. Kadas citevy BrET@V THY évTOAnY. Ti ovV RéyeEL; KoArdobe peta THY poBovpévwr Tov Kiprov, meta TOV pere- i A U Cy. > A / \ A TeVTOV 0 EhaBov SiaoTadpa pHuaTos év TH Kapdia, meTA TOV AadovvToy Ta SiKatdpata Kupiov Kat Tnpovytwv, weTa TOV 5) / v4 ¢ ty > \ 4 > / \ , ELOoT@Y OTL 1 pedETH EoTiV Epyov evppocvyns Kal dvapapv- K@pévov Tov Noyov Kupiov. ti dé 70 Suynrodv; OTe 6 Sikatos Kal €v TOUT@ TO KOTMM TepiTratel Kal TOV aryLov alava éKdé- / A id A Lal yeTat. PrETreTE Tas EvopoléTHTEV Matas KaXds. 12. ddAa mobey éxeivors TadTa vonoat 7) auviévat; nets Sé Sixaiws \ / A vonotavTes Tas EVTOAAS, Nadodpev ws HOEAncTEV 6 Kupuos. Sid lal , \ I] ¢ lal TOUTO TTEPLETEMEV TAS AKOaS NUOV Kal Tas Kapolas, iva cuviw- pev Tava. / \ as: UA a) t lal XI. Znrncwper 6€ et euédnoev TS Kupio rpohavepaaa \ ne an aA la) Tept Tov datos Kal Tepl TOD aTavpod. Trepl pwev Tov LdaTos \ a yeypatras ert Tov Iapanr, més TO Barticwa TO hépov adde- € a > \ / 3 >? € A b / cw apapTLav ov wn mpoadéfovTal, add’ EéavTots oixodomn- / , a covaw. 2. deyer yap oO mpodyntns: “EkcTHO! oYpaNé, Kal ett Jer. ii. 12, a ~ \ > ' c I2. TOYT@ TAEION pizZAT@ H PA, GTI AYO KAl TIONHPA ETTOIHCEN 6 Aadc O}TOC’ EME ETKATEAITION TIHTHN Zwic, Kal EayTOIC GpyZAN BdOPON Is. xxxiii. 16—18. Ps. i. 3—6. ? Zeph. iii. 1g. Ez. xlvii. Dpiys a2. Cf. S. John Vi. 51. 256 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [x1 @andtoy. 3. MH méTpa EpHmdc €cTIN TO Opoc TO 4rION MOY Lind; EcecOe FAp wc TETEINOY NOCCOI ANITITAMENO! NOCCIAC ACH- PHMENOL 4. Kal maduv reyes O Tpodytns: "Ero Tropeycomal EMMPOCOEN COY, KAI OPH OMAAIG) KAI TIYAAC YAAKAC CYNTPIYa@ Kal MOYAOYC CIAHPOYC CYNKAACO, KAI AWCOd COI BHCAYPOYC CKOTEINOYC, amoKpyoyc, Aopatoyc, (NA FNACIN STI Erd> KYpioc 6 Oedc. Kat- KatoikHceic €N YYHAG cTTHAalw TéTpac icyyp&c. 5. Kai‘ To YAWP aYTOY TICTON’ BaclAéa META ADZHC OYECOE, KAI H YyYH YM@N meAetHcel dBon Kypioy. 6. Kal madw év addwo mpodyty Neyer’ Kai Ectal 6 TAYTA TIOIDN GC TO ZYAON TO TEtbyYTEYMENON TIAPA TAC AleZOAOYC TN YAATOON, O TON KAPTION aYTOY Aaocel EN KAIp@ aYTOY, KAl TO YAAON AYTOY OYK ATTOPYHCETAI, KAI TIANTA Sca &N TOI KATEYOAWOHCETAI 7. OYY OYTWC O1 AcEBEIG, OFX oYT@c, AAN’ HC O YNOYc ON EKpitITel 6 ANEMOC ATIO TIPOC@TTOY TAc rfc. AIA TOTO OYK ANACTHCONTAI [ol] AceBeic EN KPICEl, OYAE AMapT@AO! EN BOYAH Alkal@n’ OTI FIN@cKEl Kypioc OAON AIKAI@N, Kal OAdc AceBONn AroAciTA. 8. aicbavecOe Tas TO Vwp Kal \ Ae eee AN) SEEN Sey A \ , Z , TOV OTAaUpOY ETL TO AUTO Wpicev. TOUTO yap Eyer’ Maxapzoe NS BE \ \ , , > \ oo 5 of of érl Tov otavpoy édticayTes KaTéBnoay Els TO VOwp’ OTL AX \ \ / > ° > n / / , / Tov pev pucOov Ayer EN KAIPO AYTOY TOTE, dyciv, aTToddcw. vov d€ 5 réyes’ TA YAAA OYK ATTOPyHceTAl, TODTO Neyer OTL A ca WA o\ > / b) s a \ fa) U 4 a mav pha 0 éay é€eNevoetar €€ VYuadv b1a TOD TTOpmaTOS VUOV 3 / \ ’ / Mv > > A \ / éy TWioTel Kal ayarn, éoTat eis ErrvaTpodny Kal édmida TOA- Rois. 9. Kal tad Erepos mpodnrns Aéyeu’ Kai HN H FA TOY "JaK@B €TTAINOYMENH TIAPA TIACAN THN TAN. TOUTO Névyel” TO oKedos TOU TVEevpaTos avToD So€aler. 10. Elta Ti Neyer; Kal HN TroTAMOC EAKWN EK AEZIMN, KAl ANEBAINEN EZ aYTOY AENAPA @paia’ Kal Oc AN ddérH EZ ayYT@N ZHCceTAl EiC TON Ai@NAa. An , e/ ¢ al \ , ’ \ ed II, ToUTo Aéyer STL Hels pev KaTaBaivoyev eis TO Vdwp yé“ovTes aduapTioy Kal pitrou, Kal avaBaivoyev Kaptrodo- poovtes ev TH Kapoia, [Kai] Tov PoBov Kat THv éd7rida eis TOV Inooby év TS Tveipate ExovTes. Kai Oc &N ArH ATO TOYTON > \ a a a by ZHCETAI EIC TON AIMNA, TOUTO AéyeL’ OS av, dnaiv, akovcn Tov- / \ / Ul > \ . A ToOV NaNOUMEVWY Kal TLOTEVON, ENTETAL Els TOV Alva. x11] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 257 € la! fol ¢ 7 > ”. XII. ‘“Opolws radw rept tod ctavpovd opifes ev adrd@ mpopntn AéyovTe: Kai OTE TAYTA CYNTEAECOHCeETAl; Aerel Kypioc’ 4 Esr. v. 5. al \ a , ec “OTaN ZYAON KAION Kal ANACTH, Kal OTAN EK ZyAOY AIMA CTAZH. a \ A A } éyes Taw mepl TOU cTavpov Kal Tov oTavpodalat wédrov- Tos. 2. reyes 5é marw [ev] TO Maton, rodewovupévov Tod , \ JA ¢€ / ’ \ *IopanX vio TéY GddrdAOp’A@Y, Kal Wa VIropYnTH avTOUs lA vA 5 \ \ ¢ / b) A 566 ToAe“oupéevous OTL Oia Tas apaptias avToy TapedoOncav > 6 U / > \ OYA M ” / \ a els Oavarov: Aéyet eis THY Kapdiav Mawicéws TO Tvedpa, lal 4 ‘h iva Toinon TUTov otavpov Kal Tod pédXoVTOS TaayxeELW, OTL oN f y > / pees) mt le > \ bia) ra) ft €av pn, Pyoiv, EATiTwWOLY ET AUTO, Els TOV aL@va TOhELNON- / = ” a aA x7? A ed > / ie] covta. TiOnaw ovv Mwvons ev ép ev O7Xov ev pécw TNS ‘ i \ A é TUYyENS, Kal UYnAOTEpos oTabels TravTwv éEéTELVEY TAs YEipas ¢ / Kal oUT@s Tadw évixa 6 “laopanr. eita, oTdTayv Kabetner, 29 A \ hea ite fal d ? bv OF eGavatovvTo. 3. mpos TL; iva yvdow Ott ov SvvavTat cwO7- SEN \ Cee } 3 Lol > I \N f Pp) (+ / Val, €av pn ET AVT@ éEAXTTiTwWoLV. 4. Kal TadlV EV ETEP@ mpopntn Aéyer* “OAHN THN HMEpaN EZeTIETACA TAC YElpdAc MOY Is. Ixv. 2. TpOC AAON ATIEIOH Kal ANTIAEFONTA OAG AiKala Moy. 5. [Larev - a a , an > a t/ Py fr 2a% a \ Motors moet tUTov Tov “Inoov, ots Set avTov mrabety Kat ’ \ / \ 60 3 / b} / / autos Cworroinces Ov Sofovawy atrodkwreKévat ev onpuelo, Tim- an? / 2 / \ K / , vw } f Tovtos Tov Iopanr. émroinoev yap Kupios wavta bbw Saxvew ’ / \ bl] £9 3 67) ¢ t \ rn yy avTous, Kal amréOvnoKopv (érreidn 1) TapaBacis dia TOV dpews v , ’ \ év Eva éyévero), iva édéyEn avtovs ote dia Ty TapaBacww avrav eis OXtWw Oavatov TtapadoOncovta. 6. Tépas yé v4 \ “oA / a a) Tot avTos Mwvons évretdapevos: Oyk Ectal YMIN OYTE Y@NEYTON Deut. > \ > 4 cee. Saks ao / a3 AEEXVile 15. OyTe FAYTITON Elc BEON YMIN, AUTOS Tole, va TUTTOV TOD "Incod delEn. trove? ody Mavons yadxovy oduv kal TiOnow évdoEas, / a , Kal KnpvypaTe Karel Tov Aaov. 7. éAOoVTES odv emt TO aN 26é Cee WA \ InN > / Yj \ avtTo €déovTo Matcéws iva repli avtév avevéyxn Sénow Trepl Lal 77 ) fal > \ X > \ M - fs T¢/ THS Lacews avTo@y. elmev 5é mpos avtovs Mavans “Otay, / fal ay lal dyciv, &nxOn Tis budv, éXOérw él Tov Shiv Tov él Tod / b] f \ > / UJ (dA b) \ a Evdou éemixelwevov, kal éXtricadtTw TiaTevcas OTL avTOS VY \ / lal an vexpos dvvatar Cworroinoat, Kat Tapayphua cwOnoeTal. Kal cd > / yv y \ > / \ / lal OUTWS eTToloUY. eEyvEels Tad Kal év ToUTOLs THY ddEav TOD > roWe did > ’ a / f Inood, ore €v avT@ Tavta Kat eis avtov. 8. Ti Neyer waduy Ex. xvii. 14. Ps; (Cx. Te S. Matt. XXli. 44. Is: xly. 1. S. Matt. XXll. 45- Gen. xxv. 2I—23- Gen. xlviii. 11, 0; Gen. xlviii. 14, 18, 19. 258 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [x11 Motojs “Incod vid Navy, éribeis adt@ toito To ébvopa, ” , ” , ’ , a ‘ <Le c ‘ évte Tpopyty, wa povov axovon Tas 6 ads OTL 6 TaTHP / al \ lal ct a9 lol / *s ” r mavta pavepot Tept Tov viod “Incod; 9. Aéyer ody Mavons > a tn N / 5 é \ r v € / y b) 4 Inco’ vid Navn, éribeis Todt dvopa, omore errepev avTov KaTaoKoTrov THs is’ NdBe BIBAION e€ic TAC yelpac coy Kal FPAYON & Aéret Kypioc, Ott éxkdyet €k PpiIZ@N TON OIKON TIANTA TOT "AmadHk 6 yidc TOY Oeoy em” €cyATWN THN Hmep@n. 10. LOE madw “Incods, ovdxt vids avOpmmov adda vids Tod Weod, TUT@ dé év capKi havepwOeis. “Emel ody pédAdovew éeyew 6re Xpeotos vios Aaveld éativ, avtos mpopyntevec Aaveisd, poBovpevos Kal cuviay Thy TAavnY THY dpaptodadv: Eimen Kypioc tT Kypia moy: Kasoy ék AezZI@N Moy Ewe &N 6G ToC €yOpoyc CoY YTOTIUAION THN TIOA@N coy. II. Kal maduw révyer of. ? ‘ - tal U ’ otws “Hoaias: Eien Kypioc 1& Xpicté moy Kypia, oy éKpa- THCA Thc AezZAc aYTOY, EmAKOYcAl EMTIPOCHEN AYTOY EONH, Kal icyYN BactAéwNn AlappHzw. ide mas Aayeid A€rel ayTON Kypion, \ e\ a] / Kal VLoV ov EYEL. XIII. “[dwpev dé ef odtos 6 Nads KANpovopeEl 7 6 TPOTOS, \ ¢€ , > CA * > bd / > U = Kal 1 SiaOnnn eis nuds 7 eis éxelvous. 2. aKkovoaTe ovV mept TOU Aaov Ti A€yet 7) ypady *EAdcito A€ ‘Icadk Trepi “PeBeK- KAC THC fyNalkKOc ayTOY, OTI CTeipPA HN. Kal CYNEAABEN. ITA €ZAAOEN ‘PeBéxka TrYBécOal TApA Kypioy. kal eltten Kypioc mpdc aytHn’ Ayo €6NH €N TH facTpi coy Kal AYO Aaol é€N TH KOIAIA COY, KAl YTTEPEZE! AAGC AaOY, Kal 6 MEIZWN AOYAEYCEI TG) EAACCONI. 3. aicOaverOat odeirete tis 6 "Ioadk Kai tis 7 “PeBéxxa, \ > \ f 665 ¢/ / € \ 2 A >’ cal kal éri tivwv déderyev Ott pel{wv 6 ads ovTOS 7 éKelvos. \ v VE Ld 4. Kai év addy mpodytela Neyer havepwtepov 6 “laxdB AY ’ \ \ ey 3 rf / = > ' . > ' ‘ mpos “Iwond Tov viov avtovd, Néywv' *lAoy, oYK écTépHcéN me Kypioc TOY Mpocatroy coy’ Mpocdrar€é Mol Toyc yioy¥c coy, fNa 2 , > Ge \ , > \ \ lal eYAOPHC@ ayToyc. 5. Kal mpoonyayey Edpaiu cai Mavacon, tov Mavacon Gédwv iva evroynOn, ott mpecBuTEpos Hv 6 \ A fal yap “loond mpoonyayey eis tHv deEvdy yeipa tod matpos TaxoB. eidev 58 “laxo8 tirov TO Trvevpate Tod aod TOD petakv. Kal Ti reve; Kai émoincen ‘lakdoB éNaAAdz TAC Yelpac xIv] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 259 AYTOY, KAl ETIEOHKEN THN AEZIAN ETT] THN KEaAHN “Eqppaim To¥ AeyTEpoy Kal NE@TEpOY, KAI EYAGPHCEN AYTON. Kal EiTTEN “lwcrid Tipdc “lake? Mertaeec coy THN AezIAN €Ttl THN KecaAHN ManaccA, Sti Tpw@TdToKdc Moy Yidc écTIN. Kal ElTTEN “laK@B rpdc lacHd OiAa, TEKNON, OlAa’ AAN 6 MEIZWN AOYAEYCEl TG BAACCONI. Kal oytoc Aé eyAorHOHcetal. 6. Brérrere él tivwy TéOerKev, TOV Aaov TovTOY eivat TPOTOY Kal THS SiaOHKNS KANpOVOpOY. 7. EL ovv étt Kal dia Tod “ABpaay éuvncOn, aréxyopev TO Téevov Ths yvorcews nuav. Ti ody Aéyee TO "ABpadp, bTE povos muatevoas éTéOn eis Stxavocvyny; “ldoy TébeIkA ce, ABpadm, Gen. xv. 6, TIATEPA EONGN TON TICTEYONTN Af AkPOBYCTIAc TH Oe. Set XIV. Nai. adr oper ti)v ScaOnkny iv Borer Tots Tatpact Sovvat TS Aa@, ef Sédwxev. Sédwxev: avtol Sé ovK éyévovto a&ior AaBeivy Sia Tas apaptias avTo@v. 2. rEeyeEL yap 6 mpodytns’ Kai HN Mayctic NHcTeY@N €N Opel ZINA, TOY Ex. xxiv. AABEIN THN AlAOHIKHN Kypioy mpdc TON AXON, HMEPAC TECCEPAKONTA we Kal NYKTAC TeccepAKONTA. Kal EAaBEN [MayYcric] trapA Kypioy Ex. xxxi. Tac AYO TrAAKAC TAC FerpAMMENAC TH AAdKTYAG TAC yelpoc Kypioy es EN TINEYMATI. Kal AKaBadv Maivojs natépepey pos Tov adv dodvat. 3. Kat eimev Kupsos pds Matonv' Mach Moycii, Ex. xxxii. KATABHOI TO TAyoc, OTI 6 Aadc coy ON €ZHrarec ék fAc Airymtoy abe: HNOMHCEN. Kal cYNAKeEN MaycAc 6OTI émolHcaN €ayTOIC TIAAIN X@NEYMATA, KAl EPIYeN EK T@N YEIPAN, KAl CYNETPIBHCAN al TAdKEec Thc AIAdHKHC Kypioy. 4. Matos pev éraBev, avrot 5é ovK éeyévovto aEwor. mas 8é pets éEXaBopev; pabere. Movorjs Oeparav ov édaBev, avtos 5¢ Kupios rpiv exer els Aadv KAnpovopias, dv nuds vtropelvas. 5. ebavepabn Sé wa Kaxelvo. TedevwOdow Tots dpapthpacw Kal nuets bid TOU KANpovomodvTos SiaOynKnv Kupiov “Incot rXaBwpev, ds els TODTO HToLacOn, iva avTos havels Tas 6n SeSamravnpévas nav Kapdias TS Oavdtw Kal tapadedouévas TH THs TAdYNS avopia AUTPpwWCapevos Ex TOD cKOTOUS, SiaOnTaL ev nuiv SiaOn- Knv royo. 6. yéypartar yap TAs avT@ 6 Tati)p évTédXeTaL, AvTpwoauEvoy nuds éx ToD oKdTOUS, ETOLMacaL éEavTS Nady 17—2 260 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [x1Vv Is.xlii.6,7. dytov. 7. Eyer oY 6 TpopnTns’ "Ey Kypioc 6 Oedc coy EkAAECA Ce EN AIKAIOCYNH, KAl KPATHCO) TAC yelpdc COY Kal ENICYYC@ CE, KAI EAWKA CE EIC AIABHKHN TENOYC, EIC AC EONDN, ANOIZAL OCOAAMOYC TYPAGN, Kal eZarareiIN EK AECM@N TETTEAH- MENOYC Kal €2Z OIKOY (YAAKAC KAOHMENOYC EN CKOTEL yevm@oKomeV Is. xlix. ovv 7o0ev éXuTpwOnuev. 8. TadwW 6 mpodnTns éyer’ “lA0Y 6 . ' > tal > “ n > ' > ' > ' *Y TEDEIKA CE EIC PAC EONDN, TOY EINAI CE EIC CWTHPIAN EWC ECYATOY a“ na a ’ , c ’ ‘ , U TAc rAc’ oytwc Aérei Kypioc 6 Aytparcdmendc ce Oedc. 9. maduv fa c / / ° na ' aS aoe ! _ a » , Ts. lxi. (a) TpopnynrTnys NEeyeEL TIneyma Kypioy €T €ME, OY EINEKEN EYPICEN I, 2. ' tal ee ' ' \ ‘ ME EYArreAIcacdal TATIEINOIC, ATTECTAAKEN ME iACACBAl TOYC CYNTE- TPIMMENOYC THN KAPAIAN, KHPYZAI AIYMAAGTOIC AECIN Kal TYPAOIC ANABAEYWIN, KAAECAl ENIAYTON Kypioy A€KTON KAI HMEPAN ANTA- TIOMOCEWC, TIAPAKAAECAI TIANTAC TOYC TIENBOYNTAC. XV. "Ere oty xai wept tod caBBatouv yéypamtau ev tois 8€xa Royous, év ols EXaAngEV ev TO Sper Yuva mpos Ex. xx. 8. Matojy xata mpocwov' Kai dridcate TO c&dBBaton Kypioy Ps. Xx1V. 4- ‘ ra ‘ ' a \ > ey, / . XEPCIN KABaAPpAIC Kal KAPAIA KAOAPA. 2. KaL EV ETEDM Aevyet Jer. xvii. "Ean dyAdzZacin ol yiol MOY TO CABBATON, TOTE ETTIBHCO) TO EAEOC 24e Jie o} >? ’ \ ' / ’ , a al , ‘ Moy €IT ayToyc. 3. TO caBRaTov réyeu ev apyn THS KTiTEWS Gen. ii.2. Kai étroiHcen 6 Oedc EN EZ HMEpaic TA Epra TON YEIPON AYTOY, Kal CYNETEAECEN EN TH HMEPA TH €BAOMH KAI KATETIAYCEN EN AYTH, Kal HTIACEN AYTHN. 4. TpooéyeTe, Téxva, Ti Eyer TO DYNETEAECEN EN EZ HMEPaic. TOUTO Eyer OTL ev EEaKLaxXLNLOLS y / / \ , ¢ \ ¢ / 3 erect cuvTedecet Kvpios Ta ovvTavta. 1 yap nuépa Tap ’ a t / ” ’ \ la fal , avT® [onmwawet] yitia ETN. avTos S€é pot pwaptupel Néyor" 2Pet.iii.8. IAoy Hmepa Kypioy €ctal wc yiAia €TH. ovKovy, Téxva, ev bE e / > r € / y / A nuépas, ev Tois eEaxioxidlows Etec avyTedecOnoeTaL TA ouvTavta. 5. Kal KaTémaycen TH AmMéepa TH EBAOMH. TOUTO Aéyeus OTav E@v 6 vids aVTOD KaTapynoEL TOY KaLpoV TOD 3 / \ fal \ b} A \ b] / \ es A avopov Kal Kpivet Tovs aceBels Kat addaker TOV HALOY Kat TV cednVHY Kal TOs aoTépas, TOTE KAaN@S KaTAaTTAVCETAL éy TH nuépa TH éEBSoun. 6. wépas yé Toe Réyes’ “Aridceic SAY \ . \ ' a > ~, a ¢ \ AYTHN YEPCIN KABAPAIC Kal KaPAIA KAbAPs. EL ovvY HY Oo Oeos Cee? ely a , ¢ ! \ a a NREPaV NYLAGEV, VUVY TLS duvatat aylacatl Kadapos @V TH XVI] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 261 fal > \ 5 Uj / Kapoia, €v Tacw TeTdavnueOa. 7. €¢ OE ovY apa TOTE A J lA / ’ KANOS KATATIAVOMEVOL AyLacomEV AUTHY, OTE SUVNTOMEOa avTol , ws / NaS / ¥ SuxarwOévtes Kai atroNaBovtes THY émrayyerlay, wnKEeTL OVENS rn A / ¢ \ TS avouias, Kawev O€ yeyovoTwy Tavtay v0 Kupiou, Tote SuvncopeOa avtny ayidcat, avtol ayiacbévtes TpaeTov. 8. mépas yé Toe Aéyes avtois: TAc NEOMHNIAC YM@N Kal TA Is. i. £3. , , tal tal = > lal / CABBATA OYK ANEYOMAI. OpaTe Tas eyes” Ov Ta VOY caBBaTa 3 WK / > \ iad / b] e / \ / [éuol] dexta, a\Xa O TeToinxa, év @ KataTa’cas TA TavTa ’ \ ¢ vA ’ / / 2 o- / ? / apynv juépas oyoons Troujow, 6 €otty Gov KOcpoU apyny. ¢ / \ > / > > / Q. d00 Kal ayouev THY Huépav THY oyddny Ets EevppoaiynY, b ie Aimar ed a 2S > a \ ‘ fa) \ lel? év 7 Kal 0 Inoovs avéotn éx vexpov Kat havepwbeis avéBy els ovpavovs. XVI. “Ere dé cai rept Tov vaod épeé vpiv, TOs TaVE- € y ’ \ > \ ” \ 5] > \ pevol of Tadaltwpot eis THY OiKOOOMNY 7)ATTLCAaY, Kal OvK éerrl \ \ b} lal N / ’ ! is ” Ly an Tov Qeov avtTav Tov TolNcayTa avTOUs, Ws dvTAa oiKov Oecod. 53 \ ¢ \ “9 9 r SN ? A A 2. axyedov yap ws ta EOvn adftépwoay avTov é&v TO vag. Gra THs eyes Kuptos Katapyov avTov; uadete’ Tic émeé- Is. xl. 12. TPHCEN TON OYPANON CTTIOAMH, H THN PHN ADaKi; OYK ero; Aérel Is. Ixvi. 1. Kypioc: “O oypandc mol O@pdOnoc, H A€ FA YTOTIOAION TON TIOAGN a Gr , 7 ! , n MOY TIOION OIKON OIKOAOMHCeTE MOI; H TiC TOTOC THC KAaTa- ¢ lal TIAYCEMC MOY; EyVoKaTE OTL waTaia n eXTIs aUTAY. 3. Tépas yé ToL TaAW Eyer’ “IA0Y Ol KABEAUNTEC TON NAON TOYTON, AYTOI Is. xlix. 17. eek > ' / \ \ \ rn ’ \ AYTON OIKOAOMHCOYCIN. 4. yiveTat. Sva yap TO ToAEMELY avTovs OnpéOn vio Tav éyOpe by Kal avTol of Tav éyOpe KalnpéOn vid Tav exXOpav. v L auto of Tav éyOpav ¢€ J ’ / ’ / / c yy ¢ UTNPETAL aVOLKOOOMNTOVELY aUTOV. 5. TaALY Ws ewEeNrEV n ¢ 5 TOMS Kal 0 vads Kal 0 ads “lopanr Tapadisoabat, épave- pon. Réyeryadp n ypady Kai éctai ér? écydtwN TON HMEpAN, Enoch \ ; ; : ( 7 ys ete b Ixxxix. 56, Kal Trapdadacel Kypioc TA TPOBATA TAC NOMAC Kal THN MANAPAN 66. \ \ , Seas > ! \ DEEL 2 eS KAl TON TIYPTON AYT@N EIC KATAPOOPAN. Kal éyévero Kal” & édadhnoev Kupios. 6. Entjcapev S€é ei Eat vads Oeod. " i EoTLW, OTTOV AUTOS A€yeL TroLety Kal KaTapTiCeW. yéypaTTaL / MV el n c ! : yap’ Kal €ctat TAc €BAomMAAOc CYNTEAOYMENHC, OIKOAOMHOHCETAI Dan. ix. 24. Naoc Ocof enddzmc Emi TH GNdmati Kypioy. 7. evplcxw ody ef ee t A 5 > ! aaN) i Sh OTL €OTLY VAOS. TWWS OVUY olkodounOnoerat €TTb TWO OVOMLATL 262 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [xvz / / \ Ant nr a a an ¢ € A Kupiov; padere. mpo Tov nds mictevoas TO Oc@ Hv nuov \ / a bL 6 \ \ ’ 6 , ¢ TO KaTOLKNTHpLOY THS Kapdlas POapTov Kal aaOeves, ws ’ a \ \ ‘ , / ba ! \ adnGGs oikodopntos vads Sia xYeLpos’ OTL HY TANPNS pEV \ o / s eiSwXoAaTpelas Kal Hv oiKos Satpoviwy, Sad TO TroLeiy Ooa 7 > , lal lal > ' a ie dee | a > a U évaytia TO Oe. 8. iKOAOMHOHCETAI AE Ertl TE) GNdMaTI Kypioy. la) / a mpocéyete Sé, va 6 vacs Tod Kupiov évddEws oixodopnOp. A , t \ ” A (9 a \ , mos; pabete. RNaSovtes THY Aperw TOY apapTiov Kai ENTI- DLN Ay 2} Lf / / b) b] lal ll cayres éml TO dvoma éyevopeda Kawvol, Tadw €& apyns KTLCO- 4 Yee) a / ¢ an b) A ¢ \ a pevor’ Ovo ev TO KaToKynTHpip nuwv adnOas 0 Oeods KaTorKet Clin lal ¢ / ’ lal a / id lal ’ lel éy nuiv. 9. TOS; 0 AOYoS avTOU THS TioTEws, n KAoLs avTOD an > t ¢ / a t ¢ by \ n THS émayyedias, 7 copia THY Sikalwpatov, al evToOAal THS a ’ \ an / >) \ CUA fal didayins, avtos év nuiv mpopyntevwv, autos ev nuiv KATOLK@Y, Qn lal / / ’ / id r \ r lal tois TH Oavato SedovAwpévots avolywv npiv THY Ouvpav ToD \ COA \ vaovd, 6 éotiv otopa, petavoray Sid0rs nuiv eioayer eis TOV / ¢ \ A a 5 dpOaprov vaov. 10. 6 yap Today cwOnvar BréTreL ovK ets Noy 3 Aue Ne 2 A n \ n_ TOV avOpwrrov ANAG ELS TOV EV AVT@ KATOLKOUYTA Kal NaNOVITA, eee ’ Aes X / 3 \ n 06 / nr re em avT@ exTANnTooOpmevos ETL TH wNOETOTE pITE TOU AEeyoVTOS \ / ’ , a / , ] / TA pHpata axnkoévar ex TOD STOMATOS MHTE AUTOS TOTE ETTL- if , fal / \ > reOupnKévat aKovew. TOTO eoTLY TYEUBLATLKOS VAdS OLKObO- / a povpevos TO Kupio. >) f A € lal XVII. ’Ed’ bcov wv év duvvatd Kal amdornte Syr@oat € Lal / ¢ lal ’ Duty, ermiver wou » uy [TH emOvuia pou] ux) Tapadedoc- / a > / / \ mévat TL [TOV avynKovTwY eis cwTnplav]. 2. €av yap Tepl a b] / XN / Uj Coney ’ \ / TOV EVETTWOTWY 7) MEAAOVT@Y Ypahw LplY, OV pL) VOnTNTE \ NS) al a a \ df dua TO év TapaPonals KeicOar. TadTa pev OUTS. a / A XVIII. MeraBapev 8 nal eri érépav yrdou Kat di6a- t ¢€ \ Ul Deh a 7 an xv. ‘“Odol dvo eiaiv dibayhs Kai éEovcias, t) Te TOU pwros € lal / A ¢ a Kal 7 Tov cKoTous. Svadopa dé Todd} THY Svo Cdav. Ee 42 \ / ? / NW of, a n AS mev yap elow TeTaypevor pwtaywyot ayyedou TOD Oeod, be Ses 2 \ By A c r ed’ iis O€ dyyerou ToD Satavd. 2. Kal 6 pév éeotiv Kupsos ’ \ Baie, \ \ lal ¢ lal rf lal a0 aiwvev Kal eis Tovs aidvas, 0 5é dpywv Kalpod TOU voV THS avopias. € 3 eQ\ lal XIX. ‘H ody 080s Tod dwros éorw a’tn: av Tus Oédhov Ae . 0 SOREN \ € , ! ' a ov OOOV OOEVELY ETL TOV @plo LEvov TOTTOV OT, EUG} TOLS epyots xIx] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 203 ’ A > € a ca a fal A avTov. éotiv ovv 7 Sodcioa nuiv yv@ous TOU TepiTTaTely év a / / avTn ToavTn: 2. “Ayamnoes Tov ToincavTa oe, poBnOnaon / / U ’ } >’ iy Tov oe TAdcarTa, Sokaces TOV Ge AUTPwWoapEVoY ex BavaTou: éon atAovs TH Kapdia Kal TAOVGLOS TH TvEevpaTL’ ov KOANN- €on atrAovs TH Kapodla Kal TAOVGLOS TH TrEeVpaTL’ OV KOA , / A av Onon peta Tropevopévwv ev 666 Oavatov, pioncers Tay 0 ovK lal A / e la ‘\ éotiy dpeotov TH Oed, puonoces TWaoav vTrdKpiow: ov py b) YB 3 \ / rd e , / ” éykaTanrimns evtodkas Kupiov. 3. ovy vipwoeis ceavton, Eon \ / ) ’ a \ \ dé Tavewoppov Kata Tavta. ovK apels éml ceavTov Se€av, U \ \. rf ov Anurrn BovrAnv Tovnpav Kata TOV TAHCIOV Gov: ov dwceELs A Lal U Th uy cov Opdacos. 4. ov Topvevcets, OY MOIYEYCEIC, Ov ¢ Ld al fa) madoplopnces. ov pn cov 0 AOyos TOU Bcod eEEXOn ev al 3 / dkaSapcia tTwav. ov Anurbn Tpdcwrov éhéyEas Tivd eri 4 oh 4 ' 14 ’ TapaTToOpatt. €on Tpais, Eon HCyyIOC, Eon TPEMWN TOYC ’ A ” b) t an > A Adroyc ovs HKovcas. ov pynoiKaKnoels TO AdEAPO Gov. > x f t ” x ov 2 \ ' Die 5. ov py Sabuynons TOTEPOV ETTAL N OV. OY MH AdBHC ETT ’ ° , MaTaiay TO ONOMA Kypioy. ayamnoets TOV TANTLoY coU UTrép 7 nr THv ux cov. ov poveicers Téxvov év POopa, ovSéE Tare Tal > \ \ tal Uj a yevunOev airoKxtevets. ov un apys THY xXElpad cou amo Tod CI) * > \ r Ul bl —-a \ b] \ Ud , viod gov 7) ato THS OuyaTpos cov, GNAG amo vEeoTNTOS SLba- a > \ al A Eevs PoBov Oeod. 6. ov wn yévyn ériOupedv Ta TOD TANoLov ? *O\ / a cou, OV pr yévn TAEOvERTNS. OVSE KOAANOHTH Ex ruxTs ToU A ’ \ \ a peta vipnr@v, GddAa peTa TaTEWaY Kal SiKaiwy avacTpa- , x / , 3 / ¢€ > \ / gjon. Ta cvpPaivovta aor evepynpata ws ayaba mpocdéén, mA v ” a oe , > 7 , elo@s OTL dvev Oeod ovdev yiverat. 7. ovK eon Siyvopov 356 Slyr STOTAYNON KUpLoLS WS TU D év aloyv ovde SiyAwooos. vrotaynon Kupiows ws TUT@ Oecod ev aicyvvy Kat do8w. ov pr) erutaEns SovAw cou 7 TraLdicky é ia fate #) nS é n n €v TLKpLa, a \ ‘ Tots éml Tov avTov Oeov éedmifovew, pnote ov wn hoB7On- \ peta 5 , Len neh 5 ) \ , covta Tov em apdotépois Oeov’ OTe nOev ov KaTa Tpdc- UA ’ SS Tl) a \ fol ¢ / WTOV KaNEcal, AN éd’ ods TO TVEDWA NTOlwacev. 8. KoWw- * A n » ba vncEls ev TaTW TO TAHTLoV cov, Kal ovK épels TAA EINAI’ ef x > al ’ / / > / a > na yap €v T@ abOaptw Kowwwvoi éorte, TOTW padXov év ToOisS a >? vy ‘ \ A pbaprois. ovK on TpdyAwooos Tayis yap TO cT6ua Oavd- 7 a A Tov. ocov Svvacat vrrép THs Wuyis cou ayvelces. 9. MH FINOY TIPOC MEN TO AABEIN EKTEINGN TAC YEIPAC, TIPOC AE TO AOYNal IBS SO Ue Is. Ixvi. 2. LO BSS Yc Acts iv. 32; Ecclus. iv.
31.  Heb. xiii.7. Rom. xii.g. 264 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. [xIx a ec / lal rf CYCTION. ayamnoets ws KOpny TOD dpOadwod cov TavTa TON AAAOFNTA COI TON AdrON Kypioy. 10. MNHCOHCH nuépav Kpicews vuKTos Kal nuépas, Kal éextntncers Ka? éExactny pépav Ta fal A tal TpocwTa THY ayiwv, }) dia Noyou KOTTLaY Kal TropevopeEvos Ets \ / \ Vv Lal ’ \ Lal A Lal , TO Tapakadécat Kal medeTOV Els TO THOaL WoynVY TO OYO, lal fal / lal ) Oia TOV YEipav cov épydon els AVTPOV apapTLBY ov. lal ’ Il. ov dvatacers Sovvat ovdé Sib0vs yoyyvoets, yywon 6é Tis 6 Tod picbod Kadds avtatrodoTns. gudakes a trapédafes, , . / 5 Lal , / , ‘ unre Tpoatilels pynte abaipav. eis TéEXOS mLanTELS TOY TroVn- pov. xpwvets Sixaiws. 12. ov Toinoes oyicpa, eipnvevoers ¢€ d€ payopuévous cuvayayov. é£ouoroynon él apaptias cov. a o ov mpoontes emi Tporevyny €Vv ouvElonoeL TOVNpa. avTN ’ \ id € \ r / €otly 7 000s TOU PwTos. XX. ‘H 8 rod péravos 0d05 éoTw oKodua Kal KaTAapas pecty. 0005 yap éaoTiv OavaTov aiwviov peta Tiwplas, ev h é€otl Ta aroAdvTa THY uynv avTdy' €idwdoraTpela, , ¢/ 5 1 cs 5 iN ae , Opacitns, tos Suvdpews, VroKpiots, SuTdoKapoia, povxeta, / ¢ / ¢ / / / yf ,’ , povos, aptayn, vTepnpavia, TapaBacts, doX0s, Kakla, avGa- ’ cal rn Seva, dappaxeia, payela, TeoveEia, apoBia Beod. 2. dua- r ; tal r ) ‘ >; r / >, KTat Tov ayabav, picodvTes adnOeLav, ayaT@vTEs Wevdn, ov ywooKovtes picbov dixatocvrns, oV KOAAMENO! AFd0G, ov nr J , ral Kploe dikaia, ynpa Kal oppave@ ov TpoceYovTEs, AypuTVouv- ’ ’ , wird Ae) \ \ 4 e A A Tes ovK els HOBov Ocod adda Eri TO Tovnpov, OY pakpav Kal f. ’ fal " TOppeo mpavTns Kai UTOLOVN, ayaTeVTES paTata, SudKoVTES GVTATFOOOMA, OUK EXEDVTES TTWYOV, OV ToVOdVTES eTL KAaTA- TOVOUPLEVO, EVXEPELS €v KaTadadLa, OU YLVWOOKOVTES TOV TOLN- cavTa avtous, poveis Téexvav, POopets TAacpaTos Oeod, azro- / \ >) / lal \ / atpepopuevor Tov evdedpevov, KaTaTrovooVTEs TOV OALtBopevon, TAouUCi@Y TApaKANTOL, TEVHT@Y avomoL KpiTal, TavOapdap- TNTOL. XXI. Kanddov odv éotiv pabovta ta Sdixarwpata Tod Kupiov, 00a yéyparrat, év TovTois TepiTateiv. 6 yap TadTa mowov. év TH Bacirela TOV Ocod SoEacOncerar’ 6 exeiva Ex)e- 5 ’ r A i lal yomevos peTa TOV Epywv avToD ouvaTroAcitar. Ova TovTO xxi] THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 265 ’ fe \ A ’ , 3 lal \ e fy avactacts, dia TodTO avTaTodopa. 2. "Epwrd Tovs vrrepé- y t l ’ a , ae NOVTAaS, El TLVa pov yvouns ayalns NauBaveTe TUMPovriaV »” ne A ’ aA 3 / \ Lees, Xs. / éyete we EavTay eis ods Epyaonabe TO KadOv’ jun) EAXELTNTE. a U A lal 3. eyyds 1 népa ev 4} ovvaTroNeitat TavTa TO Tovnpe. > \ c ' ore \ > a ” eg b] a ¢ Aa erryc 6 Kypioc kai 6 micOdc ayTOy. 4. éTt Kal ETL EpwT@ vuds" Is. xl. ro. e A / L > Pie er L , Apoc. XXli. éavTav yiveoOe vouobérat ayaboi, EavtTov péveTe TUMBoUAOL 15. / v > ¢ al a ¢ / ¢ \ / ¢ MloTol, apate €€ vay Tacav vToKpiow. 5. 0 dé Meds, o lal ¢ a / Tov TavTOS Kocpov KupLevav, don Vpiy codpiay, cUVECW, ért- A ~ b) A ¢ / TTHUNV, yYOoWw TOV SiKatwpaT@V avTOD, UTTopovnV. 6. yt- la) / lal / ’ ’ r veobe Sé Ocodidaxrot, ExEntrobvtes Ti Ente? Kupios af’ tyar, \ tal vA id fal > ¢ / / > / / > Kal Trovetre iva evpeOnre ev nuépa Kplioews. 7. et O€ Tis EoTW ayalod pvela, uynpwoveveté prov pereTOVTES TadTa, iva Kal 7 ’ lal émlOupia Kal 1 aypuTvia eis te ayabov ywpyon. épaTa vuds, yapw aitovpevos. 8. Ews ett TO KadOV oKEdOS eaTLW > a lal > \ lal pe? vpov, pu) ErelTnTE pndevt EavTaY, GAA cuVEyas eKln- TeiTe TavTa Kal avaTAnpodTe Tacav évToAnY’ EoTW yap a&ia. 9. 610 waddov éorovdaca ypayar af’ ov nduvyOnp, > Ni ’ A ¢ a / ’ U / \ > , els TO eVppavat vuas. Lecce, ayarns téxva Kal eipnvys. A / na 0 Kupsos THs d0fns Kal madons yapttos peta Tod TvEvpaTos ¢ an UMOV. 7 iat ae nnn ue Tee We hay, Le a ae uae poe SORT; ar i PAW LA fa at Sit inal a Rie tt it ac _ en) rake Ria hie eas leer aio yr SOR ain tee it ay me ye eat ye . SRA con yy nn I | si inh i ahs Data ys ey gtpe a 4 A ae \ 5 ee a wi Usri ‘ OO Wah ha A Es. {' Yate A J i het ah 12 AV * : : Dias) Bi) & ‘ i + * - ‘ a .] i i‘ { , TRANSLATION OF THE Meteor i rh OF BARNABAS


# The Epistle of Barnabas

# Chapter 1

2.  Seeing then that the days are evil, and that the Active One him- self has the authority, we ought to give heed to ourselves and to seek out the ordinances of the Yahuah (Lord). The aids of our faith then are fear and patience, and our allies are long-suffering and self-restraint. While these abide in a pure spirit in matters relating to the Yahuah (Lord), wisdom, under- standing, science, knowledge rejoice with them. For He hath made manifest to us by all the prophets that He wanteth neither sacrifices nor whole burnt-offerings nor oblations, saying at one time; What to Me is the multitude of your sacrifices, saith the Yahuah (Lord)? I am full of whole burnt-offerings, and the fat of lambs and the blood of bulls and of goats I desire not, not though ye should come to be seen of Me. For who required these things at your hands? Ye shall continue no more to tread My court. Tf ye bring fine flour, tt ts vain ; incense ts an abomination to Me ; your new moons and your sabbaths I cannot away with. These things therefore He annulled, that the new law of our Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha HaMashiach (Jesus Christ), being free from the yoke of constraint, might have its oblation not made by human hands. And He saith again unto them; Did J command your | fathers when they went forth from the land of Egypt to bring Me whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices? Nay, this was My command unto them, Let none of you bear a grudge of evil against his neighbour in his heart, and love you not a false oath. So we ought to perceive, unless we are without understanding, the mind of the goodness of our Father; for He speaketh to us, desiring us not to go astray like them but to seek how we may approach Him. Thus then speaketh He to us; Tze sacrifice unto Elohim (God) zs a broken heart, the smell of a sweet savour unto the Yahuah (Lord) ts a heart that glorifies its Maker. We ought therefore, brethren, to learn accurately concerning our salvation, lest the Evil One having effected an entrance of error in us should fling us away from our life.
3.  He speaketh again therefore to them concerning these things ; Wherefore fast ye for Me, satth the Yahuah (Lord), so that your votce is heard this day crying aloud? This ts not the fast which I have chosen, saith the Yahuah (Lord) ; not a man abasing his soul; not though ye should bend your neck as a hoop, and put on sackcloth and make your bed of ashes, not even so shall ye call a fast that ts acceptable. But unto us He saith; Behold, this ts the fast which I have chosen, saith the Yahuah (Lord) ; loosen every band of wickedness, untie the tightened cords of forcible contracts, send away the broken ones released and tear in pieces every unjust bond. Break thy bread to the hungry, and if thou seest one naked clothe him; bring the shelterless into thy house, and if thou seest a humble man, thou shalt THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 271 not despise him, neither shall any one of thy household and of thine own seed. Then shall thy light break forth in the morning, and thy healing shall arise quickly, and righteousness shall go before thy face, and the glory of Elohim (God) shall environ thee. Then shalt thou cry out and Elohim (God) shall hear thee; while thou art still speaking, He shall say, ‘Lo, I am here’; tf thou shalt take away from thee the yoke and the stretching forth of the finger and the word of murmuring, and shalt give thy bread to the hungry heartily, and shalt pity the abased soul. ‘To this end therefore, my brethren, He that is long-suffering, foreseeing that the people whom He had prepared in His well-beloved would believe in simplicity, manifested to us before- hand concerning all things, that we might not as novices shipwreck ourselves upon their law.
4.  It behoves us therefore to investigate deeply concerning the present, and to search out the things which have power to save us. Let us therefore flee altogether from all the works of lawlessness, lest the works of lawlessness overpower us; and let us loathe the error of the present time, that we may be loved for that which is to come. Let us give no relaxation to our soul that it should have liberty to consort with sinners and wicked men, lest haply we be made like unto them. The) last offence is at hand, concerning which the scripture speaketh, as Enoch saith. For to this end the Master hath cut the seasons and the, days short, that His beloved might hasten and come to His inheritance.! “ And the prophet also speaketh on this wise; Zex reigns shall reign upon the earth, and after them shall arise a little king, who shall bring’ low three of the kings under one. In like manner Daniel speaketh concerning the same; And J saw the fourth beast to be wicked and strong and more intractable than all the beasts of the earth, and how there arose from him ten horns, and from these a little horn an excrescence, and how that tt abased under one three of the great horns. Ye ought there fore to understand. Moreover I ask you this one thing besides, as being one of yourselves and loving you all in particular more than my own soul, to give heed to yourselves now, and not to liken yourselves to cer- tain persons who pile up sin upon sin, saying that our covenant remains to them also. Ours it is; but they lost it in this way for ever, when Moses had just received it. For the scripture saith; And Moses was in the mountain fasting forty days and forty nights, and he recetved the covenant Jrom the Yahuah (Lord), even tables of stone written with the finger of the hand of the Yahuah (Lord). But they lost it by turning unto idols. For thus saith the Yahuah (Lord); Moses, Moses, come down quickly; for thy people whom thou Ty eCSA 27.2 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. broughtest out of the land of Egypt hath done unlawfully. And Moses understood, and threw the two tables from his hands; and their cove- nant was broken in pieces, that the covenant of the beloved Yahusha (Jesus) might be sealed unto our hearts in the hope which springeth from faith in Him. But though I would fain write many things, not as a teacher, but as becometh one who loveth you not to fall short of that which we Wherefore let us take heed in these last days. For the whole time of our faith shall profit us nothing, unless we now, in the season of lawlessness and in the offences that shall be, as becometh sons of Elohim (God), offer resistance, that the Black One may not effect an entrance. Let us flee from all vanity, let us entirely hate the works of the evil way. Do not entering in privily stand apart by yourselves, as if ye were already justified, but assemble yourselves together and consult concerning the common welfare. For the scripture saith; Woe unto them that are wise for themselves, and understanding in their own sight. Let us become spiritual, let us become a temple perfect unto Elohim (God). As far as in us lies, let us exercise ourselves in the fear of Elohim (God), [and] let us strive to keep His commandments, that we may rejoice in His ordinances. The Yahuah (Lord) judgeth the world without respect of persons; each man shall receive according to his deeds. If he be good, his righteousness shall go before him in the way ; if he be evil, the recompense of his evil-doing is before him; lest perchance, if we relax as men that are called, we should slumber over our sins, and the prince of evil receive power against us and thrust us out from the kingdom of the Yahuah (Lord). Moreover understand this also, my brothers. When ye see that after so many signs and wonders wrought in Yashar'el (Israel), even then they were abandoned, let us give heed, lest haply we be found, as the scripture saith, many called but few chosen. s. For to this end the Yahuah (Lord) endured to deliver His flesh unto cor- ruption, that by the remission of sins we might be cleansed, which cleansing is through the blood of His sprinkling. For the scripture concerning Him containeth some things relating to Yashar'el (Israel), and some things relating to us. And it speaketh thus; He was wounded for our transgressions, and He hath been bruised for our sins ; by Hts stripes we were healed. As a sheep He was led to the slaughter, and as a lamé that is dumb before his shearer. We ought therefore to be very thankful unto the Yahuah (Lord), for that He both revealed unto us the past, and made us wise in the present, and as regards the future we are not without understanding. Now the scripture saith; JVot unjustly is the net spread THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 273 Jor the birds. He meaneth this that a man shall justly perish, who having the knowledge of the way of righteousness forceth himself into the way of darkness. There is yet this also, my brethren; if the Yahuah (Lord) endured to suffer for our souls, though He was Yahuah (Lord) of the whole world, unto whom Elohim (God) said from the foundation of the world, Zet us make man after our image and likeness, how then did He endure to suffer at the hand of men? Understand ye. The prophets, receiving grace from Him, prophesied concerning Him. SBut He Himself endured that He might destroy death and show forth the resurrection of the dead, for that He must needs be manifested in the flesh; that at the same time He might redeem the promise made to the fathers, and by preparing the new people for Himself might show, while He was on earth, that having brought about the resurrection He will Himself exercise judgment. Yea and further, He preached teaching Yashar'el (Israel) and performing so many wonders and miracles, and He loved him exceedingly. And when He chose His own apostles who were to proclaim His Gospel, who that He might show that He came not to call the righteous but sinners were sinners above every sin, then He manifested Himself to be the Son of Elohim (God). For if He had not come in the flesh neither would men have looked upon Him and been saved, forasmuch as when they look upon the sun that shall cease to be, which is the work of His own hands, they cannot face its rays. Therefore the Son of Elohim (God) came in the flesh to this end, that He might sum up the complete tale of their sins against those who persecuted and slew His prophets. To this end therefore He endured. For Elohim (God) saith of the wounds of His flesh that they came from them; When they shall smite thetr own shepherd, then shall the sheep of the flock be lost. But He Himself desired so to suffer ; for it was necessary for Him to suffer on a tree. For he that prophesied said concerning Him, Spare My soul from the sword ; and, Pierce My flesh with nails, for the congregations of evil-doers have risen up against Me. And again He saith; Behold [ have given My back to stripes, and My cheeks to smitings, and My face did I set as a hard rock.
6.  When then He gave the commandment, what saith He? Jo is he that disputeth with Me? Let him oppose Me. Or who is he that goeth to law with Me? Let him draw nigh unto the servant of the Yahuah (Lord). Woe unto you, for ye all shall wax old as a garment, and the moth shall con- sume you. And again the prophet saith, seeing that as a hard stone He was ordained for crushing; Behold I will put into the foundations of Zion @ stone very precious, elect, a chief corner-stone, honourable. ‘Then again 274 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. what saith He; And whosoever shall set his hope on Him, shall live for ever. Is our hope then set upon a stone? Far beit. But it is because the Yahuah (Lord) hath set His flesh in strength. For He saith; And He set Me as a hard rock. And the prophet saith again; Zhe stone which the builders rejected, this became the head of the corner. And again He saith ; This is the great and wonderful day, which the Yahuah (Lord) made. I write to you the more simply, that ye may understand, I who am the offscouring of your love. What then saith the prophet again? Zhe assembly of evil-doers gathered about Me, they surrounded Me as bees surround a comb ; and; For My garment they cast a lot. Forasmuch then as He was about to be manifested in the flesh and to suffer, His suffering was manifested beforehand. For the prophet saith concerning Yashar'el (Israel) ; Woe unto their soul, for they have counselled evil counsel against them- selves saying, Let us bind the righteous one, for he is unprofitable for us. What saith the other prophet Moses unto them? JSehold, these things saith Yahuah Elohim (the LORD God) ; enter into the good land which the Yahuah (Lord) sware unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and inherit it, a land flowing with milk and honey. But what saith knowledge? Understand ye. Set your hope on Him who is about to be manifested to you in the flesh, even Yahusha (Jesus). For man is earth suffering ; for from the face of the earth came the creation of Adam. What then saith He? Jnto the good land, a land flowing with milk and honey. Blessed is our Lord, brethren, who established among us wisdom and understanding of His secret things. For the prophet speaketh a parable concerning the Yahuah (Lord). Who shall comprehend, save he that is wise and prudent and that loveth his Lord ? Forasmuch then as He renewed us in the remission of sins, He made us to be a new type, so that we should have the soul of children, as if He were re-creating us. For the scripture saith concerning us, how He saith to the Son; Let us make man after our image and after our like- ness, and let them rule over the beasts of the earth and the fowls of the heaven and the fishes of the sea. And the Yahuah (Lord) said when He saw the fair creation of us men; /ucrease and multiply and fill the earth. "These words refer to the Son. Again I will shew thee how the Yahuah (Lord) speaketh concerning us. He made a second creation at the last; and the Yahuah (Lord) saith ; Behold I make the last things as the first. In reference to this then the prophet preached ; Luter into a land flowing with milk and honey, and be lords over it. Behold then we have been created anew, as He saith again in another prophet; Schold, saith the Yahuah (Lord), I will take out from these, that is to say, from those whom the Spirit of the THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 275 Yahuah (Lord) foresaw, the:r stony hearts, and will put into them hearts of fiesh ; for He Himself was to be manifested in the flesh and to dwell in us. For a holy temple unto the Yahuah (Lord), my brethren, is the abode of our heart. For the Yahuah (Lord) saith again; Jor wherein shall I appear unto the Yahuah (Lord) my Elohim (God) and be glorified? I will make confession unto Thee in the assembly of my brethren, and I will sing unto Thee in the midst of the assembly of the saints. We therefore are they whom He brought into the good land. What then is the milk and the honey? Because the child is first kept alive by honey, and then by milk. So in like manner we also, being kept alive by our faith in the promise and by the word, shall live and be lords of the earth. Now we have already said above ; And let them increase and multiply and rule over the fishes. But who is he that is able [now] to rule over beasts and fishes and fowls of the heaven ; for we ought to perceive that to rule implieth power, so that one should give orders and have dominion. If then this cometh not to pass now, assuredly He spake to us for the hereafter, when we our- selves shall be made perfect so that we may become heirs of the covenant of the Yahuah (Lord).
7.  Understand therefore, children of gladness, that the good Yahuah (Lord) manifested all things to us beforehand, that we might know to whom we ought in all things to render thanksgiving and praise. If then the Son of Elohim (God), being Yahuah (Lord) and future Judge of quick and dead, suffered that His wound might give us life, let us believe that the Son of Elohim (God) could not suffer except for our sakes. But moreover when crucified He had vinegar and gall given Him to drink. Hear how on this matter the priests of the temple have revealed. Seeing that there is a com- mandment in scripture, Whosoever shall not observe the fast shall surely die, the Yahuah (Lord) commanded, because He was in His own person about to offer the vessel of His Spirit a sacrifice for our sins, that the type also which was given in Isaac who was offered upon the altar should be fulfilled. What then saith He in the prophet? Axnd let them eat of the goat that is offered at the fast for all their sins. Attend carefully ; And let all the priests alone eat the entrails unwashed with vinegar. Wherefore? Since ye are to give Me, who am to offer My flesh for the sins of My new people, gall with vinegar to drink, eat ye alone, while the people fasteth and waileth in sackcloth and ashes; that He might shew that He must suffer at their hands. Attend ye to the command- ments which He gave. Take two goats, fair and alike, and offer them, and let the priest take the one for a whole burnt-offering for sins. But the 18—2 276 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. other one—what must they do with it? Accursed, saith He, zs the one. Give heed how the type of Yahusha (Jesus) is revealed. And do ye all spit upon tt and goad it, and place scarlet wool about tts head, and so let it be cast into the wilderness. And when it is so done, he that taketh the goat into the wilderness leadeth it, and taketh off the wool, and putteth it upon the branch which is called Rachia, the same whereof we are wont to eat the shoots when we find them in the country. Of this briar alone is the fruit thus sweet. What then meaneth this? Give heed. Zhe one for the altar, and the other accursed. And moreover the accursed one crowned. For they shall see Him in that day wearing the long scarlet robe about His flesh, and shall say, Is not this He, Whom once we crucified and set at nought and spat upon; verily this was He, Who then said that He was the Son of Elohim (God). For how is He like the goat? For this reason it says the goats shall be fair and alike, that, when they shall see Him coming then, they may be astonished at the likeness of the goat. Therefore behold the type of Yahusha (Jesus) that was to suffer. But what meaneth it, that they place the wool in the midst of the thorns? It isa type of Yahusha (Jesus) set forth for the Church, since whosoever should desire to take away the scarlet wool it behoved him to suffer many things owing to the terrible nature of the thorn, and through affliction to win the mastery over it. Thus, He saith, they that desire to see Me, and to attain unto My kingdom, must lay hold on Me through tribulation and affliction.
8.  But what think ye meaneth the type, where the commandment is given to Yashar'el (Israel) that those men, whose sins are full grown, offer an heifer and slaughter and burn it, and then that the children take up the ashes, and cast them into vessels, and twist the scarlet wool on a tree (see here again is the type of the cross and the scarlet wool), and the hyssop, and that this done the children should sprinkle the people one by one, that they may be purified from their sins? Understand ye how in all plainness it is spoken unto you; the calf is Yahusha (Jesus), the men that offer it, being sinners, are they that offered Him for the slaughter. +After this it is no more men (who offer); the glory is no more for sinners. The children who sprinkle are they that preached unto us the forgive- ness of sins and the purification of our heart, they to whom, being twelve in number for a testimony unto the tribes (for there are twelve tribes of Israel), He gave authority over the Gospel, that they should preach it. But wherefore are the children that sprinkle three in number? For a testimony unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, because THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 279 these are mighty before Elohim (God). Then there is the placing the wool on the tree. This means that the kingdom of Yahusha (Jesus) is on the cross, and that they who set their hope on Him shall live for ever. And why is there the wool and the hyssop at the same time? Because in His kingdom there shall be evil and foul days, in which we shall be saved ; for he who suffers pain in the flesh is healed through the foulness of the hyssop. Now to us indeed it is manifest that these things so befel for this reason, but to them they were dark, because they heard not the voice of the Yahuah (Lord). g. Furthermore He saith concerning the ears, how that it is our heart which He circumcised. The Yahuah (Lord) saith in the prophet; With the hearing of the ears they listened unto Me. And again He saith; They that are afar off shall hear with their ears, and shall perceive what I have done. And; Le ye circumcised in your hearts, saith the Yahuah (Lord). And again He saith; Hear, O Yashar'el (Israel), for thus saith the Yahuah (Lord) thy Elohim (God). Who ts he that destreth to live for ever, let him hear with his ears the voice of My servant. And again He saith; Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, for the Yahuah (Lord) hath spoken these things for a testimony. And again He saith; Hear the word of the Yahuah (Lord), ye rulers of this people. And again He saith; Hear, O my children, the voice of one crying in the wilderness. ‘Therefore He circumcised our ears, that hearing the word we might believe. But moreover the circumcision, in which they have confidence, is abolished ; for He hath said that a circumcision not of the flesh should be practised. But they transgressed, for an evil angel taught them cleverness. He saith unto them; Zhus saith the Yahuah (Lord) your Elohim (God) (so I find the commandment); sow mot upon thorns, be ye circumcised to your Lord. And what saith He? Se ye circumcised in the hardness of your heart; and then ye will not harden your neck. Take this again; Lehold, saith the Yahuah (Lord), all the Gentiles are uncir- cumcised in their foreskin, but this people is uncircumcised in their hearts. But thou wilt say; In truth the people hath been circum- cised for a seal. Nay, but so likewise is every Syrian and Arabian and all the priests of the idols. Do all those then too belong to their covenant? Moreover the Egyptians also are included among the circumcised. Learn therefore, children of love, concerning all things abundantly, that Abraham, who first appointed circumcision, looked forward in the spirit unto Yahusha (Jesus), when he circumcised having received the ordinances of three letters. For the scripture saith; And Abraham circumcised of his household eighteen males and three hundred. What 278 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. then was the knowledge given unto him? Understand ye that He saith the eightcen first, and then after an interval three hundred. In the eighteen I stands for ten, H for eight. Here thou hast Yahusha (Jesus) (IHSOY2). And because the cross in the T was to have grace, He saith also three hundred. So He revealeth Yahusha (Jesus) in the two letters, and in the remaining one the cross. He who placed within us the innate gift of His covenant knoweth ; no man hath ever learnt from me a more genuine word; but I know that ye are worthy. 1o. But forasmuch as Moses said; Ye shall not eat swine nor eagle nor falcon nor crow nor any fish which hath no scale upon it, he received in his understanding three ordinances. Yea and further He saith unto them in Deuteronomy; And J will lay as a covenant upon this people My ordinances. So then it is not a commandment of Elohim (God) that they should not bite with their teeth, but Moses spake it in spirit. Ac- cordingly he mentioned the swine with this intent. Thou shalt not cleave, saith he, to such men who are like unto swine; that is, when they are in luxury they forget the Yahuah (Lord), but when they are in want they recognize the Yahuah (Lord), just as the swine when it eateth knoweth not his lord, but when it is hungry it crieth out, and when it has received food again it is silent. Veither shalt thou eat eagle nor falcon nor kite nor crow. ‘Thou shalt not, He saith, cleave unto, or be likened to, such men who know not how to provide food for themselves by toil and sweat, but in their lawlessness seize what belongeth to others, and as if they were walking in guilelessness watch and search about for some one to rob in their rapacity, just as these birds alone do not provide food for themselves, but sit idle and seek how they may eat the meat that belongeth to others, being pestilent in their evil-doings. And thou shalt not eat, saith He, lamprey nor polypus nor cuttle fish. ‘Thou shalt not, He meaneth, become like unto such men, who are desperately wicked, and are already condemned to death, just as these fishes alone are accursed and swim in the depths, not swimming on the surface like the rest, but dwell on the ground beneath the deep sea. Moreover thou shalt not eat the hare. Why so? Thou shalt not be found a cor- rupter of boys, nor shalt thou become like such persons ; for the hare gaineth one passage in the body every year; for according to the number of years it lives it has just so many orifices. Again, either shalt thou eat the hyena; thou shalt not, saith He, become an adulterer or a fornicator, neither shalt thou resemble such persons. Why so? Be- cause this animal changeth its nature year by year, and becometh at THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 279 one time male and at another female. Moreover He hath hated the weasel also and with good reason. ‘Thou shalt not, saith He, become such as those men of whom we hear as working iniquity with their mouth for uncleanness, neither shalt thou cleave unto impure women who work iniquity with their mouth. For this animal conceiveth with its mouth. Concerning meats then Moses received three decrees to this effect and uttered them in a spiritual sense; but they accepted them according to the lust of the flesh, as though they referred to eating. And David also receiveth knowledge of the same three de- crees, and saith; Lvessed ts the man who hath not gone in the counsel of the ungodly—even as the fishes go in darkness into the depths; and hath not stood in the path of sinners—juast as they who pretend to fear the Yahuah (Lord) sin like swine ; and hath not sat on the seat of the destroyers— as the birds that are seated for prey. Ye have now the complete lesson concerning eating. Again Moses saith; Ye shall eat everything that divideth the hoof and cheweth the cud. What meaneth he? He that receiveth the food knoweth Him that giveth him the food, and being refreshed appeareth to rejoice in him. Well said he, having regard to the commandment. What then meaneth he? Cleave unto those that fear the Yahuah (Lord), with those who meditate in their heart on the distinction of the word which they have received, with those who tell of the ordinances of the Yahuah (Lord) and keep them, with those who know that meditation is a work of gladness and who chew the cud of the word of the Yahuah (Lord). But why that which divideth the hoof? Because the righteous man both walketh in this world, and at the same time looketh for the holy world to come. Ye see how wise a lawgiver Moses was. But whence should they perceive or understand these things? How- beit we having justly perceived the commandments tell them as the Yahuah (Lord) willed. To this end He circumcised our ears and hearts, that we might understand these things.
11.  But let us enquire whether the Yahuah (Lord) took care to signify before- hand concerning the water and the cross. Now concerning the water it is written in reference to Yashar'el (Israel), how that they would not receive the baptism which bringeth remission of sins, but would build for themselves. For the prophet saith; Ae astonished, O heaven, and let the earth shudder the more at this, for this people hath done two evil things; they abandoned Me the fountain of life, and they digged for themselves a pit of death. Ls My holy mountain of Sinai a desert rock? for ye shall be as the Jiedglings of a bird, which flutter aloft when deprived of their nest. And 280 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. again the prophet saith; J wll p20 before thee, and level mountains and crush gates of brass and break in pieces bolts of tron, and I will give thee treasures dark, concealed, unseen, that they may know that I am Yahuah Elohim (the LORD God). And; Zhou shalt dwell in a lofty cave of a strong rock. And; His water shall be sure; ye shall see the King in glory, and your soul shall meditate on the fear of the Yahuah (Lord). And again He saith in another prophet; Axd He that doeth these things shall be as the tree that ts planted by the parting streams of waters, which shall yield his fruit at his proper season, and his leaf shall not fall off, and all things what- soever he doeth shall prosper. Not so are the ungodly, not so, but are as the dust which the wind scattereth from the face of the earth. Therefore ungodly men shall not stand in judgment, neither sinners in the counsel of the righteous ; for the Yahuah (Lord) knoweth the way of the righteous, and the way of the ungodly shall perish. Ye perceive how He pointed out the water and the cross at the same time. For this is the meaning; Blessed are they that set their hope on the cross, and go down into the water; for He speaketh of the reward at his proper season ; then, saith He, I will repay. But now what saith He? 7s leaves shall not fall off; He meaneth by this that every word, which shall come forth from you through your mouth in faith and love, shall be for the conversion and hope of many. And again another prophet saith; And the land of Jacob was praised above the whole earth. He meaneth this; He glorifieth the vessel of His Spirit. Next what saith He? And there was a river streaming from the right hand, and beautiful trees rose up from wt; and whosoever shall eat of them shall live for ever. ‘This He saith, because we go down into the water laden with sins and filth, and rise up from it bearing fruit in the heart, resting our fear and hope on Yahusha (Jesus) in the spirit. And whosoever shall eat of these shall live for ever; He meaneth this ; whosoever, saith He, shall hear these things spoken and shall believe, shall live for ever.
12.  In like manner again He defineth concerning the cross in another prophet, who saith; Amd when shall these things be accomplished? saith the Yahuah (Lord). Whensoever a tree shall be bended and stand upright, and whensoever blood shall drop from a tree. Again thou art taught con- cerning the cross, and Him that was to be crucified. And He saith again in Moses, when war was waged against Yashar'el (Israel) by men of another nation, and that He might remind them when the war was waged against them that for their sins they were delivered unto death; the Spirit saith to the heart of Moses, that he should make a type of THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 281 the cross and of Him that was to suffer, that unless, saith He, they shall set their hope on Him, war shall be waged against them for ever. Moses therefore pileth arms one upon another in the midst of the encounter, and standing on higher ground than any he stretched out his hands, and so Yashar'el (Israel) was again victorious. Then, whenever he lowered them, they were slain with the sword. Wherefore was this? That they might learn that they cannot be saved, unless they should set their hope on Him. And again in another prophet He saith; Zhe whole day long have I stretched out My hands to a disobedient people that did gainsay My righteous way. Again Moses maketh a type of Yahusha (Jesus), how that He must suffer, and that He Himself whom they shall think to have destroyed shall make alive in an emblem when Yashar'el (Israel) was falling. For the Yahuah (Lord) caused all manner of serpents to bite them, and they died (forasmuch as the transgression was wrought in Eve through the serpent), that He might convince them that by reason of their transgression they should be delivered over to the affliction of death. Yea and further though Moses gave the commandment; Ye shall not have a molten or a carved image for your Elohim (God), yet he himself made one that he might shew them a type of Yahusha (Jesus). So Moses maketh a brazen serpent, and setteth it up conspicuously, and summoneth the people by proclamation. When therefore they were assembled together they entreated Moses that he should offer up intercession for them that they might be healed. And Moses said unto them; Whensoever, said he, one of you shall be bitten, let him come to the serpent which is placed on the tree, and let him believe and hope that the serpent being himself dead can make alive ; and forthwith he shall be saved. And so they did. Here again thou hast in these things also the glory of Yahusha (Jesus), how that in Him and unto Him are all things. What again saith Moses unto Yahusha (Jesus) (Joshua) the son of Nun, when he giveth him this name, as being a prophet, that all the people might give ear to him alone, because the Father revealeth all things concerning His Son Yahusha (Jesus)? Moses therefore saith to Jesus the son of Nun, giving him this name, when he sent him as a spy on the land; Zake a book in thy hands, and write what the Yahuah (Lord) saith, how that the Son of Elohim (God) shall cut up by the roots all the house of Amalek in the last days. Behold again it is Yahusha (Jesus), not a son of Adam, but the Son of Elohim (God), and He was revealed in the flesh in a figure. Since then men will say that Messiah (Christ) is the son of David, David himself prophesieth being afraid and understanding the error of sinners; Zhe Yahuah (Lord) said unto my Lord, Sit thou on My right hand until I set thine 282 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. enemies for a footstool under Thy feet. And again thus saith Isaiah ; The Yahuah (Lord) said unto my Messiah (Christ) the Yahuah (Lord), of whose right hand I laid hold, that the nations should give ear before Him, and I will break down the strength of kings. See how David calleth Him Yahuah (Lord), and calleth Him not Son.
13.  Now let us see whether this people or the first people hath the inheritance, and whether the covenant had reference to us or to them. Hear then what the scripture saith concerning the people; And Jsaac prayed concerning Rebecca his wife, for she was barren. And she concetved. Then Rebecca went out to enquire of the Yahuah (Lord). And the Yahuah (Lord) said unto her ; Two nations are in thy womb, and two peoples in thy belly, and one people shall vanquish another people, and the greater shall serve the Zess. Ye ought to understand who Isaac is, and who Rebecca is, and in whose case He hath shewn that the one people is greater than the other. And in another prophecy Jacob speaketh more plainly to Joseph his son, saying ; Behold, the Yahuah (Lord) hath not bereft me of thy face; bring me thy sons, that I may bless them. And he brought Ephraim and. Manasseh, desiring that Manasseh should be blessed, because he was the elder; for Joseph led him to the nght hand of his father Jacob. But Jacob saw in the spirit a type of the people that should come afterwards. And what saith He? And Jacob crossed his hands, and placed his right hand on the head of Ephraim, the second and younger, and blessed him. And Joseph said unto Jacob, Transfer thy right hand to the head of Manasseh, for he ts my first-born son. And Jacob said to Joseph, I know tt, my son, I know it; but the greater shall serve the less. Yet this one also shall be blessed. Mark in whose cases He ordained that this people should be first and heir of the covenant. If then besides this He also recorded it through Abraham, we attain the completion of our knowledge. What then saith he to Abraham when he alone believed, and was ascribed for righteousness? Behold I have made thee, Abraham, a father of nations that believe in Elohim (God) in uncircumetsion.
14.  Yea verily, but as regards the covenant which He sware to the fathers to give it to the people let us see whether He hath actually given it. He hath given it, but they themselves were not found worthy to receive it by reason of their sins. For the prophet saith; And Moses was Jasting in Mount Sinai forty days and forty nights, that he might receive the covenant of the Yahuah (Lord) to give to the people. And |Moses| received Srom the Yahuah (Lord) the two tables which were written by the finger of the hand of the Yahuah (Lord) in the spirit. And Moses took them, and brought THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 283 them down to give them to the people. And the Yahuah (Lord) said unto Moses; Moses, Moses, come down quickly ; for thy people, whom thou leddest forth from the land of Egypt, hath done wickedly. And Moses perceived that they had made for themselves again molten images, and he cast them out of his hands and the tables of the covenant of the Yahuah (Lord) were broken in pieces. Moses received them, but they themselves were not found worthy. But how did we receive them? Mark this. Moses received them being a servant, but the Yahuah (Lord) himself gave them to us to be the people of His inheritance, having endured patiently for our sakes. But He was made manifest, in order that at the same time they might be perfected in their sins, and we might receive the covenant through Him who inherited it, even the Yahuah (Lord) Yahusha (Jesus), who was prepared beforehand hereunto, that appearing in person He might redeem out of darkness our hearts which had already been paid over unto death and delivered up to the iniquity of error, and thus establish the covenant in us through the word. For it is written how the Father chargeth Him to deliver us from darkness, and to prepare a holy people for Himself. Therefore saith the prophet; Z the Yahuah (Lord) thy Elohim (God) called thee in righteous- ness, and I will lay hold of thy hand and will strengthen thee, and I have given thee to be a covenant of the race, a light to the Gentiles, to open the eyes of the blind, and to bring forth them that are bound from their fetters, and them that sit in darkness from their prison house. We perceive then whence we were ransomed. Again the prophet saith; Behold, I have set Thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that Thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth; thus saith the Yahuah (Lord) that ransomed thee, even Elohim (God), Again the prophet saith; Zhe Spirit of the Yahuah (Lord) is upon Me, wherefore He anointed Me to preach good tidings to the humble; He hath sent Me to heal them that are broken-hearted, to preach release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Yahuah (Lord) and the day of recompense, to comfort all that mourn.
15.  Moreover concerning the sabbath likewise it is written in the Ten Words, in which He spake to Moses face to face on Mount Sinai; And ye shall hallow the sabbath of the Yahuah (Lord) with pure hands and with a pure heart. And in another place He saith; Jf MLy sons observe the sabbath, then I will bestow My mercy upon them. Of the sabbath He speaketh in the beginning of the creation; And Elohim (God) made the works of His hands in six days, and He ended on the seventh day, and rested on tt, and He hallowed it. Give heed, children, what this meaneth; Ye ended tn six days. He meaneth this, that in six thousand years the Yahuah (Lord) shall bring 284 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. all things to an end; for the day with Him signifieth a thousand years ; and this He himself beareth me witness, saying; Lehold, the day of the Yahuah (Lord) shall be as a thousand years. ‘Therefore, children, in six days, that is in six thousand years, everything shall come to an end. And He rested on the seventh day. ‘This He meaneth; when His Son shall come, and shall abolish the time of the Lawless One, and shall judge the ungodly, and shall change the sun and the moon and the stars, then shall He truly rest on the seventh day. Yea and furthermore He saith ; Thou shalt hallow it with pure hands and with a pure heart. If therefore a man is able now to hallow the day which Elohim (God) hallowed, though he be pure in heart, we have gone utterly astray. But if after all then and not till then shall we truly rest and hallow it, when we shall ourselves be able to do so after being justified and receiving the promise, when iniquity is no more and all things have been made new by the Yahuah (Lord), we shall be able to hallow it then, because we ourselves shall have been hallowed first. Finally He saith to them; Your new moons and your sabbaths I cannot away with. Ye see what is His meaning ; it is not your present sabbaths that are acceptable [unto Me], but the sabbath which I have made, in the which, when I have set all things at rest, I will make the beginning of the eighth day which is the beginning of another world. Wherefore also we keep the eighth day for rejoicing, in the which also Yahusha (Jesus) rose from the dead, and having been manifested ascended into the heavens.
16.  Moreover I will tell you likewise concerning the temple, how these wretched men being led astray set their hope on the building, and not on their Elohim (God) that made them, as being a house of Elohim (God). For like the Gentiles almost they consecrated Him in the temple. But what saith the Yahuah (Lord) abolishing the temple? Learn ye. Who hath measured the heaven with a span, or hath measured the earth with his hand? Fave not I, saith the Yahuah (Lord)? The heaven ts My throne and the earth the footstool of My feet. What manner of house will ye build for Me? Or what shall be My resting-place? Ye perceive that their hope is vain. Furthermore He saith again; Behold they that pulled down this temple themselves shall build it. So it cometh to pass; for because they went to war it was pulled down by their enemies. Now also the very servants of their enemies shall build it up. Again, it was revealed how the city and the temple and the people of Yashar'el (Israel) should be betrayed. For the scripture saith; And it shall be in the last days, that the Yahuah (Lord) shall deliver up the sheep of the pasture and the fold and the tower THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 285 thereof to destruction, And it came to pass as the Yahuah (Lord) spake. But let us enquire whether there be any temple of Elohim (God). There is; in the place where He Himself undertakes to make and finish it. For it is written ; And zt shall come to pass, when the week ts being accomplished, the temple of Elohim (God) shall be built gloriously in the name of the Yahuah (Lord). I find then that there is a temple. How then shall it be built in the name of the Yahuah (Lord)? Understand ye. Before we believed on Elohim (God), the abode of our heart was corrupt and weak, a temple truly built by hands ; for it was full of idolatry and was a house of demons, because we did whatsoever was contrary to Elohim (God). Sut it shall be built in the name of the Yahuah (Lord). ive heed then that the temple of the Yahuah (Lord) may be built gloriously. How? Understand ye. By receiving the remission of our sins and hoping on the Name we became new, created afresh from the beginning. Wherefore Elohim (God) dwelleth truly in our habitation within us. How? The word of His faith, the calling of His promise, the wisdom of the ordinances, the commandments of the teaching, He Himself prophesying in us, He Himself dwelling in us, opening for us who had been in bondage unto death the door of the temple, which is the mouth, and giving us repentance leadeth us to the incorruptible temple. For he that desireth to be saved looketh not to the man, but to Him that dwelleth and speaketh in him, being amazed at this that he has never at any time heard these words from the mouth of the speaker, nor himself ever desired to hear them. This is the spiritual temple built up to the Yahuah (Lord).
17.  So far as it was possible with all simplicity to declare it unto you, my soul hopeth that I have not omitted anything [of the matters pertaining unto salvation and so failed in my desire]. For if I should write to you concerning things immediate or future, ye would not understand them, because they are put in parables. So much then for this.
18.  But let us pass on to another lesson and teaching. There are two ways of teaching and of power, the one of light and the other of darkness ; and there is a great difference between the two ways. For on the one are stationed the light-giving angels of Elohim (God), on the other the angels of Satan. And the one is Yahuah (Lord) from all eternity and unto all eternity, whereas the other is Yahuah (Lord) of the season of iniquity that now is.
19.  This then is the way of light, if any one desiring to travel on the way to his appointed place would be zealous in his works. The Ha Yoke Uv [Hae HN. 286 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. knowledge then which is given to us whereby we may walk therein is as follows. ‘Thou shalt love Him that made thee, thou shalt fear Him that created thee, thou shalt glorify Him that redeemed thee from death; thou shalt be simple in heart and rich in spirit ; thou shalt not cleave to those who walk in the way of death; thou shalt hate everything that is not pleasing to Elohim (God); thou shalt hate all hypocrisy; thou shalt never forsake the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord). Thou shalt not exalt thyself, but shalt be lowly-minded in all things. ‘Thou shalt not assume glory to thyself. Thou shalt not entertain a wicked design against thy neigh- bour ; thou shalt not admit boldness into thy soul. Thou shalt not commit fornication, ‘Zou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not corrupt boys. ‘The word of Elohim (God) shall not come forth from thee where any are unclean. Thou shalt not make a difference in a person to reprove him for a transgression. ‘Thou shalt be meek, thou shalt be guiet, thou shalt be fearing the words which thou hast heard. ‘Thou shalt not bear a grudge against thy brother. ‘Thou shalt not doubt whether a thing shall be or not be. Zhou shalt not take the name of the Yahuah (Lord) in vain. ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour more than thine own soul. Thou shalt not murder a child by abortion, nor again shalt thou kill it when it is born. Thou shalt not withhold thy hand from thy thy son or thy daughter, but from their youth thou shalt teach them the fear of Elohim (God). Thou shalt not be found coveting thy neighbour's goods ; thou shalt not be found greedy of gain. Neither shalt thou cleave with thy soul to the lofty, but shalt walk with the humble and righteous. The accidents that befal thee thou shalt receive as good, knowing that double-tongued. _ Thou shalt be subject unto thy masters as to a type of Elohim (God) in shame and fear. Thou shalt not command in bitterness thy bondservant or thine handmaid who set their hope on the same Elohim (God), lest haply | they should cease to fear the Elohim (God) who is over both of you ; for He came not to call with respect of persons, but to call those whom the Spirit had prepared. Thou shalt make thy neighbour partake in all things, and shalt not say that anything is thine own. For if ye are fellow w-partakers_ in that which is imperishable, how much rather shall ye ye be in the things which are perishable. ‘Thou shalt not be hasty _ with thy tongue, for the mouth is a snare of death. So far as thou art able, thou shalt be pure for thy soul’s sake. Se not thou found holding out thy hands to receive, and drawing them in to give. ‘Thou shalt love as the apple of thine eye every one ¢hat speaketh unto thee the word of THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. 287 the Yahuah (Lord). Thou shalt remember the day of judgment night and day, and thou shalt seek out day by day the persons of the saints, either labouring by word and going to exhort them and meditating how thou mayst save souls by thy word, or thou shalt work with thy hands for a’ ransom for thy sins. ‘Thou shall not hesitate to give, neither shalt thou murmur when giving, but thou shalt know who is the good paymaster of thy reward. ‘Thou shalt keep those things which thou hast received, neither adding to them nor taking away from them. ‘Thou shalt utterly hate the Evil One. Thou shalt judge righteously. Thou shalt not make a schism, but thou shalt pacify them that contend by bringing them together. Thou shalt confess thy sins. Thou shalt not betake thyself to prayer with an evil conscience. This is the way of light.
20.  But the way of the Black One is crooked and full of a curse. For it is a way of eternal death with punishment wherein are the things that destroy men’s souls—idolatry, boldness, exaltation of power, hypocrisy, doubleness of heart, adultery, murder, plundering, pride, transgression, treachery, malice, stubbornness, witchcraft, magic, covetous- ness, absence of the fear of Elohim (God); persecutors of good men, hating the truth, loving lies, not perceiving the reward of righteousness, not cleaving to the good nor to righteous judgment, paying no heed to the widow and the orphan, wakeful not for the fear of Elohim (God) but for that which is evil; men from whom gentleness and forbearance stand aloof and far off; loving vain things, pursuing a recompense, not pitying the poor man, not toiling for him that is oppressed with toil, ready in slander, not recognizing Him that made them, murderers of children, cor- rupters of the creatures of Elohim (God), turning away from him that is in want, oppressing him that is afflicted, advocates of the wealthy, unjust judges of the poor, sinful in all things.
21.  It is good therefore to learn the ordinances of the Yahuah (Lord), as many as have been written above, and to walk in them. For he that doeth these things shall be glorified in the kingdom of Elohim (God) ; whereas he that chooseth their opposites shall perish together with his works. For this cause is the resurrection, for this the recompense. I entreat those of you who are in higher station, if ye will receive any counsel of good advice from me, keep amongst you those to whom ye may do good. Fail not. The ‘he day is at hand, in which everything shall be destroyed together with the Evil One. ‘The Yahuah (Lord) is at hand and His reward. Again and again I entreat you; be good lawgivers one to another ; continue faithful counsellors to yourselves; take away from 288 THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS. you all hypocrisy. And may Elohim (God), who is Yahuah (Lord) of the whole world, give you wisdom, judgment, learning, knowledge of His ordinances, patience. And be ye taught of Elohim (God), seeking diligently what the Yahuah (Lord) requireth of you, and act that ye may be found in the day of judgment. But if you have any remembrance of good, call me to mind when ye practise these things, that both my desire and my watchfulness may lead to some good result. I entreat you asking it as a favour. So long as the good vessel (of the body) is with you, be lacking in none of these things, but search them out constantly, and fulfil every commandment ; for they deserve it. For this reason I was the more eager to write to you so far as I was able, that I might give you joy. Fare ye well, children of love and peace. The Yahuah (Lord) of glory and of every grace be with your spirit. mae SEFEPHERD OF fee ERNE: Ae, HATH, foe SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. HIS work is entitled in the most ancient notices ‘The Shepherd’, or ‘The Shepherd of Hermas’. Hermas is both the narrator and the hero of the narrative. The Shepherd is the divine teacher, who communicates to Hermas, either by precept or by allegory, the lessons which are to be disseminated for the instruction of the Church. Later confusions, which identify Hermas with the Pastor, find no countenance in the work itself. Hermas’ own personal and family history are interwoven from time to time into the narrative, and made subservient to the moral purposes of the work. In this case it re- sembles the Divina Commedia, though history plays a much less important part here than in Dante’s great poem. The structure of the work is seriously impaired by the common division into three parts or books, Visions, Mandates, and Similitudes, as if they stood on the same level. It may be convenient to use this mode of division for purposes of reference alone; but we must not suffer it to dominate our conception of the work. The Vzszons are introductory, and the Shepherd does not appear until their close. He delivers his message to Hermas in two parts, (1) Jandates or Precepts, (2) Stmilitudes or Parables, i.e., moral lessons taught by allegory. The person first introduced in the book is one Rhoda (Vis. i. 1), to whom Hermas had been sold when brought from Rome as a slave. Her part is somewhat the same as Beatrice’s in Dante’s poem. She appears to him in the heavens as he is on his way to Cume, and reproaches him with his not altogether blameless passion for her. Having thus aroused his conscience, she withdraws. Then he sees before him an aged woman whom (considering the place) he not unnaturally mistakes for the Sibyl (V7s. ii. 4), but who proves to be 19—2 292 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. the Church. The object of the Vistons indeed seems to be to place before the reader the conception of the Church under the guise of an aged woman, whose features become more youthful at each successive appearance. ‘Thus the lessons of a smitten and penitent conscience, of the Church growing and spreading (the Church Militant), lastly, of the Church purified by suffering (the Church Triumphant), and the terrors of the judgment, occupy the four Visions properly so called. Hermas is enjoined to write down all that he hears. One copy of his book he is to send to Clement, who is charged with making it known to foreign cities; another to Grapte, whose business it is to instruct the widows and orphans, and he himself, together with the presbyters, is to read it to the people of ‘this city’, i.e., Rome ( Ms. ii. 4). The fifth Vzsion is different in kind from the preceding four, and indeed is designated, not a Vision (opacts), but a Revelation (azoxaAvjis). Hermas is now in his own house. The appearance is no longer the representation of the Church, but a man of glorious visage in a pastoral habit, who has been sent to dwell with him, and teach him to the end of his days. He is ‘the Shepherd, the angel of repentance’, who delivers to him certain Mandates and Similitudes, which he is ordered to write down, and which form the two remaining books—the main part of the work. The teaching of the Shepherd then is contained in the twelve Mandates and the ten Similitudes which follow. But the tenth and last of the latter is not strictly a parable like the rest. It contains a final chapter, summing up the function of the Shepherd and his heavenly associates, in the work of perfecting the instruction of Hermas. 2. The geographical setting of the narrative has its centre in Rome, where evidently the work itself was written. Hermas’ home in the city, the road to Cume, the Via Campana,—these are the localities mentioned by name. There is one exception. Arcadia is chosen as the subject of a Similitude (Sz. ix.), the last properly so called, because the mountains visible from a central height by their character and position afford a good subject for the concluding parable, the component elements of the Church (see J. A. Robinson, Zhe Athos THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 293 Codex of the Shepherd of Hermas, p. 30, where the views of Rendel Harris are discussed and further developed and modified). As he was brought to Rome, and sold as a slave there, Arcadia may have been his native place. ie The da¢e is uncertain. The work is found in general circulation in the Eastern and Western Churches, soon after the middle of the second century. About this time also it must have been translated into Latin. It is quoted by Irenzeus in Gaul, by Tertullian in Africa, by Clement and Origen in Alexandria. All these fathers—even Tertullian, before he became a Montanist—either cite it as scripture, or assign to it a special authority as in some sense inspired and quasi-canonical. The same inference as to its early influence may be drawn from the denunciation of Tertullian, who—now become a Montanist—rejects it as repulsive to his puritan tendencies (de Pudic. 10), and the author of the Muratorian Canon (c. A.D. 180), who denies it a place among either the prophets or the apostles, though apparently allowing it to be read privately for edification. Its canonicity moreover had been the subject of discussion in more than one council, when Tertullian wrote (¢. ¢, not before A.D. 212). With the date is closely connected the question of authorship. On this point there are two ancient traditions. (1) The author of the ‘Shepherd’ was the same Hermas, who is greeted by S. Paul as a member of the Roman Church, a.p. 58 (Rom. xvi. 14). This is the view adopted by Origen (iv. p. 683) in his commentary on the passage, where he speaks of the book as ‘a very useful scripture, and in my opinion divinely inspired’; but, as he introduces this view of the authorship with ‘ut puto’ it is plain that he does not fall back on any historical tradition in support of his opinion. His influence had great weight with subsequent writers. (2) It was written by one Hermas, the brother of pope Pius I (c. A.D. 140—155) during the episcopate of the latter. This is stated in the Muratorian Canon (c. A.D. 180) ‘sedente cathedram urbis Romae ecclesiae Pio episcopo fratre eius’. This statement, however, is not consistent with the mention of Clement as a contemporary. If it be true, either some other Clement is meant, or the original Greek of the 204 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. Canon, of which only the Latin is extant, cannot have stated that Pius was actually bishop at the time when it was written. This tradition appears likewise in one or two subsequent writings, which however are perhaps not independent. It is somewhat dis- credited by the fact that its motive in depreciating the value of the work, as being quite recent and having no claim to be read in the Church like the writings of the Apostles and prophets, appears in the context’. (3) Besides these two traditional views, a third and intermediate Hermas, not otherwise known, is postulated as the author about A.D. go—100, to meet the difficulty about Clement. This is the view of several recent critics (Zahn, Hirt des Hermas p. 14 sq, followed by Caspari and others). The notices of the Christian ministry, and of the condition of the Church generally, seem to be consistent with either the second or the third view, though they suggest the earlier date rather than the later ( Vis. il. 2, 4, ill. 5, 9, St. ix. 27). On the whole we may, though not without diffidence, adopt (2) the ancient tradition, which is definite and claims to be almost contem- porary, as the safest guide; though confessedly (3) the modern suggestion has stronger support from internal evidence, such as it is. The £thiopic version, which identifies the author with S. Paul, ought to be regarded as a blunder, rather than a tradition founded on Acts xiv. 12 tov d¢ IlatXov “Epyjy. 4. The authorities for the text are as follows: I. GREEK MANUSCRIPTS. 1. The celebrated Sinaitic ms (&) of the fourth century, where, after a gap caused by the loss of six leaves, the Shepherd follows 1 These words are illustrated by the fact that (a) in the Codex Sinaiticus (§) the Shepherd (a fragment, see below, p. 295) appears at the end of the volume, following on the Epistle of Barnabas, which again follows the Apocalypse and the books of the Canonical New Testament; (b) in the list appended to the Codex Claromontanus (vith Cent.) again it follows the New Testament proper, of which the closing books are ‘Revelation of John’, ‘Acts’, and is succeeded by the apocryphal ‘Acts of Paul’, and ‘ Revelation of Peter’; (c) in several Mss of the Latin version it appears in different parts of the Old Testament. THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 295 the Epistle of Barnabas at the end of the volume. Unfortunately, however, only a fragment, roughly speaking the first quarter of the text, survives, the manuscript, after several lacunz, breaking off finally in the middle of Mand. iv. 3. 2. The Athos ms (A), written in a very small and cramped hand of the fourteenth century. This consists of three leaves now in the University Library at Leipsic, and six leaves still remaining in the Monastery of Gregory on Mount Athos. The portion of the manuscript now at Leipsic was in 1855 brought from Mount Athos by the famous forger Simonides, who sold it to the University there, as well as what purported to be a copy of six other leaves of the same document. This copy was subsequently edited by Anger. The existence, however, of the original manuscript was questioned until 1880, when Dr Lambros rediscovered it at Mount Athos. His collation of the readings of these six leaves was in 1888 published by J. A. Robinson (Zhe Athos Codex of the Shepherd of Hermas). Like the Sinaitic, this manuscript is incom- plete, having lost a leaf at the end; but from Mand. iv. 3 to Sim. ix. 30 (where it fails us), that is to say, for nearly three fourths of the whole work, it is our sole Greek authority for the text. Besides Simonides’ afographon mentioned above, another copy was subsequently found among his papers after his arrest, and published by Tischendorf. The publication of Dr Lambros’ collation shows us that, whereas the afographon edited by Anger was a forgery, the second apographon was truly described as being a transcript of the Athos ms. In passages therefore where the Athos codex has become damaged and illegible between 1855 and 1880, this apographon (A‘) has a certain value. II. VERSIONS. 1. Latin Versions. These are two in number, (a) the so-called Old Latin Version (L,), which exists in about twenty manuscripts, the mutual relation of which has not yet been made quite clear. From this version Faber Stapulensis published his editio princeps in 1513. (6) The Palatine Version (L,), found in one manuscript of the fourteenth century, and in 1857 published in full by Dressel. Both these versions give us the text virtually complete. 2. Ethiopic Version (E). This exists in a manuscript discovered in 1847 in the monastery of Guindaguinde by A. d’Abbadie, who procured a transcript, but did not realise the full importance of his 296 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. discovery. At length at Dillmann’s earnest request he published the text with a Latin translation in 1860. ‘This version likewise contains the Pastor complete. The mutual relations and comparative value of our authorities are matters of considerable dispute; but a comparison of the early chapters, where the Greek of the Sinaitic ms exists, shows us that & generally agrees with L, L, against AE, the close connexion of this latter pair of authorities being noticeable throughout. Again, within these groups, L, appears to preserve a purer text than L,, and E than A. III. Parristic QUOTATIONS. Besides these direct authorities for the text, the Shepherd of Hermas is quoted in the Greek by Clement of Alexandria and Origen, while considerable passages have been incorporated into the texts of Antiochus the Monk and ps-Athanasius. TIOIMHN. I. ‘O Opéas pe mémpanév pe ‘Podn tii eis ‘Podunv. \ Vi Tove / eb] U \ ’ / ’ \ MeTa TOAAA ETH TAVTHY aveyvwpicauny Kat npEdynv avTHvy ’ rf ¢€ > / \ / \ / ’ \ ayaTay ws aderpnv. 2. META YpOvoy TLVa Novopmevyy Eis TOV \ \ / 3 \ b] / rear \ al 4 motapov Tov TiSepw eidov, kai érédwxa avtn THv YElpa Kal > Fi ? \ ’ nr aA , 9 ’ ‘ \ / éEnyayov avTnv Ex TOU TOTapov. TavTHs oY LOwY TO KAaAXOS dveNoyilo 2y TH Kapdta jov Aéywv' Makapios Hunv et oySouny ev Th Kapdia pou déyov pos um TOLAUTHY YyUVaiKa Elyov Kal TO KAANEL KALTO TPOT@. jdvOY A ) , ” \ aO7 \ ’ \ TovTO eBoudevoapny, Erepov Se ovdEV. 3. pmeETA Ypovoy TLWa Topevopuevou pov els Kovpas nai doEafovtos tas KTiceis TOD cod, Ws weyarat kal extrpetrets Kal Suvatai eiow, TepuTaTav > ‘ \ le} / \ > / / tly Me) aditvaca. Kai Tvedwa pe EXaBeEv Kal arnveyKév pe dv avo- , a 2 9 2 OF COA A vag VG MIF dias Twos, dc Hs avOpwrros ovK EdUVaTO OdedcaL’ Hv Sé 6 TOTTOS Fi NES Np ES A eT \ > \ Kpnuvedns Kal atreppnyes ato Tév VdaTav. SvaBas ody Tov \ > Cal S > Ve U \ tal \ / \ Totamov éxeivoyv nNOov eis TA Opard, Kal TLOG Ta yovaTa Kal , / / nw 7 V3. lal , \ npEaunv tpocevyer bar TO Kupio kai éEouoroyeicOai pov Tas / amaptias. 4. Tpowevyomévou O€ pov Hvoiyn 6 ovpavos, Kal n \ Bréro THv yuvaixa éxelyny Hy émeOUpnoa aorralopévny pe ex Tov ovpavod, héyoucay’ “Epya, yaipe. 5. BréwWas O€ els > lol y¢ lal aviv eyo avTH Kupia, ti od dd roveis; 7 Sé amexpiOn pot’ “AvedynudOnv iva cov tas ayaptias édéyEw mpds Tov Kvpiov. 6. déyw avtn Nov ov pov éreyxos ef; Ov, dyciv, , GXNA Akovoov Ta pnuata & cot pérAW Aéyewv. 6 Oeds 6 €v a ’ a lal rn TOls OUVpavois KaTOLK@Y Kal KTiaasS EK TOU fn OVTOS Ta OVTA 3 @ , ‘ ’ / [4 Lal id J, , / ’ fal Kal TANCuVas Kal avEnaoas Evexeyv THS aylas éxKANolas avTod, 3 ts / la opyifeTat cor OTL Hwaptes eis Ewe. 7. atroxpiOels avTH NEyw° > Ne te % Vd / ; x , td \ ea Kis oé€ jmaptov; motm tpom@m; 1) TOTE cot aloxpov pnua 298 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (Vii b / > / / e b) c / ’ U , éeXaAnoa; OV TavTOTe ce ws Oeayv nynodpnv; ov TavTOTE GE ’ , rd , ’ , , ? / ‘ ‘ éveTparrny ws adeApyv; Ti mov KaTaevon, @ yUval, TA TOVNPA r , travta kal axd@apta; 8. yerdoacd por Aéyer’ “El trip / , / c bp / rf / a , r Kapdlav cov avéBn 7 émiOupia THs Tovnpias. 1% ov SoKEl cou ’ \ / \ a bf y Bin. > lel , nm 9 A ‘ avopt Sixaiw Trovnpov mpayua elvat éay avaBh avTod emt THY / ¢c \ > / ¢ ‘ / >’ \ / Kapdiay 9 Trovnpa ériOumia; auaptia yé ect, Kal peyarn, / c ‘ , ’ \ / U > ” > gyaiv. 6 yap Sixavos avnp Sixava Bovdeveta. ev TO ovv dixata Boureveo Oar avtov KatopOovtat n d0£a avTod év Tois ’ lal \ , U »” \ f > \ / ovpavois Kal evKaTadXakTov exer TOV Kupiov év TravTl mpay- pate avtov' of Sé mrovnpad Bovdevopevor ev Tais Kapdiats avtav Oavatov Kai aixyparwticpoyv éavtois éerieT@vTaL, a- Mota of TOY aidva TOUTOY TepLTOLOUpEVOL Kal YyaupL@VTeES eV ral xX / b] Cal \ % 3 / al ,’ a lal a rAXG z TO TROUT AUTOY Kal ju) AVTEXOmEVOL TOV aya dv THV “EAKOV >, - 0 > ” Tov. Q. peTavoncovol al Wuyal avTa@Y, olTWwes ovK ExoU- > ry) % \ e \ , / 4 \ \ , cal ow édmrida, dAXa éavTOvs aTeyvwKacw Kai THY CwnY avTOV. > \ ‘ / \ \ / ae . ial / aa ov TpocevxXou pos TOV Deov, Kal iaceTar TA dpwapTn- “ata cov Kal dXov Tov olkov cov Kal TavTwY TOV aylwv. II. Mera 70 A\aAjoat avtpy Ta pynyata Tadta éexreicOn- catty m 9. SAP ef v \ \ t gay ol ovpavol’ Kayo bros Hunv mweppiK@s Kal AvTrOvpevos. > Se > > bre ee ee / > ' éXeyov dé ev euavt@* Ei atirn pou n apaptia avaypaderat, TO Py / fal lal “ a lal 3 / \ e \ A s duvnoopat cwOjvar; 7) was éEtNacopat Tov Oceov repli a ie lal lal TOV AuapTLO@V mov TOV TEdelwy; 7 ToloLs PHuacw epwTncw \ / ivf t / / fa) / tov Kupioy iva itatevontai por; 2. Tav’Ta wou cvpPovdevo- / \ 8 4 Es 3 a Ol / f / Meévou Kal dtaxpivovtos é€v TH Kapdia pou, Brévw KaTévavTi / \ > > / / val / pov xabédpay revenv é€& épiwyv yiovivwy yeyovviay peyadny’ Av: \ lal > e fal / 4 kai nOev yurn mpecBoris ev iwaticu@ AapTrpoTaTa, Exovea / > \ lal Wot J / / \ > U / BiBXtov eis Tas yeElpas, Kal Exabicev povn, Kal dowateTai pe’ ¢ a a ’ \ Epua, yatpe. kayo dvTovpevos Kai Kralwy citrov' Kupia, rn \ s / s / / c cal ¢ / xaipe. 3. Kai eirév pou’ Ti otuyvos, “Epya, 6 waxpodupos \ ) U e / lal ‘ ” \ a 37 Kal GoTOMAaYNTOS, 0 TAaVTOTE YEAOY, Ti OUTW KaTHd)S TH idéa \ , ¢. , > \ 2 2 a. c \ \ , , Kal ovy tapos; Kayo elTov avTH “Td yuvatkcs ayaborta- / id > ’ 6 id A TNS Neyovens STL HuapTov eis avTHV. 4. 7 5é Eby’ Mndayas \ aN A a fal n A émt tov SoddNov Tod Oeod TO Tpadypwa TovTo. GAA TaVTWS et \ , ety 4 WN 2. A ” \ a , emt THY Kapdiav cov avéBn Tept avTAs. éotw ev Tois Sov- Mion THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 299 rn a ¢ UY bes / 3 / % \ hous TOV Oeod 7 TovavTn BovdAy apaptiav éTipepovca* Trovnpa \ \ \ »” > U lal \ ” yap BovdAyn Kal éxTdyKTOS, eis Tavoeuvoy TrEvpa Kal 75n ’ ” dedoxipacpuévoy, éay ériOupnon Tovnpoyv Epyov, Kal wariota lal , / a “Eppds 0 éyxpatns, 0 amexomevos Tacns érmOupias Trovnpas Kal wANPHS TacHs aTOTHTOS Kal axaklas pweyadns. > / / III. °AAX ov»>y &vexa TovTou dpyifetai cot 6 Oeds, GAN ’ > \ cal iva Tov olKov cov Tov avounoarTa els Tov Kupiov Kal eis Uuas fal A / > \ / : TOUS yovels aUT@Y ETLTTpEWyS. Ada PidOTEKVOS WY OUK éVOU- s > x3 lel b] \ fol an Oérevs cov Tov oikov, adda adjKas avTov KatapGaphvar Sewads* \ etek ’ , c , : ? ee et , , dua ToUTO cot Opyiferar 0 Kupios* adda tacetai cov TavtTa \ nr Ta TpoyeyovoTa Tovnpa év T@ oikw cou’ Sia yap Tas éxeivwV 3 a al apaptias Kal avounpata ov KatepOdapns ard THv BuwtiKov > ¢ , lal mpakewv. 2. adr 1 TodvoTTAayyVia Tod Kupiov 7rénodv ge Kal TOV OiKOY GoU Kai LaxupoTOLncEL oe Kal OewedtWoeL cE > lal / ’ a \ , A e J > \ ’ ' év th S0€y avTov. ov povov pn pabupncys, ddAdd evripvyer kai taxupoTroles cou Tov oiKoV. ws yap 6 yadKEvs odupoKo- lel > la] rf TOV TO Epyov avToU TepvyiveTat TOD TpaypmaTos ov OéreL, oUTw V5 © / c ¢ Kal 0 Noyos 0 KaOnuepivos O dixatos TepvyiveTat TaGNS TOVN- / \ / 7 a ny, Bes; Sas es plas. pun Svadlans ovy vovdetay cov Ta Téxva* olda yap bre > > ¢ / ’ lal > / > éav petavonoovow €& bAns Kapdias a’Tar, évypadyncoytat eis n le) ¢ / a tas BiBNous THs Fons peta THY ayiov. 3. peTa TO Tranvat Ee 5) \ ef rn / A / b] re / > avTns Ta pnuata TavTa eyes por’ O€reELs axodcai pou ava- , , las ywooKovons; NEyw Kayo" O€drw, Kupia. Réyes por’ Levod ’ A \ wv \ / fal lal v f axpoaTns Kal axove Tas dofas Tod Oecov. Neovca peyarws lod S ’ lal kat Oavpaotas 0 ovK icxvoa pynpovedoat’ TavTa yap Ta er ” \ ’ / v / \ > pnpata éxppixta, & ov dvvatat dvOpwros Bactacat. Ta ovvy ” Cc oan érxyaTa pnuata éuvnuovevoa’ Hv yap nuiv cvydpopa Kal Huepa’ *Tdav 6 Ocds tay Suva ) dopatw Ouvaper Kal t 4. D 0 Oeds ray Suvapewy, 6 dopar@ Svvayer Kal Kpataia Kal TH peyadyn cuvécer avTov KTicas TOV KOcpoV Kal TH év- d0E@ Bovvj a) \ \ > ft a , ? a \ a ¢ H TepiOeis THY EVTTpEeTTELAY TH KTLTEL AVTOU, Kal TO > Oy ee f \ “) \ \ fa} V ‘ \ a toxup® pnuate mntas Tov ovpavov Kai Pewediwoas THY YyHY a ‘Od \ A 7 , \ / / A Pay. eTl VOATWY, Kal TH Lia copia Kal Tpovola KTLZaS THY aylav é a) if td a "\ \ XO oS \ 6 t ‘ KK\nolav avTod, HY Kal nUrAOynoEV, (dod pEeOLoTaver ToOvS > \ \ ovpavovs Kal Ta opn Kal Tors Bovvods Kal Tas Paraccas, Kal 300 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 1. iii / £ \ / Lad , “~ ’ r iA , “ , r TayTa Opanra yiveTat Tots exAeKTOIs avTOD, iva aTrob@ avTots « \ a lol Ti érayyediav iv ernyyelrato peta TONS SoEns Kal yapas, >A / \ , a a «a I > U €av THpnTwoW Ta vomLa TOD Meod & TapédaBov ev peyary TioTel. ‘ IV. “Ore ody éréXecev dvayweoKovea kal nyépOn aro a ‘5 s fa} / / » Te \ 6é6 Ths Kabédpas, HNOav Técoapes veaviat Kai jpav Thy KaDEdpav Kal annrOov pos THY advaToAnv. 2, mpooKadeitas Oé pe Kal irpato Tod aTnOous pou Kai réyer pou’ “Hpecéy cou y ava- lel lal / yvwois ov; Kal Néyw avtH Kupia, ravta pou ta éoyata / \ dpéoxer, Ta Sé TMpoTEpa Yarera Kal oxrnpa. 1 SE Ep pot Néyouca’ Taira ta écyarta Tots dixalou, Ta dé TpoTEpa Tots ” \ lal ’ U / > a 9-8 lo Overw Kal Tols atoatatat. 3. Aadrovons avTHS eT EMO Svo0 Tivés avdpes Ehavncay Kai jpav avtny TAY ayKoVeY Kat annrOav, brrov Kal 1) Kabédpa, mpos Tv avatodnv. idapa dé amnrOev, Kal UTayouda Néyer por’ “Avdpifou, “Eppa. “Opaais fi. I. Ilopevowévov pov eis Kovpas cata tov xapoy dv Kab Tépucl, TepiTaTav aveuvncOnyv THs TEpvcWhs dpacews, Kal madw pe alpe: Tvedpa Kal atropéper eis TOV avTOY TOTrOY OTrOU kal Tépvot. 2. éAOoy ody eis TOY TOTOY TLOG Ta yovaTa Kai npEaunv tmpocevyecOar TO Kupio xai d0€afew avtovd ro dvoma, btu pe AELov nYynoaTo Kal éyvdpicéy por Tas auwapTias foou Tas TpoTepov. 3. peta bé TO eyepOnvai pe amo THS mpocevyns BréTwo arrévavti pou Thy TpecButépay jv Kal mépucw éwpaKey, TEepiTaTovcay Kal avaywocKovocay BiBra- plovov. Kat réyes por’ Avvy tadta Tots éexdexTots ToD Oeod avayyetdat; Aéyw avTH Kupia, tocatra pynpovedoat ov Svvapas’ Sos Sé pot TO BuPriduov, va peTtayparrwpat avTo. Aa8e, dnciv, cai arroddces pot. 4. EdaBov eye, Kal eis Twa TOTOV TOU aypov avaxywpnoas peTeypatrayny TavTa Tpos ypappa* ovx nUpicKxov yap Tas guArNABas. TEXeCaVTOS otY wou Ta ypaupata Tov BiBrLOSLov eEaidvns npTayn mou éx THS xerpos TO BiBriS10v* bro Tivos é ov« eidov. A ee at THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 301 \ he e s , II. Mera dé déka nai révte nwépas vnotevocavTos jou Kab \ a A Tova epwTtncavtos Tov Kupiov arrexarvphOn poe ) yvaots THS rat s rf e ypadns. nv Sé yeypaypéva tavta’ 2. To omépya cov, \ \ > , “Eppa, 70étncav eis tov Oeov Kal éBracdnunoay els Tov ’ % / \ Lal ’ fal > / / Kupvov cat mpoédmxav trovs yovets avtayv év tovnpla peyann. \ / la \ / ’ ’ / Kal NKovocay TpodoTat yovewy, Kal TpodovTeEs ovK WhEeArnOncar, > \ » / Pace , yA \ 5) , \ adra €Tt TpocéOnKav Tals dwapTials aVTOY Tas acEeNyelas Kal \ hs \ a > / e > / , cuuduppovs Trovnpias, Kal oUTws éTAHTOnCaY ai avopulat av- a a \ a TOV. 3. GAA yvdplicoY Ta’Ta Ta Pnuata ToOIs TEéKVOLS COU Taw Kal TH cvuBie cov TH pedNoVoN cov ade’ Kal yap vA >’ ’ / a / > a Ud = > \ QUTN OVK ATEYETAL TNS YAwWaONS, EV 7) TOVNpEevEeTaL’ adda >] / A oR nr r / \ a ” AY axovcaca Ta pnuata Tadta apéFetat, kal E£eu EXeos. 4. peta TO yvwpicar oe TavTa Ta pnuata avTols & éveTeiNaTo pol O / A > lal / 9 / ’ A oe Seatrorns iva cot arroxadugpOy, ToTe apievtat avTois ai awap- Tlat TacaL Us TpPdOTEpov HuapTov, Kal Tacw Tos aylows Tots , lel a apapTncacw péxype TavTns THS ypuépas, éav €E Ons THs Kap- , > A a dias petavojcwow Kal dpwow amo Ths Kapdias avTav Tas / »” \ ¢€ , \ lal FE ,’ lal Supvylas. 5. @pocev yap 6 Searrotns Kata THs d0Ens avTod > lal fal ml Tovs ExEKTOVS aUTOD’ éay wWpLoMéevNS THS Nuépas Ta’TNS Bla c M ETL auwapTnols yévnTat, pn exe avTovs cwTnpiav’ yap petavowa Tois Sixalois Eyes TédOS* TeTANPwVTAL al Hpuépat petavolas Taow Tois ayiows’ Kat Tols bé COverw petavold bd na ? a €aTiv Ews eoxaTns nuépas. 6. E€peis oy Tois Tponyoupévots a > / vA / \ € \ >’ tal b] THS EXKANTLas Wa KaTopOwowrvTat Tas ddovs avTaY ev diKaLO- / vA s / > / \ b] / \ cuvn, wa aTroNaBwotv é€x TANpoOUS Tas EeTTayyENlas peTAa TOA- a / > / ? e 9 \ Ud Ais SdEns. 7. eumeivate ody of épyalomevor tiv Sixacocvvnv \ \ / 7 / ¢ lal c / \ lal kal wn Swpvynonte, iva yévntar vudv 1 Tapodos peta TOV A A € ayyérov THY ayiwv. pakapior vpels Ooo. Vropevete TIP Lal / Pri tv epyouévny THY weyarny, Kal boot ovK apyncovTaL thv Conv adtadv. 8. wpocev yap Kuptos cata Tod vid avtod, \ na ,’ TOUS apvnoapévous tov Kupiov avtadv atreyvwplaba ato THs fons avtayv, Tovs viv péAXovtas apveicOar Tails épyouévass A \ \ nmépats* Tots é mpoTepov apynoapévots Oud THY TOAVaTAAYY- / ¢/- > / >) al viav LNEWS EYEVETO AUTOLS. 302 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 2. iti \ he ca / rad III. So dé, ‘Eppa, wnnére pvnotxaxnons toils tTéxvows cov, \ \ > / EA A tal b] \ tal unde TH aderpnv cov éaons, iva KalapicOdow aro TAY Tpo- Tépwy apapTiav avTav. tTatdevOncovTat yap Tratbela Sixaia, / a €av ov pn wYnoLKaKNnoNS avTols. pynoikakia OavaTov KaTep- \ , nr yaterar. od bé, ‘Epyd, peyadas Oripers Exyes iSimtixas Sia Tas TapaBaces Tod olkov cov, OTL ovK ewéXnoeV Got TeEpl avTav. Gada TrapeveOupnOns Kal Tats TpayywaTeiais cov cuV- / val ee 3 \ / \ AS eat lal avedipns tais movnpais' 2. adda cater ce TO wn aToaTh- vat ce ato Qeod bavtos, Kal 7 amroTns cov Kal 1 TOAAH éyxpateva’ Tadta cécwxéy oe, éav éupelvns, Kal TavTas owber \ \ a b , \ / ? ? / \ Tovs Ta ToLavTa épyalopuévous Kali TropEevopevous ev akaklg Kal ATNOTNTL. OUTOL KaTIZYVOVELW Tacns Trovnplas Kal Tapapé- vouow els Conv aidviov. 3. pakdplor tavTes of épyafopevor \ / > / oe xa , cal A Thy Sucatoavynv: ov dvapOapynoovra Ews aidvos. 4. épels 5é al / U , val Makiu@* [dod OrtYrus Epyerat, €av cou doKn Tadw apveicOas. ‘ , is ' / el Erryc Kypioc toic émictpe@omenoic, Ws yeypaTTat ev TO *EA6ad x / lal / bd SAD / al aA kat M@éar, toils mpopntevoacw év TH Epnuy TO ae. ¢ IV. “AmexarvdOn Sé pot, ddeApol, Kowmpéve V7TO veavi- ’ ' , ' P \ , > aKou evedseaTaTou AéyovTos pow’ Thy mpecBuTépay, trap 7s rn / érxaBes To BiBriSxov, tiva Soxeis eivar; eyod dnusr* THv LiBva- Nav. Uravdca, pyciv, ov éotw. Tis odv éctiv; dnpt. “H b} fal iA "ExrAncia, pnoiv. eizov avte’ Acari oby mpecButépa; “Ort, dno, Tavtwv mpetn éxticOn’ Ova TodTO TpeaBuTEepa, Kat Sua tavTnv 6 KOopos KaTnpTicOn. 2. peTérrerta S€ bpaciv 7) b] an ” ALO ¢ B / \ -) / J eldov év TO oik@ pov. HAOev 7 TpecBuTEepa Kal HpwTHTEV mE et On TO BiBAXlov dédwxa Tols mpecButépors. npvnoaynv , a , , a] A eae, Sedwxévat. Karas, hyciv, reToinkas’ éyw yap pnyata Tpoc- A =) > lol Getvar. Otay ov amoTekéow TA pynuata TavtTa, dia cod $ a > a a yvopicOncetat Tois exAeKTOIs Tac. 3. yparrers odv Svo A a BiBrapisdia, kat wéprpers Ev KAjpevte kai ev Vparrn. wéurrer > aA 3 NE var Q oth a7 \ 2 L ‘ ovv KaAnuns els tas Ew modes, Exetv@ yap éTLTETpAaTTTAaL iN \ / \ / \ \ > , \ \ T'partn 5& vovbernoet Tas ynpas Kal Tovs dpdavovs. avd bE 2. iii. 4 dpveto@ac] conj. Harmer [L,E]; dpyyoa: NAL. Mis 3.4] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 303 7 \ A a dvayveon eis TaUTHY THY TOAW peta TaY TpEecBuTépwV TOV or a / TpoicTapéevov THS ExKANT las. "“Opacis / Ul I. wv eldov, adeAdol, Tora’Tn. 2. vnotedoas TodAGKLS ol vA / \ > / 4 kat denOels Tod Kupiouv va pot pavepdon Thy atroKaduu hv > / a \ fal / > / ) A A poe érnyyeitrato SetEas dua THS TpeaRuTépas exeivys, aVTH TH \ v c , \ ~ / P ~| \ lcd vuxtl @hOn por 4 TpecBuTépa Kai elrév pow’ “Erret ovTws > \ a \ Lal > \ A / > \ > \ évoens €f Kal otrovdaios eis TO yva@vat TravTa, EXOE Eis TOV > \ vA / \ \ “ / b] 0 aypov otrov ypoviters, Kal wept dpav TéuTTHY eupavicOjnco- / \ / \ a > a ? 4 b] \ pai cou kat Sei—Ewm cou & dei ce idety. 3. NpwTnTa av’THnY a lol > lol 7 , éyov' Kupia, eis trotov torov tod aypod; “Ozrov, dyciv, , x > Oéres. é€eXeEaunyv ToTov Kahov dvakeywpnKdta. mply Sé lal lal al / lal NaAncaL avTn Kal eltrety TOV TOTOV, Eyes pot’ “Héw exel >’ f Omrou Oédeis. 4. eyevounv ody, adeddol, els TOY aypov, Kal > suvewndica Tas Bpas, Kal AOov eis TOY TOTOY bTrov SieTAEa- A an U penv avTn det, kai BréTrW TvprAréXLoV KElwevov éhehavTivor, es ek an / ” ' A \ 9 , Kal €TL TOU oupredioU ExELTO KEPBLKAPLOY ALVODY, Kal ETAVH Névtiov eEnTtA@pEVOY ALVOUY KapTacLoV. 5. LO@v TaUTa KEl- \ / v > a / 54 > Ld \ peva Kai pndéva dvta ev TO TOT@ ExOapBos éyevouny, Kal c \ s BY \ e / > ie \ ¢ \ @oEL TPOmos pe EXaPeEV, Kal al Tplyes pou opOai’ Kal wcel ral / n > pikn yor mpoondrOev, povov pov ovTos. é€v €uavT@ ovy yevo- pevos Kal pvnabels THs SdEns ToD Oeod Kal AaBav Oapaos, els Ta yovata éEwporoyovpny TO Kupiw radu tas aduaptias Tay poroyouuny TH Kupig s dpaprias ¢ Bi , ¢ ee \ ys 4 \ flov ws Kal TpoTepov. 6. 7 dé HAGE peTa veavioxor EE, ods Kal TpOTepoyv éEwpakey, Kai éTrecTaOn Lor Kal KaTHKpPOaTO , VS) / A / \ ¢e Tpocevyopéevov ov Kal éEouoroyoupévov TO Kupio tas awap- I \ ¢ / / A ¢ fal n \ a Tlas pov. Kal aryapévn pov reyes’ “Eppa, matoat epi todv auaptiav cov TdvTa épwrav' épwra Kal rept Sixacocvyns, iva rap é EauTns els TOV olKOV cou Kal é&e- nS pépos Te eEauTns els TOY oiKOV . J. Kab é&e Y a \ Nay. \ \ I \ t YVELPEL ME THS YELPOS Kal AryeL Ee TIPOS TO TUpAPENLOD, Kal NéyEL Lad / a Tots veaviokots’ “Tarayere Kai oixodopetre. 8. Kai peta TO > avaxwprcat TOs vEeavioKoUS KAL MOVOV NUBY YEeyovoTaV AéyeL 3. i. 6 éwecrdOm] conj. Hilgenfeld ; éoray A; stetit fost L,E; def. SL». 304 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V."30 / , -~ / poor’ KaOucov ade. éyw avtTn’ Kupia, apes tovs mpeaBute- a / v / pous mpatov Kabica, “O cou déyw, dyno, Kabicov. 9. Oé- > / > , Novos ovv pov Kabicat eis Ta deELa pépy ovK Elacév je, AAX > / lal 1 EZ ,’ \ ,’ \ / / evvever ou TH YeLpt wa eis Ta ApioTepa mépyn KaBicw, Siado- / 7 , , \ yilouevou pov ovy Kal AvTTOUpEéVOU OTL OVK ElacéV pe ELS TA c n deEva pépn Kabicar, Neyer wor’ Avumn, “Epud; 6 eis ta beEva / / ve > / lal of) ’ / lal ® a \ bépn TOTos aANwv éotiv, THY }6n EvapeaTHKOTaY TO Mew Kal ! v Fe ag A \ Oy \ " v , maQovrwy elvexa Tov ovopaTtos’ col b€ ToANG Aelrres iva peT ’ a / a > ’ c > , lal id / / r avtav Kabions' GAN ws eupévers TH ATAOTHTL Gov, MEVOr, a a f. Kat Kain eT avTar, Kal boot édy epyaowyTaL Ta éKelVov « val ¢ épya Kal UrevéeyKwow & Kat exeivol UIrnVvEeyKay. / II. Ti, dyui, varnveyxav; “Axove, pyciv' pactvyas, ‘ / A lal gurakas, Orinpers peyadas, oTavpovs, Onpia elvexev Tod dvo- patos’ dia TovTO Exeivwy éeotlv Ta deEva pépyn TOD ayvacparTos, yn 3 / \ \ v = al A al \ > \ Kal ds éav wan dia TO dvoma’ THY Sé NoiTaY Ta apioTeEpa - Mépn eotiv. adda adudotépar, kal Tov x deEvy Kai Tadv €& tal ‘ ‘ “~ e ’ dpiotepav KaOnpévov, Ta avTa S@pa Kai al avTal érrayyeNiau' ld > n > Lal U \ » U / peovov éxetvor ex deEiav KaOnvTar Kai éxovow Sokav Twa. e nw Lol 2. avd &€ KateTiOupmos eb xablioa éx SeEidy pet avTdv, adda in} ¢ / r Lae / \ 5 \ tel ¢ Ta voTEpnuata cou ToAAa KabapicOnon dé aro TOV VaTEpN- / : \ ’ Ay ber aN A a ato cov’ Kal waves 8é of un SupuyodyvTes KaBapicOnoovTat a e TO TAaYTOV TOV AuapTnUaTwY Els TAVTHV TY Nuépav. 3. A ” By > ae \ \ x. A \ \ TavTa elimaca iOedev atreNOeiv’ mec@yv Sé avTHs Tpos TovsS / ’ / ’ A \ a / ivf > / “aA mooas NpwTnaa avTnVY KaTa Tov Kupiov iva mou éridelEn 0 ¢ ernyyeltAato bpaua. 4. 9 O€ TWadw émedkaBeTO pov THs \ Went) 2) / N Oi. a \ J b) b] Yelpos Kal eyelper pe Kal KaOifer et TO cuprrédiov EF evw- , > / \ \ > \ > Lins \ b] / vupov: éxabéfero 5é Kat avtn éx deEvwwv. Kal érapaca \ Ud / lal paBsov twa ammpav réyer por’ Brees péya tpdyua; “PES ve ¥ > , “ éyw avTH Kupia, ovdev Brérw. éyet por [Lv] idov ovy ce A , , / / > , \ ¢€ U opas KaTévavTl cov TUpyov méyav oikodopmovmevoy emi vdaT@v t / lal > / ’ AiGouws TeTpaywvois NapTrpois; 5. €v TeTpaydve O€ wKOd0- a € Uy ¢ \ a a / A > U ,’ MEiTO O Tupyos vTrO TOY EE veavioxwy TOY EXnAUVOOTw@Y MET IA bl \ / bl a auTns adndau 5é wuptades avdpav trapédepov riOous, of wéev éx a a € x 9 ia \ A @ Tov Bubod, ot dé €x THS ys, Kal emedidovy Tots &E veavioxors. V. 3. il THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 305 a > A éxeivor d€ éXauwBavov Kal wKodomovv' 6. Tors péev ex TOU lal U e / , (dA b] / > \ Bv@0d AiOovs EXxkopévovs travtas ovTws éTiMecay eis THY 7 a oiKodounv’ npuwocpévoe yap noav Kal cuvedwvouy TH apLoyh peta Tov Etépwv ALOwv" Kai oVTwWS EKOAXDVTO GAANOLS, WaTE \ i \ ; A \ / > / \ & ») \ THY apwoyny avtav pn paiverOar. éepaiveto Oé n oiKkodopn la) > Tov mupyou ws €& évds AiOov @Kodounuévn. 7. Tods é Cask / \ , ’ \ a a \ \ Erépous ALOous Tors Pepouévovs amo THs Enpas Tovs pep amréBadXov, Tovs dé érifouy eis THY oixodopnv’ adNdrovs é ‘ ,’ fal , KaTEKOTTTOV Kal EppiTTOV paxpay atro TOU TUpyov. 8. adXot cal ’ lal dé AlHos TroANOL KUKAW TOU TUpoU EKELVTO, Kal OVK EYPwVTO > a > x > | re / b] b) tal Sy avtois eis THY olKobounY’ HoaVv yap Tives €€ avTaY erwpLa- KoTes, €repor 5é ayiopas éyovtes, addot SE KEKOOB@pévot, ¢ adnot O€ NevKol Kal oTpoyyUroL, 7) appolovTes els THY OLKO- / dounv. 9. EBrerrov 5é Erépovs ALOouvs piTToMévous paKpav , \ fol ¢ aT0 TOU TrUpyou Kal épYomévous eis THY OddV Kal fu) péVOYTAS > A ec A > \ / > \ > / e e / \ > \ EV TH 00@, GANA KUALOMEVOUS Els THY avodiav' ETépouS OE TTL Top €uTimtovtas Kal KaLtomévous’ éTépous O€ Timtovtas éyyvs 7) / \ \ Py f Q A ’ \ bd / voatwy Kal pn Suvapévous KuvrALCOAVaL eis TO Vdwp, Kaitrep / lel A Gerxovtav Kuda Ojvat Kal éXOeiv eis TO Vdwp. III. AciEaca pou tadta 7OeXev arrorpéxewv. éyw avTi’ Kupia, Ti wor dheXos TadTa EwpakdTi Kai fun ywWeoKoVTL TL 2 \ t ey ew, L : A 5 €oTW Ta Tpayuata; amoKpiOciod por Néyer’ Llavovpyos «ft ” , ig \ s\ \ / / / avOpwrros, Oédwv yiwwoecKey Ta Tept Tov TUpyov. Nai, dni, / v4 “ , al > f A ’. / / Kupta, iva Tots adeAois avayyeldo, Kat [(Napwrtepoe yévwvTat, \ a > , ‘ \ / > a / Kat Tavta] dkovoartes ywwwoKxwow Tov Kipsov év Todd Oo€n. ¢ Ac 2. 9 dé én’ “Axovcovtar pév Troddol’ axovaavTes Sé tives €F b] A > avTav YapHnoovTat, Ties b€ KNaVTOVTAL’ AXA Kal oOvTOL, Eav , akOVowoLW Kal peTavontwaw, Kal avTOL YapnooVTat. aKovE x a ovv Tas TapaBoXas Tod TUpyou’ amoKahiw yap cot Tava. \ / Kal [NKETL pol KOTTOUS Trapeye TEPL aTroKaAU ews’ ai yap 3 / Ka aTokaduiers avTat TéNOS Exoucw" TeTANPOpéVvaL yap EloLy. > > ’ if > aXX ov TaVvon aiTovpevos aToxad’Wels’ avaidys yap «et. ¢ \ , ay 3. 0 pev Tupyos ov PBrérrEts olKOdomovpEvoY, eyo Elme 1 > / (ed a U A e 3 Exxdyota, » opbeica cou kat viv Kal TO mpoTepov' 0 av oby ch x Pet; lll. 20. 306 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. iii / > / \ la) U \ ’ U A Oernons ETEpWTA TEPL TOU TrUpYoU, Kal aTroKahuyw col, Wa a \ fal € / / Mea I / > 4 a yapis peta tdv ayiwv. 4. déyw adth Kupia, ére. anak v U ¢ , lal U ’ U > / ¢ aEvov me NYyNTwW TOV TravTa LoL aTrToKaAUYaL, aTOKaAVYOV. 1 a A d€ Neyer pou’ “O av évdéyntai cor atroxahudOjvat, aroKadv- / id / 4 hOncerat. povov 7 Kapdia gov mpos Tov Decoy Tw Kal pH / A oR ” > / ’ f m ' AX 5 , dupuynoers 0 av ibys. 5. ernpwernca avtnv’ Avati o Tupyos Je, 58 U ’ 80 ioe Bi a / \ ‘ ert voaTwv @Kodountat, Kupia; Eimd oo, pyoiv, Kai TO mportepov, Kal éxtnretis eriysedras* exlntav odv evpicKers THY ee! EEN, > ’ ¢ 1 ” arnOeav. Sati ovv eri vdatwv w@KoddunTtat 6 TUpyos, aKovE ¢ n ¢) \ ore 1) S@7 Uwdv bia VdaTos EcdOn Kal cwOnceTat. TeOeweXiwTat Sé 6 TUpyos TS pypate Tod TravToKpaTopos Kal évddkou ovd- fal € a >’ U rn patos, Kpateirar dé Ure THs aopatou Suvapews Tod SecroTov. IV. ’Asroxpieis Néyw adti* Kupia, peyados kat Gav- pactas exes TO TPaypwa TovVTO. of dé veavioxot ol EE of ° lal J > / / e / > e a oixodomovvTes Tives etciv, Kupia; OvTot etow ot arytot v lal a e a f 3 A c dyyeroe TOD Ocod of mpa@tow KticGévtes, ols TapédwKev oO r a \ ’ lal U lal Kupuos macav thy Kxticw avtod, avfew Kal oixodopety Kat in / a / U ‘ / a Ul Seotrolew THs KTicews Tacns. Sta ToUT@Y ovv TEeMecOnoETAL ¢ 3 \ fal , € A ‘<4 e / 7) olkodouy Tov Tupyov. 2. Oi dé Erepos ot TapadépovTes Tovs AiGous Tives eiaiv; Kat avtot a&yiou ayyedou TOU Oeod* 2 \ © Ace € , > , > / ovTo. O€ of EE UTEpéyovTes avTOUS Elo. GUVTEeMecOnoeETaL \ fa c lo ‘OUV 7) OLKOOOMN TOD TUpyou, Kal TaVTEs Ouod evppavOncovTat KUKA® TOU TUpyoU Kal do€acovaww Tov Oedy, OTL ETENETOH 7 > \ lal / > / >] \ lA 4 f oikodoun Tov TUpyov. 3. éemnpwTnca avTny réywv' Kupia, vw e A / \ \ \ / >) A 7OeXoV yvavat TOV ALQwv THY EEOdoY Kai THY OUVapLY avTOY, rie 5) ane L , 5) a 4) Js , motamn €oTw. atroKxpiOeica pot réyer” Ovy OTe od ex Tap- 3 a , Tov ak&idTtepos ef iva cot aTroKadugpOy adddoL yap cov TpoTEpol f ’ A elow Kal Bedtlovés cou, ols &det aTroxadrudOnvar Ta OpapaTta rn A \ a lal radta’ Gdn iva d0€acO7 TO dvoua Tod Ocod, coi amexarvVPOn \ AN kat arokadud@ncetas Sia Tovs Siudyous, Tovs dvadoyifo- a ‘ lol lal 4 pévous év Tals Kapdiats avT@V Ei dpa EcTLV TadTa 7) OUK ETT. tal a f b) A ” , héye avTois OTe TadTa Tavta éoTly adnO}, Kat ovdev EEwbEv fal \ / \ \ éoTw THs adnOeias, GANA TavTa icyvpa Kai BEBara Kat 4 > / TePeweNtw@peva EOTLV. V. 3. vil THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 307 wv Le) \ a / a ¢ , > \ V. “Axove viv mepi Tov NO@v TeV VIrayovTwY els THY > f e \ = 7 e / \ \ \ oikodounyv. of ev ovv diPot of TETPaywvor Kal AEUKOL Kal a A is lal b) A a > b) cuppavodrvTes Talis appoyats avT@Y, OUTOL EioLY OL aTOTTONOL be ge ame \ p>) ba . \ 8 f e bé Kal érioKxotros Kal didacKkarot Kal dStdKovoe of mopevbévtes \ , r a \ KaTa THY GEe“voTHnTAa TOV Deod Kal emicKoTHcaYTES Kal bu- ¢ lol a vad lal daEavtes Kal Svaxovncavtes ayvas Kal ceuvas Tols éxeKTOIS a a e \ , CIN MY] P \ ' Tov cod, of péev Kexowpnpévot, of S€ Ett dvTES’ Kal TavTOTE nr / e lal > / éavTois cuudavncavtes Kal €v EavTois elpnyny ~xyov Kal ’ , v A \ a > a > a n , GAnrwv jAKovov’ da TovTO €v TH oiKodopH TOU TUpyoU cUp- fal ’ lal e \ lal an dwvovow ai appoyal avtwv. 2. Oi dé é« Tod BuOod éEdxo- , > \ A poevot Kal émiTiOéwevor els THY oiKodounY Kal cuupwvodrTeEs nr ¢ re ’ lal \ n id / / n v b] Tais appoyais avTav peta THY ETépwv NOwY TOV 7}8n @KodO- / / > / AE / ’ e , vA n nuéevov tives eiciv; Odroi eicw of madovtes évexev Tod > rn ‘ ' ovopatos Tov Kupiov. 3. Tovs dé étépovs ALOous Tors hepo- D 3 Na n l a / Gs / ” x Mévous amo THs Enpds OédXAw yvavat Tives eiciv, Kupia. Edn \ \ ¢ / . Tovs pev els THY OlKodounY UTayovTas Kal 7 NaTOMOUpEVOUS, / id / > / e/ > ’ 3 A b] Uy TovTous 0 Kupuos édoxipacev, OTe érropevOnoav ev TH evOuTHTE tov Kupiov cai xatwpOecarto Tas évtoNas avtod. 4. Oi dé ’ / \ / >’ \ > \ / > / / ayouevoe Kat TLOéwevot eis THY OiKOOomnY Tives eiciv; Neéou a A ¢ a eloly év TH TioTe. Kal Tictoi. vovOerodvTat Sé UO TAY 3 / > \ b] n / ¢ / > > f / ayyéXwv eis TO ayaborroteiv, SvoTs evpéOn €v avTols Tovnpia. a > / 5. Ovs d€ aréBadXov Kal épirrovy, Tives eiciv; OdrTot eiow ¢ f \ /- tal \ fal napTnKores Kal OéXovTes peTavonaat’ Sia TOUTO maKpay ovK % , n / anepipnaav é&m Tov Tupyou, OTL evypnoToL EcovTaL Els THV f > al oixooouny, Edy peTavonowaw. ol ovv pméddOVTES pETAaVOEI>D, 3A / an n €av peTavonowowy, ioxupol EcovTar évy TH TioTel, éav voV , Lal MeTavonowow év @ oikodometrat 6 TUpyos. éav Oé TeXecOF 7 > / ’ / M4 / oiKodoun, oUKETL ExoUTLY TOTTOV, GAN écovTat ExBodoL. ovor \ lo) » \ A , Lal d€ TOUTO éyxoucw, Tapa TO TUpyw KEic Oa. \ \ ‘ \ VI. Tovs € cataxortopévovs Kal paxpay piTrTopévous ’ \ Lol / J A ipl amo Tov Tupyov OérXes yvavat; ovTOL Elo of viol THs > U ~ > / a avomias’ emiotevoay dé ev UTroKpice, Kal Taca Tovnpla ovK ,’ A > > b) A a amTéoTn aT avTaY’ dia TOTO OvK ExovcW GwTHpiay, OTL OVK 2 Je, v ’ ] \ \ \ / ’ A AY eloly EVXPHOTOL Eis OlKOdouHnY Sia Tas Trovnplas avTav. Sia 20—2 cf. Apoc. xx idle 308 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. vi ral ‘4 \ , , la \ A , A TOUTO cuvEeKOTNTAY Kal TOppw amrepipnaay bia THY OopynV r / , ’ aA tov Kupiou, ott map@pyicav avtov. 2. Tovs b€ érépous os Co, \ / \ € / , A > Vf Ewpakas TONNOUS KELMEeVOUS, M1) UITTaryOVTAS Eis THY oiKOOOMND, @ € ‘ 5 / > / ec > / A ’ / oUTOL of pev expwplaKoTes eloly, of eyvwKoTes THY adnOevay, Wane] , Ay a ee \ , rs CaF 3 4 pr) ErripetvavTes O€ Ev AUTH NSE KOAAWpEVOL TOIs aylous’ bia lal vv / , ¢ be \ \ »” / TovTo dypnotol eiaw. 3. Ol d€ Tas cytopas eyovTes Tives aes e as e >> , > ~ , ” etciv; Ovroi eiow ol KaT adANXOY EV Tals Kapodlats EXOVTES ‘ \ , / ,’ td r ’ \ / ’ / y Kl LN ELPNVEVOVTES EV EAUVTOLS, AANA TPOTwWTOP ELPNYNS EYOV- vd \ , ,’ > / > , e / ’ lel Tes, OTav O€ aT’ GAANAWY ATOYwWpPHTwWOL, ai Tovnpiat aUTOY An ? kf év tals Kapoiais éupévovew. avtat ovv ai cxiopai eiow as éyovowy of ALBor. 4. of b€ KexoNoBapévol, ovTOL eicwv TreTI- Lal / lal OTEUKOTES ev Kal TO TAEloY pépos EyouTEs Ev TH SiKaLocvYN, ‘ \ / »” r ,’ / = \ la) \ \ > Tiva dé wépn Exovoty THS avouias’ Sia TOUTO KoOBoL Kal ovX OroTeEAcis eloiv. 5. Oi 5é evKol Kal oTpoyyUAoL Kal pn c / , \ , \ / , / / , nw , appolovtes els THY oiKOdounY Ties Eiciv, KUpla; aTroKpLOEioa / Phe! f \ s A? , \ / > pot Neyer’ “Eas more wwpos ef Kal aovvetos, Kal TavTa é7re- rf e vv pwTas Kal ovdev voels ; ovTOL Elow ExovTES meV Tria TLY, EXOVTES \ \ r lal , A / ev / a) \ S€ xal WAODTOY TOD ai@vos TovTOV. bTay yévnTat Oriris, dia a \ A b] n \ TOV TAOUTOY avTaV Kal Sid Tas TpaywaTelas aTapvodVTaL TOV Kupiov avtav. 6. Kal atoxpiOels avtn Aéyw* Kupia, rote = v ” > \ > / 7 / ovy evypnaoToL ExovTat eis THY olKodouny ; “Otay, dnoly, TreEpe- A ’ lal c an a“ , KOT) AUTOY O TAOUTOS 6 Wuyaywyeoy avTovs, TOTE EVypNTTOL »” fr a \ c f ¢ f Te A Ecovtat T® Oc@. Watrep yap O ALOos 0 oTpoyyUAOs éav py fr \ ’ / > , fol b) f , TepikoTH Kal atoBadryn €€ avTov TL, ov duvatat TeTpaywvoS / ivf sh e lal b] / A x A > Be A yevéo Oat, ovT@ Kal oi TAOUTOUYTES év TOVTM TH Ai@VL, Eady py A b) A id Xi A >] 5 IZ a K / wv TEPLKOTH AUTOV 6 TAOUTOS, ov SuvavTat TO Kupio evypnatot / fA fal A ; f yevéoOat. 7. amo [S€] ceavtod mpatov yas" bte émXov- v Ce lal \ ” : \ > f- A r TELS, Aypnatos HS* vov de evypnaTos Ei Kal WpEAos TH CoH. a fal \ \ 5 an a evypnato. yiver Ve TO Dew’ Kal yap ov avtos xpacat Ex TOY avTov ALbwv. / a 5 3 A a VII. Tovds dé érépous ALPous, ods cides pwaxpav aro Tov ss / ¢ \ TuUpyou piTTomévous Kal TimToVTas els THY OddY Kal KUALOME- a A ? Tene haw € l vous €k THS OOD Els TAS AVOdias* OUTOL EloLY OL TETLETEVKOTES A a 3 a \ bev, aro O€ THS Supvylas avtav adiovaw Thv odov avTav THY V. 3. vili THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 309 a > / egy U € A arnOwnv’? Soxodvtes obv Bertiova odov Svvacbat evpeiv, Tra- \ a la A b) , VOVTaL Kal TaXalTwWpotCLWW TeEpiTaToOUYTES ev Tais avodiats. id la NS / Kal > e ’ 2. of dé wimtovTes eis TO TDP KAL KaLOpEvoL, OUTOL ELoLY Ot Els } > / n fal fal a \ eh ’ a TéX0S aTootayTes TOU Deod Tod Cavtos, Kai ovKETL aUTOIS a / STN \ 7 a A \ \ > / an avéeBn eri thy Kapdiav Tod peTavoncas bia Tas ériOuplas THs > a A A A acehyelas aUTMY Kal TOV TrOVNPLOY BY EipyacavTo. 3. Tovs dé e , \ U b) \ Loe e , \ / ETEPOUS TOUS TITTOVTAS EyYyUS TOV VOaTwY Kal p17 SuVaLEeVvoUS lal > \ a ft Lal / > U e / > KuNaOjvat eis TO VOwp OérXELs yvOvas Tives Elaiy; ovTOL Eioww € \ t b t \ / a > \ ol TOV Oyo axovaarTes Kab OérXovTes BatTicOjvat eis TO a” a / =) a ’ tal BY > }} (J te , dvona Tod Kupiov' cita otay avtots ENOn ets pevelav n ayvoTns A b) / la) \ / / b] i) lal TS aGAnOelas, weTavoovowy, Kal TopevorTat TaXLY OTicw TOV ; A ] A A Lal b lA Ca \ > / ériOupiav avtTov TaV Tovnpav. 4. érédXecev odY THY eENynoLW nw + , la , \ > / TOD TUpyou. 5. avadevodpevos ETL avVTHY eTNPOTNOA, EL Apa f € / @ e , Le mavTes ot AGot ovtoL of amoBeBAnmEevor Kai pon appolovTes ’ A , A lal / 3 l4 nt lal U els THY OlKOdopHnY TOD TupyoU, El Ect avToOis peTavota Kal la / \ ‘ lal , €youol TOTOY Els TOY TUpyoV ToUTOV. "Kyouvaw, dynaiv, peTa- b \ >] la) ds , > / ig / voav, ada els TOUTOY Tov TUpyoy ov SvVaYTaL apwocal. 6. e / \ / ¢ / \ bs / \ lal d ETEepw@ S€ TOTM Apm“ocovow TOD ENATTOVL, Kal TODTO OTaV a Lf \ ¢ / lal lol Bacavcbdcw Kai éxTrAnNpwoocwow Tas nuépas TOV apapTLov , fal \ \ lal (/ v4 J a avtav. Kal dud TovTO peTaTeOnoovTat, 6TL peTéXNaBov TOD / lol \ U , an a pnmatos Tov dikatov. Kal TOTE av’TOIs cUUBHoETAL peTaTEOy- > A , x A \ ’ A, SN \ / Sta vat €k Tov Bacavev avTar, éay avaByn érl THY Kapdiav avTav vw. \ > / / 3\ \ A b] rn tee \ \ Ta épya a eipyacavto Tovnpa. éav 5é wn avaBy él THY Kap- ’ , lal ,’ / \ ‘\ / , Lal diav avTar, ov c@fovtar dia THY oKANPOKAapoiay avTOD. > / A > VIII. “Ore otv éravcaunv épwrdy avtny tept TwavTwv / / / f- } lal rf TOUT@V, Aéyer poe’ @érews GdrO idetv; KaTteTiOvpos dv TOD A \ U an? a / Geacaclat Tepryapys eyevouny Tod idelvy. 2. éuBréaca por ¢ yA \ / 5 / e \ lal / uTepelolacey Kal heyet pot’ Brerrecs emta yuvaixas KKM , , , ' € , a c tov Tupyou; Brew, dnt, kupia. “O trupyos obtos vio , iy ee S) \ lo) / ” la) Tovtayv Paotaleta: kat éemutayny Tov Kupiov. 3. akove viv \ > , ’ a > lal c a TAS EVEpYElLaS AUTOV. 1 MeV TPWTN AVTOV, ) KpaTovoa Tas a / A , e na yetpas, Iliotis KaXetrau’ dia TavTns c@fovTas ot éxdEKTOL TOD fa ¢ \ e fe id / \ ’ , @cod. 4. 7 5€ érépa, 7 mepteCwopévyn Kal avdpifouévn, ’Ky- ’ a fF o ' SPE a , Pv EN Kpateia Kadeita’ avtn Ouyarnp éeotiv THs Ilictews. os av 310 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. _[V. 3. viii 5 , / J fal / / , a r , an obv aKoXovOnon avTH, MaKapLos yiveTas ev TH Cw avToOd, OTL 7 tal lal ” ,’ / / d es > / TavT@Y TOV Tovnpay Epywv apéEeTat, TiaTevawn bri, éav apéek- U r 4 9 .£ nrat maons ériOupulas trovnpds, KAnpovopnaer Cwny aiwvuov. , / 5. Al dé &repat, xupia, tives eiaiv; Ovyarépes addndrov eiolv. lal c , / Kanrovvtat dé 1 pev “AmroTNs, 7 6€ ’"Exvornun, 7 6é “Axaxia, € \ / € ee U ¢ s 2 lal ‘ n 5€ Leuvotns, n dé ’Ayarn. Otay ovv Ta épya THs pnTpoOs a 4 - / avTwv TavTa Toons, Svvacar Ejoar. 6. “HOerov, pnp, n / / / / v , “ wv / yvavat, kupia, tis tiva Svvapw exer adtav. “Axove, dnoly, D fal ¢ e Tas duvapers Us Exovow. 7. KpatodvTas bé UT addynrov al lal lal / Suvapers avtav Kal axoXovOodcw arrndaLs, KABds Kal yeryeEv- “~ lal / vnuevar eiotv. éx THS ictews yevvdrar ’Eyxpareca, x THs e , / fol ’"Eyxpatelas ‘Amdorns, €« ths “AmddTnTos ’Akakia, €k THS a / > / bi] ’"Axakias Leuvortns, ek THs Leuvorntos "Emictnpn, ex THs > / ’ / / s \ ” e \ \ \ Em.otnuns “Ayan. tovTwv ody ta Epya ayva Kal ceva \ re dS) a » - U , 2 L Kal Oeia éotw. 8. ds dv ody SovrEevon Tatas Kal icxyton . a lal Ul KpaTnoar Tay Epyav avTav, év TO TUpy@ EEE THY KaTOLKNoLW tal a aA ’ a peta TOV ayiwy TOU Oeov. 9. éernpwTwy dé avTnv TeEpl TOV r Vad / U > ¢ \ > / A / Kapa, ef On cuvTéreca éotiv. 7 b& avéxpaye hovn peyary / eee. / wv ,’ ¢ lal \ / ” > x Néyouca’ "Actvete avOpwrre, ovxX Opds Tov Tupyov ETL oiKOdO lel , povpevov; ws éav ody cuvTedecOn 6 TUpryos oiKOdomoUpmEVOS, v le 3 \ \ > / / >’ €yes TENS. GANA TAaYXD ETroLKOSOMNONTETAL. NKETL ME ETrE- 3 al poeta pnoév’ apketn cor 7 UTouvnots a’Tn Kal Tots ayioLs, ? lal lal Kal 7) avakaivwols TOY TvEvLaT@Y UpaY. 10. GAN ov col , a ove atrexadvgOn, arr iva Tacw Snrtoons avta. 1. peta a ¢ / a / \ a a > I / Tpets nuépas—voncai ce yap Set mp@Tov, évtérAXopat SE cot lol ¢ A \ Rae. lal ied / mpatov, Kpua, ta pnuata tavTa & cot péd\dwo Aéyeww— a ’ \ / 2! \ 5 a c / ir bd , trarjocat avta [ravta] eis Ta Gta TOV ayiwr, iva aKov- ’ , fal r CavTEs aUTa Kai TOIncarTES KaDapicOdow aro TéY TrovnpLaY an ’ . avTav, Kal ov é per avTar. > , la /, A ~ IX. “Axovoaté pov, réxva. éyo vas é&éOpewa ev Torr \s > , a aTOTHTL Kai akakia Kal cepvoTnTL did TO EXeos TOU Kupiov 3g, Ve a U \ Py , A - \ Tov eh vuds otakavtos THY SiKatocvyny, iva SixatwOnTe Kal vill. rr Aadjoa] NA; but L,L,E appear to suggest AdAynoov or tva Aahons- avira wdvra] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,]; at7a 8; rdvra A; dub. L,F. ¢ A -) \ / / s 3 A U / aytacOnre ato Taons Tovnpias Kal amd Taons TKOALOTNTOS. (4 lal \ -) / a > \ fal ‘4 Is a ol vpets 5é ov OéXeTe Tranvar ato THS Tovnplas vuev. 2. vov > a) , pA lal OUV akovoaTe pou Kal elpnvevete ev EavTots Kal émicKkéTTec Oe >. / . adAndovs Kal avTiiawBaveobe GAANAW?, Kal jor) MOvOL TA KTI- ocpata Tov Mcod perarauPavete Ex KaTAXVpaATOS, GAG jeTa- Sidore kai Tots vaTepoupévors’ 3. of wev yap amo TeV TOA- ‘ Lal Leal AOv ecpatov dobéveay TH capKi éemioTavtTac Kal Nvpai- vovTal TV capKa avTav' Tédv Oe pn exdvTwY édécpuaTa Vf ¢€ ‘ > lal \ \ \ v ‘ > \ nr Avpaivetar n capE avtay Sia TO pn Evewv TO apKeTov THS Tpopis, Kai OvapGeiperas TO cdma avTdv. 4. avtn ovv 4 ¢ a a an acvvkpacia BraBepa viv Tots éyovow Kal pr) wetabdidodaw fal ¢ / \ / Tots voTepoupevors. 5. ArEmeTE THY Kploww THY éeTEpyouenD. ¢ cal » ot vmepéyovTes ovv éxtnteite Tovs TrewavTas &ws ovTw 6 Ul \ lal , Tupyos €TEeMaOn* peTa yap TO TeNETOHVaL TOY TUpYyoV BEdn- > lal \ ? ¢ / lA 7 ¢ al cere ayaborroveiy, Kai ovy Eete TOTov. 6. BrémeTe ov Duets e , A na , ot Yaupovpevol Ev TO TAOVTW Uuar, uNnToTE oTevaEovaW Ob cf. James ¢ fal Vv. . VETEPOUPEVOL, KAL O aTEVaYLOS a’TaY avaBnoeTaL Tpds Tov ‘ * \ a al A Kupuov, Kal éxxrevcOnoecbe peta Tav [dcyétov] ayabdv tudv yy a / la) / an > [< a x al éEw 75 GUpas Tov TUpyouv. 7. viv ovv Uwiv NEyw Tols TpON- youpéevols THS EKKANTIaS Kal Tois TpwTOKADESpiTaLs* jn YiVeE- o a A e NgooeN 5 \ f ae bpwo.or Tois happakois. of dappyaxol péev ovy Ta happaxa e lal > \ / / ¢ lal \ \ ‘sf éavTav eis Tas muEibas Baotafovow, vpeis 5é TO happaxov ¢ tal \ ‘ 7\ ’ \ / > / > \ \ vpav Kal Tov tov eis THY Kapdiav. 8. éverKipwpévor eae Kal ’ I / \ i 4 e al \ U id al ov OédeTe KaOapicar Tas Kapdias vudy Kai cUYKEpacaL VUdY \ f 3 \ \ ’ A. 3 fa} la] bb ivf a ». THY ppovnow él TO avTO év KaVapa Kapdia, iva oxynTe Edeos mapa Tov Bacidéws TOU peyadov. 9. Bré7reTE ovY, TéxVA, Vie A , pntote avtat ai Svyootacias buav aroatepnaovow Thy Cony Dov. 10, Tos vuels Tadevery OéreTE Tors eKAEKTOVS , , Kupiov, avtoi pa) Eyovtes maidelav ; TrawdeveTe oUV adXANXOUS al / a) Kal eipnvevete ev avtois, va Kayo KaTévayTs Tov TraTpds ¢. \ cal , > lal ¢ \ ¢ A / A , thapa otabeioa Noyor atrob@ vVirép Vuav TavTwY TS Kupiw c UMOD. * A a > X. “Ore ovy éravcato pet éuovd AaXrovca, HAOoY of &E a > \ \ veaviokol Of oiKodomodvTEs, Kal aTnVEyKaY avTNY Tpos TOV B02 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. x ’ 4 \ A oe 4 aupyov, Kal GAOL TéEecaapes Hpav TO cup EedLoY Kal aTHVEY- / / , Kav Kal avTO mpos TOY TUpYoV. TOVTWY TO TPOTwWTOY OVK A ] A eloov, OTL amecTpampévor joav. 2. vTayovcay de avTHV , / / > ‘ \ tal a lal 2 9 npotwov iva mot atokadu Wy Tepl TOY TpLaV popdav ev als lal / iA por EvehavicOn. arroxpiOeiod pou réyer’ Ilepi TovTwy Erepov lal lal / Set oe érepwriaae iva co atroxadugpO7. 3. wpOn dé pou, ’ / A \ , c Ul lal n / / adedpol, TH wéev TPWTH OpacEer TH Tepvawh Lav TpeaPuTEpa \ ’ / / fel \ € / ¢€ i. \ \ kal év Kabédpa KxaOnuévn. 4. TH O€ ETEpa opacer THY meV y / 3 \ \ / \ \ / Ow vewtépay eiyev, THY 5é capKa Kat Tas Tplyas TpEecAv- J \ e al > / e / \ s *» \ / Tépas, Kal éoTnKvia pot Ehadet. thapwTépa O€ HV 7) TO Tpo- lal \ / ¢ / ¢ / \ / > Tepov. 5. TH Oe TpiTn Opacer bAn VewTEpa Kal KAaANEL EKTTpE- / / \ \ ai / 9 - © \ ‘A mestatn, wovas b€ Tas Tpiyas TpeaBuTépas elyev’ ihapa Oé ’ / 3 \ > \ / Ms \ / cis TENOS HY Kal él cumeniov KaOnpévyn. 6. TEepi TOVT@V fh. v / la lal / \ “ U / TEpiAvTrOS 7uNY ALaV TOU YY@vai we THY ATTOKaAUYLY TAUTHD. \ / \ / b] ¢ U al \ / Kat Brér@ THv tperBuTépay ev Opapate THS VUKTOS éyou- “ , ‘ cav pot’ Ildoa épw@tnots TaTrewodppoavyns yp feu’ vnsTevoov 5 \ ‘ a > lal \ rn / > / te ov, Kal Anprryn O aitelts Tapa TOU Kupiov. 7. €vnaTevoa ovy bd fal fal play nuéparv, Kal avTn TH vuKTi por WhOn veavioxos Kal héeyer ¢ al a Ul , poe’ “Ore od Ure xelpa aitets amoxadves év Senoer, Bere 3 cr MnTOTE TOANG aiTovpevos BrAaYys cov THY capKa. 8. apKod- i € , / e / / ] / > ol col ai amokadi’es attat. junte dvvy iayupoTépas atro- a a fal / Kkadies ov é@paxas idelv; 9. atroKxpiOeis avT@ eyo" Kupie, TovTo povoy aitodpat, Tept TeV TpL@v popda@v Tis mpecButépas va dtrokaAduipis OAOTEANS YévNTAaL. aTroKpLOEts poor Neyer’ Méype tivos aavvetoi écte; adn ai Supvyias e a a rn \ UM@GY AoUVETOUS UMaS TroLODaLY Kai TO pn ExEW THY Kapdiav ¢ An \ \ TaN, , \ ’ a , 8 A vpev pos Tov Kipiov. 10. amoxpiOels avt@ Tadw eitrov lal , "ANN amo cod, Kiple, axpiBéoTepov avTa yvwadpeOa. XI. “Axove, dnciv, wept Tdv Tpidv pophav av émifntets. a \ / ig / / / v \ 2. TH pev TpeTN Opacer Stati mpecBuTépa BhOn cor Kat aN , / eA \ fo) ¢ lal Uy emt Kkabédpav cabnuévn; OTe TO TvEdLA UmaY TpETBUTEpOV Asi ? a A Kat on pewapacpmévoy Kal pn Eyov SUvauly aTO TOY LahaKL@v lal - e f Upov Kai dupvytdv. 3. BoTep yap ot mpecBuTEpol, unKéTe ” > / r b) A xA\ o- a 3 \ éxyovtes €Amriba Tod avavedaat, ovdevy AXXO TpoTdoKeow Et f1) A e Lal a THY Koiunoly avTar, oOUTM Kal VuEeis paraKkicbevTES amo TaV tal / \ Bwwtikdv tpaypatwv wapedwKate Eavtovs eis Tas axndias, \ bs > / e A \ / SrEEN \ , é Kal ovK émepiyate éavTav Tas pepiwvas eri Tov Kupsov GAXa COpaicbn tudv n Sidvo.a, Kal érradawwOnte Tails AVTrALS aA / A vuov. 4. Arati ovv év Kabédpa éxalnto, 70edXov yvevat, A / / Kupie. “Ore rds aabevns eis xabédpay Kabéfetar dud Thy lal 6, fel ¢ re! / lo) / adobéverav avtov, iva cuvepatnOn n acbévera ToD cdpmaTos ’ lo) \ fol / e U aUTOv. éyEls TOY TUTFOV THS TPWTNS opacews. fal c Six uN a XII. Ty dé devtépa opacer cides avtnv éotynKviav Kai \ v / x” ~ ¢. / \ A f Thy ow vewTépay Eyovtay Kai thapwTépayv Tapa TO Tp0- \ / De / Tepov, THY dé capKa Kal Tas Tpiyas TpecBuTEepas. axKove, / \ ‘ >. / c , U dno, Kal tavTny THY TapaBornv. 2. bTav tpecBuTEpds v 3 x e \ \ \ 3 / > a \ \ TLS, HON abNATLKOS EavTOV dia THY acOéveray avTOD Kal THY N TTWXOTNTA, OVOEY ETEpoy TpoTdéxEeTaL EL fn THY éoxXaTHY c va A A b) A. > > / if ] fal nuépav tHS Fwns avtTov’ eita e€aidvyns KaterelfOn avTo la KANpovouia, akovaoas O€ eEnyépOn Kal TepLyaprs yevopevos b] f A I / \ ’ / b] f > \@ \ évedvaato TV iaxUY, Kal OVKETL GvaKELTaL, AAXa EaTHKED, Kal > a ’ A“ A Le) \ v > / > \ A advaveovTa: avTod TO TvEedpa TO dn EfOappévoy amd TaV , > a ' \ aes, ’ > Nee y MpoTépwy avtov Tmpakewy, Kal ovKéTe KaOnTaL, adda avopi- a (dA \ ¢€ fal ’ / \ ’ / a ¢ a Gera’ o’Tws Kal vpeis, akovcayTes THY aTroKaduUYpu Hy Vuiv 0 Kupsos amexaduwev. 3. bt €oTAayxvicOn éf vuas, Kal dvevedoato Ta TVEvpaTa VuaV, Kal aTéGecbe Tas paraKias ¢ A \ an ¢ aA > / Lt ie) 4 BJ A VEaY, Kal TpoonAOev Viv ioxupoTHS Kal edvvaywOnTE €v TH mictet, Kal Oav 6 Kuptos THY ioyupotroinow vuay éxapn’ \ \ la b] / € an \ > \ Lal / \ Kal Oud TOUTO ednAwWoEV UpiY THY OiKOdOMnY TOD TUpyoU, Kal 4 U 3 > ¢/ U > , > c A érepa Snrwoes, eav €€ OANS Kapdlas elpnveveTe ev EaUTOLs. XIII. Ty 6 tpitrn opaces cides avtny vewtépay Kai ’ a id Kady Kal idapav, Kal Kadnv THY mophny avTns’ 2. ws éav \ yap Tit NvTrOULEVE EXON AyyEerdia ayabn TLS, EvOVS eTTENAD ETO Aa J fal \ AN o- / >’ \ \ TOY TpoTépwy AUTOV Kal oVdey AAO TrpoTdéyeETat EL put) THY ayyeXav iv iKoveev, Kal iaxupoTrotetTat NoLTrOV Eis TO Ayan, \ ’ lo) b] A \ a \ \ \ \ ” A Kal avaveovTat avTov TO Tvedua Sia THY yapav nv éEhaBev € a A / oUTwS Kal vuEis avavéwow eiAnhaTe TOV TrEVLAT@Y VUaV fal / / 7 idovtes TadTa Ta ayada, 3. Kal OTL emi cvprpeniou eEides Chebsalys
22.  T Ret. V7 314 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. _[V. 3. xili / > ATp / ou ae . / ” ‘ Kabnuevny, iayupa 7 Oécws* Ott Técoapas Todas Exel TO TUp- \ U Wérov Kal iayupas ExtnKev’ Kal yap 6 Kdcpos bia Teccapwv , Lal e > / € tal f orouyelwy KpateiTal. 4. of ovY meTaVonaaVTES OOTENAS VEOL ” \ / rs vA / / écovtat Kal TeOcwercwpévor, of €& ANS Kapdias weTAaVONnTAVTES. / / dméyers ONOTEAH TI)V aTroKaduYiv’ pnKéeTe pydev aiTnaELs mepl atroxadvwews, éav Tu bé Sén, aroxadupOyjcetal cot. “Opaais & “ ee ” a , I. iv eidov, adderpol, peta nuépas elKoor THS TMpoTépas > / Lal / lel / Opacews THS yevomevns, ets TUTrov THs Orirpews THs éTEpyopE- a lal lal a a ’ lal e lal yns. 2. Umiyov eis aypov TH 000 TH Kaprravy. amo THs 0d00 A / b] \ € \ U , “ t / A. 7s / e THs Snpmocias éotly Wael ctadia Séxa’ padiws Oé ddeverat 6 TOTOS. 3. povos ovv wepiTatav akio Tov Kuipiov iva tas ; / \ \ ¢ / (vA »” \ a € / adtroxanveis Kal Ta Opapata a por deiEev Sia THS aryias RB x; / ’ A oN ‘ / > f \ } a A KKAnTlas avTOD TeXELWCN, Wa pe LaxXUpOTrOLnTN Kal OB THY / a“ / , fal a ’ / v4 petavotay Tots SovXo1s adTOD Tots Eerxavdadicpévots, iva doEa- a As a. ’ lal \ / Ye. ad Vv id , on TO dvopwa avTod TO méya Kal EvdoEor, O71 we AEvov NynTATO fa) lal % fal f tov detEai por Ta Oavpacia avtov. 4. Kal doEafovTos pov \ > la) ’ a ¢ > a > Ma) - Mp Kal evyaplaTodyTos alte, os HYOs pavis pot amexpiOn’ Mn Supuynoces, “Epud. év éuavte npEapnv SiaroylifecOar nal vA Néyerv’ VEyod ti éyw Supvyijoat, o’tw TePewedtmpévos v7r0 a y i tov Kupiov cal idov évdofa mpayyata; 5. Kat mpocéBnv \ puxpov, aded got, Kal (Sov BrETw KoVLOpTOY ws Els TOV OUpavor, Nfs 3) , , > e aa , , ” ‘ Kal npEapny Dreyer ev éavt@’ Myote xtnvn Epxyovtar Kab ‘ / a KovlopTov éyelpovalv; oUTw yap nV am e“ov ws aro oTadiov. 6. yevouévou peifovos Kat uelfovos Kovioptod virevonca elvat rn \ / ¢ Tt Ociov pixpov eEeAXaprbev 6 HALOS, Kal idov BrETw Onpiov Lal / nr Lal MéyloTov Wael KNTOS TL, Kal Ex TOD GTOMAaTOS a’TOU aKpides t 2 o z be ‘ fal / a UA e \ a mupwas éEeTopevovto. mv dé TO Onplov TO unKet WoeEl TOddY ec / \ \ \ 1 e / \ >’ / éxatov, Thy dé Kepadny elyev ws KEepamov. 7. Kal npEaunv , Ni a \ U vA / b) b) a KNaiew Kal épwtav Tov Kvpiov wa pe AuTpwonTat EE avTod. | , ey aed 2 > , - Xx 4 Kal érravenyncOny Tov pnyatos ov axnkoew' M7 dupvyncecs, 4.1.1 THs ON Wews ris émepxouévns][L,E]; rv ONiWewv rev tn A; usqgue ad advenientem diem L, (ws Tis éwepxouévys); def. N. V.4.ii] | THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 3s ¢ \ a Eppa. 8. évvoapevos ody, aderpol, THY wictww Tod Kupiov / Kat pynobels wv cdidakév pe peyarelwy, Oaponoas eis TO / > \ ” ef Ni \ , CO WA @npiov éwavtov edmxa. ottw bé HpxeTo TO Onplov poikw, date / > \ , a BA > A ’ lal SuvacOat avTo TrodWw Avpavat. 9. Epyouas eyyds avTod, Kal A a \ TO THALKOUTO KHTOS éxTElver EavTO Yamal Kal ovdév Et fur) THY yA@ooay mpoéBadrev, Kal OdK@s ovK exivnOn péeXpLS OTOU fal , 3 \ a to mapnOov avto’ 10. etyev dé TO Onpiov eri Tis Kepadjs / s A NpoOmata Técoapa’ péday, Elta TupoEdes Kal aipaTades, eitTa “pucoUY, €iTa EvKOV. II. Meradé ro rapenOetv pe TO Onpiov Kat mpoerOeiv wcel / / 3 \ (y Cf / Ie ¢ Todas TpLaKkovTa, Loov UravTa mor TrapOévos KEeKoouNmévN WS 3 a > 4 ¢/ bp] Lal \ ¢ ‘ €x vuppewvos éxtropevomévn, ON év AEeUKOLs Kal UTTOdHpacLW Nevkols, KaTaKEKahuupevn Ews TOU peTaToOL, ev wiTpa Sé HY 7) a \ / a KaTaKkaruyis avTns’ elyev b€ Tas Tpixas avTHAs NevKaS. 2. bya b) “bd an / ¢ / vA e293 / > / éyvav eyo éx TOV TpoTépwy Opauatov Ste 4 ’Exkdnola éotiv, \ e¢ , > ' ’ , s / i ron Kal iAapwTtepos éeyevounv. aamaletai pe Eyouca’ Xaipe \ ’ ve fal av, avOpwire’ Kal éy® avtny avtnotacapnv’ Kupia, xaipe. 3 lal “ 7 a > / ’ / , 3. atroxpileiod por réyes’ Ovdév coe amynvTncev; Réyo A / a a avTn* Kupia, tndKodTo Onpiov, duvvayevoy Naovs SiapOeipar’ adda TH Suvaper tod Kupiov cai th TokvaeTAayXVia avTod efépuyov ato. 4. Karas é&éduyes, pnoiv, bts THY mépiuvav act \ \ > / \ \ / v \ gov em Tov Oeov éerépupas Kal THY Kapdiav cov hvorEas Tpos > , an tov Kupiov, mictevoas bt de ovdevos SVvn cwOjvas ed yn bia A f \ > , ) / A na ¢ / ,’ , TOU peyaXov Kal évooEou ovopatos. dia TovTo 6 Kuptos aré- \ 7 ’ n \ pS lal / ” ba \ oTetkev TOY ayyeXov avToU TOV éTt TOV Onpiwy dvTa, ob TO vy a, SS / Nana? a) , > ref , dvoua corti Leypi, Kat enéppazen TO cTOMA ayTOY, [NA MH oe AYMANH. preyarnv Orirw éxmépevyas bia THY TictwW cov i ? rn \ , kai 6Tt THALKODTO Onplov day ovK ediprynoas’ 5. Uiraye ovv \ =) / nr 5) fal lal / \ a ’ lal Kal e€nynoat Tots éExdexTots ToD Kupiov Ta peyareia avtod, cy DAG a Kai elmé avtois OTL TO Onpiov TovTO TUTOS éaTiv Orirpews THs / , HerAAovENS THS peyadrns’ éav ovv TpoeToLacnabe Kal peTAa- , > vA in) vonante €€ Ons Kapdias vuav pds Tov Kupiov, duvnoecBe iil. 4 Zeypl] conj. Harris (cf. Dan. vi. 22 14D); Oeyec S*; Oeyper Nt; Oeypi A; TegriL,; TegeriE; Hegrin L,. Cia Esai:
22.  Tee env cf. Acts iv. 12. Daniel Vi. 22. cf. Heb. at Be Cleves, lv:
22.  Meet verze cf. S. Matt. XXV1. 243 S. Mark xiv. 21. cf. 1 Pet. 1. ew i: 316 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 4 i ,’ an ) , Lye. € / e fal , A ‘ expuyely avtny, éav 1 Kapdla vpov yévntat Kabapa Kat ” \ \ \ a lal € / € lal / Gpw@mos, Kal Tas OLTTaS TNS Cons nwépas vuov dSovrevonte A > , > \ / (al \ 7@ Kupio dpeurtas. émipipate Tas pepluvas vay ert TOV if , Kupuov, kat avtos xatopOwce avtas. 6. mictevcate TO , / / , \ Kuple, of dipuyou, bre wdavta Svvatat Kai atootpéeder THY , \ ) lal ’ 2 Ne lal \ > / / ig lal Lal dpynv avtod ap vuay Kat éEaroctéher pactuyas viv Tobs a / lal Supvyous. oval Tots dxovcacw Ta pywata Tabra Kal Tapa- ,’ cal \ \ lel Kovcacw’ aipeTwTepoy nv avTots TO wn yevynOrvaL. a U 2 III. "Hpernca avrny trepi Tov Tecodpov ypopaTav wv , a / elyev TO Onpiov eis THY Keparyy. 7 S€ arroKpiOeica por heyel’ / / [lddw replepyos ef mepl toultwv mpaypatov. Nai, pnp, lal /, ‘ kupla’ yvepicov pou TL éotw TabTa. 2. “Axove, pyc To e c / e lal \ A ev péray obtos 6 Kdopos éoTiv, év @ KaToKEiTE. 3. TO O€ c \ \ . al (v4 Lal \ / r ’ A mupoedes Kal aipatades, bre Sel TOV Kocpov TodTOV Ou aipwaTos \ 4 ry : A a n , € At 3 yg Kal Tupos amoddvaGat’ 4. TO O€ KpvTodY pEpos vpeELs ETTE / lal of éxpuydvtes TOV Kdcpov TodTOY. BaTEp yap TO XpUotov Soxywaterar Sud Tod Tupos Kal evypnaToy yiveTal, OUTS Kat ¢ a U Uy lal > ig a e 3 / vpets SoxipaterOe [oi Katouxovytes] év avTois. ol ovy peél- / (se | >’ rn 4 vavtes Kat Tupwbévtes UT’ adTovd KabapicOncecbe. WaTeEp \ 4 > U \ / ’ le id \ ¢€ cal TO ypuclov aTroBadXeL THY TKwWPLaY AVTOU, OUTW Kal VpMELS amoBaneire Tacav AUTHY Kal oTEevoywpiar, Kal KalapicOn- cecbe kal xpnoywor Eceabe eis THY oikodouny Tov Tupyou. TO O€ NeuKOY Mépos 6 aiay 6 é IILEVOS € Vv @ 5- TO bépos 6 aia o érepyomevos Eat, EV @ KaTOL- r a) \ A ane. ” \ \ KNTOUTW ob €KNEKTOL TOD Oeod' OTL aomtot Kal Kalapol ” G , Cak a A > \ hal) écovrau of ékNeNeypévoe VITO TOU Oeod els Conv aiwvior. a \ / a A 6. od ody un Siadirns Nadav eis TA OTA TOV ayiwv. ExeETE \ / A lal Kal Tov TUTOY THS OrALpews THs Epyouéevns pweyadns. éav Oé ta / ’ 4 Upeis OeAnaonrte, ovdev ExTaL. myNnuovEvETE TA TPOYEYpaypéeva. a ee 3 a 7. tabta eimaca anndOev, kal ovx eiSov Toiw TOTm aTndOev r \ hs J F sy NS / B) v9 wrodos yap éyéveTo’ Kaya érrectpagny els Ta OTTicw hoBnOEis, n / \ / 4 Sox@v OTL TO Onpiov Epyerat. V. 5] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 317 "Arroxaduypis e’. Ne > A ” \ / >] \ IIpocevEapévov pov ev T@ olkw Kal KaSicavtos eis TV Nf S20 Des: 4 aw f KAWHV evondOev avnp Tus Evdokos TH Orret, oXNMATL TOLMEVLKG, / , A Teptxeiwevos Sépua evkov, Kal mnpav éxwv érl TOY wuwv Nia eee: 3 A kat paBdov eis THY yeipa. Kal HoTacaTO ME, Kayo avTnOTA- , . 7 \ 3A. ! / \ L < caunv avtov. 2. kal evOds mapexabicéy por Kal Neyer poe ge a ¢ \ r , ’ / es \ fal TESTAAHY VITO TOD GEe“voTaToU ayyéXou, iva peTa cod ’ / \ ¢ A fol OiKNnowW Tas oLTas nuepas THs CwHns cov. 3. eoka éyw bre mapeotiw éxreipal L ré IT@’ Lv yap tis el; p palov pe, Kal Néyw avT@’ Lv yap Tis é; b] \ / / eyo yap, nul, yvaoKkw & TapedoOnv. Réyer pot’ OvK é€rri- / ywooKes pe; Ov, dyyl. “Exo, pynoiv, cipl 6 rom @ 500 yy A > lel ’ 0 € HY ’ lal Tapeoovns. 4. €TL AAXOUYTOS aVTOV HNAXOL@EN 7 LOEA AUTO, \ > 4 bd f ¢ bd a a ® t \ 9A. Kal éTéyvwv avtov, OT. éxeivos HY @ TrapeddOnv, Kal evOds U auvexvenv, Kal poBos pe EXaBev, Kal OAos cUVEeKOTNY ato lal U lA a Lal THS AvTNS, OTL OVTWS AUTO aTrexplOnv Tovnpas Kal adpoveas. ¢ \ > Vd 5. 0 0€ amoxpibeis por réyet* Mn cuvyvvvov, GdXa iayupo- jo.tov é€v Tais évToAais pov, als cot pédArdw évTédArecOa. ’ I / , / a 3 4 4 U amectadny yap, dnoiv, iva a ides TpoTEepoy TaVTa col Taw / Sissy X \ , ATi c oa Uy A delEw, adTa Ta Kepadraia Ta bvTa vuiv cipopa. TpwOTov ! \ ’ / / \ \ Dials A gr TaVT@V TAS EVTONAS pov Yparpov Kal Tas TapaBoXads’ Ta 5é 4 / / \ fal érepa, Ka0as cou Sel—w, ovTws ypaets’ Sid TodTO, pyoiv, / A ’ evTéAANOpal ToL TPWTOY ypawat Tas évTOAAs Kal TapaBoNas, iva ¢ \ A ’ la , \ \ A f ’ / iva UT xYelpa avaywoaKnys avTas Kal duvnOns purakat aTas. 6. éyparpa ovv tds évToAds Kal TapaPodads, Kabws éveTeiNaTd 3\ > > / ’ \ / \ 3 ’ lal pot. 7. €av ovv axovaartes avtas hudaEnte Kal év avtais jTopevOnte Kal épyaonobe avtas év Ka0apa Kapdia darro- AnprecGe amo Tob Kupiouv toa érnyyeihato vyiv' éay é ,’ , lal A AKOUGAVTES fr) eTaVonaNTE, GAN éTL TpocOnTE Tais apap- / e a A Tlals UvpaY, aToAnpryecOe mapa Tov Kupiov ta évavTia. lal Ud *, TAUTA MOL TaYTA OVTwWS ypawraL O TroLmY EvETELNATO, O AryyE- os THS MEeTAVOlas. 318 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 1 *EvtoAy a’. Ilparov tavrwv tiotevoov ote els éotlv 6 eds, 0 Ta mavra Kticas Kal KaTapticas, Kal TroLncas eK TOD pu) OYTOS eis TO eval Ta TayTa, Kal TavTAa Ywpar, povos 5é axwpNTosS Ov. 2. mlatevaov ody avT@ Kal PoBnOnte avrov, PoByGeis dé éyxpatevoat. Tadta pidacce Kat aTroBaneis Tacay Trovnpiav amo ceavtod Kat évdvon Tacav apetny Sikatocvyns Kal Shon a aA x9\ / \ 3 \ d TO Oew, av purakEns tTHv evrodAny TavTHY. ’ \ , EvtoAn Bf. / out / ” \ ” / ee ¢ Aéyeu wou “AmdoTnTa Exe Kal dKaxos yivov Kal Eon ws U \ \ ’ TA VNTLA TA ML YWWOCKOYTA THY TOVYNnplay THY aToANVOVaAY \ \ cal >] / r A \ U Tyv Conv tov avOpoTav. 2. Tp@ToV pev pNdevos KaTaanel, \ eas ” an of Eas D \ \ Nie Sd pndé ndéws akove KaTaXadodyTos’ ef SE fH, Kal GU 6 aKovoV. , fol fal lal \ t évoxyos Eon THS dwaptias Tod KaTahadodrTOS, Eay TLETEVTNS a Pet eA @ on > , : , A \ \ ha TH) KaTadadla av aKxovons’ TicTevcas yap Kal GU avTOS v4 xi a mA lol df ¥ 54 4 lal &€eus Kata Tod adeAfod cov. ovTwS ovY Evoxos Eon THS e / A a APE / > apapTias TOU KaTaNadovyTOS. 3. Tovnpa 1 KaTahaXLa, aKa- ' a 3 \ Tactatov Samoviov eT, wnd€éTrOTE ElpNVEvOV, AAA TraVTOTE fal ’ b) ’ lal év Siyootaclais KaToiKoby. améyou oly aT avTov, Kal EvOn- / play TavtoTe €&eus eta TavT@yv. 4. évdvoar b€ THY cEpve- b) e b] \ / , b] ji ’ \ U TNTA, EV 7) OVOEY TPOTKOMpa éoTLY TroYNnpoY, AAA TraVTAa ¢ \ Nae: / > , Neo , News cr , ouarda Kal ihapa. épyafou To ayabov, Kal €x TOY KOTT@Y Cou, ne ¢ \ / / - ¢ / / ¢ lal \ ov 6 Ocos Sidwciy cot, Tas VaTEpovpévols Sidov aTAGS, 7) ductal ive OOS 7H TL ) das. Wacw Sidov’ maaw yap 6 iatalwv Tiwt d@s 7 TW Ln OMS. v yap a / e a cos did0cbar Oéret Ex TOV idiwv Swpnuatev. 5. of ovY Nap- U lal / Bavovtes atoddcovaw AOyov TO Oecd, Stati EXaBov Kai els , 2 Tl ol ev yap NapBavovTes OAULBopuevos ov SixacOnoovTat, ot , / c dé évy UToKpice: NauPavorvtes Ticovaowy Sixnv. 6. 6 ovv &id0vds 10 al b a ¢ \ EX. 8 \ ov K / \ PS / aO@cs ect os yap éEXaBev Tapa Tod Kupiov thy daxoviay Tedécal, dTA@S avTny eTérecev, uNOev Siaxpivov Tive 66 7h wy » aT 7) » 1) P On 1) Sa BiG = ¢ / iv € a a 7 @. €yéveTo ovv 7 Stakovia avTn aTAws TEeXeTOEica Evdo€EOs al a Cc > a ¢ a a fal tal Tapa TO Gee. 6 ovv ovTws aTAWS OraKkovayv TH Oc@ Ejoerau. M. 3] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 319 / > / ef / (s 7. pudacce ovy THY évToAnY TavTHY, WS ToL NEAaANKA, va 1) / If \ lo) ¢ / ¢ a \ ¢ MeTavota gov Kal Tov oikov cov éy amAOTHTL EvpEOH, Kal 4 Kapoia [cov] ca0apa Kal auiartos. - \ Evrovn 4’. t ’ TlaXuv pot Aéyes* “AAnOevav ayatra, Kal Taca adnOeva éx nr / U > / ivf N A aA ¢ \ TOU oTOmaTos cou éextropevécOw, iva TO Tvedpa, 0 6 Beds fg > a \ / ] \ € lal \ an KAT@KLTEY ev TH capKi TavTN, anes evpeOH Tapa Taow ’ / \ ef / ¢ ra f ¢ 3 Ni avOperTrois, Kai ovTws So~acOjcetat 0 Kipios 6 év col KaTtor- lal A (v4 iq / 3. \ > \ Coy. \\ , \ > KO" OTL 0 Kipios adnOwos év Travti pnwatt, Kal ovdéy Tap , a 5 / 5) a avT@® Wrevdos* 2. of ody Yevdopevor aberodat Tov Kvptov Kab \ A \ a ywovtat atroatepntat Tov Kupiov, m1) mapadidovtes avt@ TV / \ ” ” \ | , lol a mapakaTadnkny iv EXaBov. €édaBov yap Tap avTod tvedua Vv lal ODF \ > / > / \ > ayevotov. TovTo éav wevdés aTrodwcwou, éuiavay THY évTO- \ lal / i b) / > / rf > Anv Tod Kupiov cal éyévovto atootepntal. 3. Tavta ovv ’ akovoas eyo éxravoa Niav. idodv Sé pe KralovTa éyet’ Ti ' Py 5 ; - Krales; “Ort, pyui, Kvple, ovK olda ef Svvapat cwoOnvas. ij! a ial a Avati; dyciv. Ovédéro yap, dni, Kipre, ev TH éun Con adnbés EKarnoa pHua, GANA TavToTE Travodpyos éCnaa peTa lal a iN \ a TavTov, Kal TO Weddos pou adnOés eréderEa Tapa Tacw > Ld x \ 797 / ’ \ = a > cin ne) Uy avOporrois’ Kal ovdétroré wot ovdels avTetrev, AAN éerriaTEevOn nw fal S , / ’ A rt TO NOVO pov. TAS ody, Pyut, KUpLEe, SVVauar Ejoat TadTa / fal \ > nan an, mpakéas; 4. Xv pév, dyoi, Kars Kal adnOds dpoveis’ eec a a > / t yap ce Ws Peod Sotrov ev adnOeta TopevecOar Kal Trovnpav lal / A 3 he \ a cuvelOnow peTa TOU TVvEevpATOS THS adNOEias pn KaTOLKE?tY, oe , b) / a / a a \ 3 0 tal pndée AUmHV errayev TO TrEvpaTL TO Te“V@ Kal armnOel. an ‘ > lal Ouvsérote, dynui, KUple, ToradTa pnuata axpiBas %jKovaa. an / hs \ 5. Nov ovv, dyciv, axovers’ dUNacce avTa, iva Kat Ta Tpd- nv > U / > a / , Tepov a éhadnoas Wevdn év Tals TpaypLaTEelats cou, TOUTwY € / a cad \ / = \ evpeOevtav adnOwav, kaxeiva Tiota yévnta’ SvvaTar yap 2. 7 Thy évrodny tavrny] conj. Gebhardt in marg. [L,L,E]; vas évrédas Tavras A. H kapdla cov] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,]; dxaxla A; om. E; def. &. 3. I Kar@Kicev] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E] Ant.; “‘rwxnce &; Karwxn- oev A. 3 el SUvaua] [L, LE]; ovdev dyaddv A; def. ®. €{noa] con}. Gebhardt in marg. [L,L,E]; éAdAnoa A; def. &. cf. James ee cf. 1 John li. 27. cf. S. Matt. XIX. Q. 320 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 3 ’ a \ / SEN la) , \ ,’ \ ~ Kakela Tiota yevéoOar. éay tavTta dudrakns Kal aro TOU fal lal \ vov mwacav adndevav Aadnons, SuYnon ceavToO Cwnv Trept- , Ae =isX a > , \ b) \ UY \ mouncacOat. Kal 0s av akovon THY évToAnY TavTHY Kab ’ {2 a U t 4 na lal aTéXNTAL TOD TroVNpoTaTou Wevo patos, CnoeTAL TO Oco. , *EvtoAn 6. : ».\ I. °Evrérropai co, pnoiv, purddcoew Thy ayvelay Kab N ’ / ’ \ \ él \ \ % / f1) avaBawvétw cov eri THY Kapolay Trepl YyuvatKos aXAOTPLAS ») a je Lal € , TWepl Topvelas Twos 7) TeEpl TOLOVTM@Y TWOY OMoLMLaTwV lal e i lel TovnpeVv. TOUTO yap ToL@Y peydAnv awaptiay épyalyn. THS a eb] i S€ oS pYNMoVvEevwWY TAVTOTE YUVAaLKOS OVdETTOTE SLtaMapTHCELS. \ S dA ¢ > f ’ \ \ , , lal 2. éay yap avtTn n évOvpnors ert [tiv] Kapdiay cov avaPh, \ Ud Stapaptynces, Kal €av Erepa oUTwS Trovnpa, apwaptiav épyaty’ / rn Uy if \ » yap évOvpnots altn Ocod SovAw awaptia weyadn eoTiv’ éav dé Tis epyaontat TO épyov TO Tovnpov TovTO, OavaTov éEavT@ , / s fen , / , \ fal ° , Katepyavetat. 3. BrETre ody av" aTréyou ato THs evOUpHTEwWS Sve AS I a a /- TaUTNS’ OTTOV yap TEe“VOTHS KAaTOLKEl, Exel Avopia ovK opeEtreL . ] lel avaBaivew émi Kapdiay avdpos dixaiov. 4. éyw avTo: y , ’ / a , Kupte, érritpevrov pot ordiya érepwticai ce. Aéye, byoiv. , A Kupre, dni, ef yuvaixa éyov tis mictny ev Kupio [kai] tabtny vy, / 7 € bs a eUpn év potyela Tivi, apa apapTaver 0 avnp cuvlav peT 2 A ” myo / / ’ ¢ r cw isan \ avtns; 5. “Aype ths ayvolas, dnoiv, ovx apaptaver’ éav bé A id SN \ c f SN \ \ ¢ / YyV@ O avnp THY apapTiay avThs, Kat fn peTavonon n yuvT, tAr’ 2) lA A / ’ Lal \ oH ¢ o) \ ’ , “ GAN erriévn TH Topveia avTHs, Kal cuvlH 6 avnp eT avTHS, / tal ¢ Fi EPEC a evoyos yiverat THS awapTias avTHs Kal KolvwVvos THs poryelas avTns. 6. Ti obv, dnl, Kvple, Tonon O avnp, éav é f "S30: , ONL, KUPLE, TrOLnaN O avnp, édy éripetvn A 10 , ¢ Le aN ! r yi EG TO TAVEL TOUTM 7 YUYN; ToAvaata, dnoiv, avTnv, Kal 6 3) Nh Yolg'd fe A L ASIEN Nee ’ \ A eo, avnp ép éavT@ pevéta’ éay 5é arrodvaas THY yuvaika érépay / \ ’ \ A > \ > / , \ yaunon, Kai avtos povyatar. 7. “Kav obv, dni, kupte, weTa \ 3 A \ an / ¢ \ \ / TO aTroXvOnvat THY yuVvaika peTavoncn [n yur] Kal OeAnon DAN \ e ial ” e / 2, , émt Tov éauTns avdpa vroatpéwrat, ov TrapadeyOnoetat; 8. 7 N \ / ’ Kal pny, dnoir, éav pr) rapadéEnrar avtny 6 avnp, amaptaver MY / ¢€ / e A b} A b} \ rn Kal peyadny apaptiay éavT@ émicTatat, adda Set Tapa- 3. 5 dwéxnrac] conj. Hilgenfeld; **x9°N; apéEnrac A; dub. L,L,E. M. 4. ii THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 225 lal AN e / \ A e Te \ ee SeyvOjvat TOY nuapTnKOTA Kal peTavoodyTa’ jun él TOAD O€ a \ Py Dr a e a , [Line ) ty ry \ \ / Tols yap dovdols TOU Ocod petavora éotiy pia. Oia THY peTa- 9 t >’ / nr (s ’ / cs i¢ A SEEN vouav ovv ovK odeirer yapely 0 avnp. aitn n mpakis eri \ \ a A b] / la / yuvalKl Kai avdpi Keira. 9. ov pdvov, pyct, worxela éotiv, a! \ / 3 la! / ’ A Wr at vv a s a €ay TLS THY TAPKA AVTOD Lavy, AAXAA Kal OS av Ta OMoLw pata A A id \ a) moun Tos éOvecw, movyaTat. wWoTe Kal ev Tois ToLvovTOLS 4 \ hs A b} J ® ’ >) A Epyous €av eumévyn Tis Kal pn weTAaVvoH, améxXoU aT avTod Kal \ A SGiAth SkrAAN r \ \ L Ae Al se , pn aovvtnds avT@* ef Sé py, Kal ov péTOXOS Eb THS GuapTias rn a ¢ nr > 3 € fal / avTov. 10. dia TodTO mpoceTayn viv ep EavTots péveuy, A , elTe avnp elTe yun’ Svvatat yap év Tots ToLovTOLS peTavoLa >) > \ vA UA € elval. II. eyo ovv, dyaiv, ov didmps adopunv va aitn 7 A oy A > \ 5) \ , ¢ / mpakls OUTWS TUYTENHTAL, GNAA ELS TO MNKETL AmapTavery \ Ls / \ A la ¢€ TOV HuapTnKoOTa. epi d€ THS TpoTépas apuaptlas avTov ¢ le] \ U got 0 Suvapevos iacw Sovvar’ avtos yap éoTw 6 éxov TavTov Thy é&cvciav. b] ] II. “Hpetyca avrov radu rAéyov* “Eset 6 Kupios d&vov , y Py o> Rey He NynoaTo iva pet éuod TavToTE KaTOLKIS, OAlya pou sey + > A by N ’ / JOE \ € yA pnpata ett avacyod, érel ov cuviw ovdév, Kal 7 Kapdia pov fal fe TETAMPWTAL ATO TOV TpoTépwv you mpaEewy’ cuveTicOY [E, 4 V4 a bd f OTL ALav adpwv cil Kal OrXws ovOev vod. 2. atroxpiOels por rE af ly , / SEAN A fi? IN \ a a éyer’ “Eyo, dnoiv, eri tis petavoias eiul Kal maow Tots A / , A 3 an 7 b) \ petavoodow ovveciv did@pt. 7 ov Soxe? cot, dnaiv, avTo A = \ A TOUTO TO peTavonoar aiverw Elvat; TO peTavonaal, dnot, / Le b] , / \ cS \ Coe, , e/ avvecis Eat peyarn. ovvier yap [6 avnp] 6 duaptncas ote 4 \ \ 14 A >’ Temoinkev TO Trovnpov Eumpoabey Tod Kupiov, cai avaBaiver SETA \ bh. > ALL Ae a e\ ” \ A \ emt THY Kapdlay avToD n Tpakis Hv Erpakev, Kal peTavoel Kal > , f ’ \ A oUKETL épyateTat TO TrovnpoY, AAA TO ayalov ToAUTENGS > , A A epyatetat, kal Tatrewot THY éavToD Wuynv Kat Pacaviter, 6Tt ad / zs ve c , / 4 b] / nuaptev. PéETreLs OV OTL pETAaVOLA UVETIS EoTLY jEyaNN. \ a > rn 3. Ava trovto ovv, dni, Kipre, eEaxpiBalouat Tapa cov / . a aA al TAVTA TPOTOV pev OTL GwapTwAOS Eipl, ELTA ayvod Tota ” ? / , oe ye SILAN Cie / épya épyalopevos Enoouat, OT ToANaL pov elolv ai auapTtiac il. 3 elra dyvod] conj, Harmer [L,]; wa yw AL; scio E; def. &. AP, FATH. 21 322 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 4. ii / / \ \ / Kai Totira. 4. Lnon, pno, éav tas évtoras pou purakns An , fal ‘\ a Kal TopevOhs év avtais’ Kal 0s av axovcas Tas évTodAs tavtas puraky, Sjoetar TH Oe@. / fé / nr III. "Ere, dy, xvpie, mpocOncw Tod émepwrnoat. Aéye, dnoiv "Hrovea, dnl, kupte, mapa tiwwv dioacKddor, e e / f , ” > \ , fA iA a. tf / OTe Erépa peTavola OUK EoTL EL 7 ExElvy, OTE Els VOwP KaTE- cy ¢€ n n nr Bnev Kat €XaBopev ahecw auapTiov nuov Taév TpoTépav. , . A ” iY \ M4 oo \ \ 2. Néryes wor’ Karas feovoas: olTw yap exer. Eder yap TOV , A ¢ ¢ / eiknhota aber dwapTidv wnKkeTl AwapTavew, add’ év ayvela A 3 A \ U , it \ lal f KaToukely, 3. émel 6€ mavTa éEaxpiBaln, Kal TodTO cou On- Awow, pn SLd0dvs aphopyny Tols wéArovEL TrLcTEVELY 7 TOLS VOV e \ miuotevoaci eis TOV KUpsov. of yap viv miaTevoavTes 7) MéA- RovTEs TLATEVELY pETAVOLAY auapTLaV ovK Exovaw, apeow Sé éyovot TOV TpoTépwv awapTLay avTav. 4. Tots ov KAnOEicL a lal ¢ Tpo ToUT@Y THY nuEepav EOnKev 0 Kupsos petavoav. Kapb4.0- 3 \ / yvoortns yap ®v 6 Kupuos, kal Tavta Tpoywockear, yyw THY acbéveray THV avOpoOTweV Kal THY TONUTAOKiaY TOD diaBoXov, OTL ToLoeL TL KAKOV Tots SovAOLS TOD Deod Kal TovnpeceTat >: eis aUTOUS’ 5. ToAvevoTrAayYVOs ovY a@Y 6 Kupios éomday- ) a xvicOn émt tTHv Tolnow avtod Kal €OnKev THY peTavotay if \ > \ € ) / lel / / 3 / TavTny, Kal éwol n eEovcia THS peTavoias TavTHS €d0On. 6. , Nes , / lin \ \ n 3 / \ f ANN éy@ cot éEyw, nol’ ETA THY KANOLW EKELVNY THY mEeya- \\ \ Se > \ ¢ \ fal / ¢€ AnV Kal cEuvny eay TIS ExTretpacOels UTO TOD StaBdXoU apap- e A THON, lav peTavotay exer. av S€ UTO Yelpa auapTavy Kal / a peTavonon, acvppopov éott TO avOpeT@ T@ ToLoOVT@’ SUTKO- \ / , 3 aA. ’ / fol \ os yap Enoetat. 7. NéEyw avt@e “EfworroinOnv tadta wapa cov akovaas oUTws axpiBas* oida ydp OTL, éav pnKéTL TpoC- 6 a S / a / — @ / % Now Tais auapTiats pov, cw@Oncopat. XwHOnon, dyai, Krab TaVTEs OTOL AV TAUTA TOL TwWOLW. IV. “Hpernca avtov madw réywov: Kupie, éwel arak 4. lil. 3 merdvoway duapriov] [L,E]; weyadnv auapriav A; al. L,; def. &. 6 @yol] S finally breaks off in the middle of this word. kr\jow] L,L,E; pref. mvevmaros A. peravonon)] L,L,E; pref. ov A. T@ ToLOUTW] CON}. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; 7d roodrov A. iv. 1 kUpte] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; kal A. le} / be / ’ avéxn pov, ert wot Kal TodTO SyAwoov. Aéye, dno. “Kav / * / ce A aA \ / yuvn, Pnel, KUpLE, 7 TadLY avnp TLS KoLWNON, Kal yaunon TES A lel ’ ¢ / €& avTav, pyTe auaptdaves 60 yapov; 2. Ovy apapravet, A an AY gnoiv’ éav Sé éf’ éEauvT@ pelvyn Tis, TeptacoTépay EavT@ Tiny Kal peyarnv do€av trepiTrovetrae Trpds TOV Kupuov: éav dé Kal yaunon, ovxX auapTaver. 3. THpEL OUY THY ayvEelay Kat THY , \ / a e a Ree Od x es \ ceuvoTnta, Kat bnon TO Oecd. TadTad gor dca AAG Kal ta) A A >? PAX Aareiv, PUAaTCE aTrO TOD Viv, ad Hs wor TapEedoOns / a neépas, Kal eis TOV OiKOY Gov KaTOLKnoW. 4. Tots 5é TpoTeé- pois cov TaparT@paciw apeois EoTat, €av Tas évTOAAS poV , é \ a Nua, ” 2\ \ 2 , gurdéns’ Kal mao. oé ddecis Ectat, €dv Tas évTOAdS pov / / \ A > iA / , tavtas duAdEwot Kal Tropevdw@aow ev TH AyvoTnTL TAaUTN. "Eyton €’. ‘ / A I. Maxpodvpos, duct, yivov Kal cuvetos, Kal TaVTwOY THY / fal Tovnpav épywv KaTtakuplevoels Kai épyacn Tacav diKaLocv- ’ \ A \ / vnv. 2. €av yap paKkpoOupos Eon, TO TrEDMA TO UyLoV TO A U \ ¢ \ KaTotKouy év col Ka0apoy EcTal, wn ETLTKOTOUMEVOY UTO ETE- rn ) b] ¢ nr pov movnpod mvevpatos, add’ év evpuYwp@ KaToLKOUY ayan- \ nr A ALdoeTaL Kal ceuppavOnceTar peTA TOV TKEVOUS EV @ KATOLKEL, a A e. / Kal NetToupynoet TO Oe@ ev iapoTyTL TOAAH, Eyov THY EvOn- A \ ’ viavy év éavT@. 3. éav dé oEvyodla Tis éTEéEAON, EVODS TO a Nate: \ wv a Be 2 \ TVEULA TO ayLov, TpUpepoy Ov, TTEVoYwpEtTaL, un Eyov [TOV] / a 3 an A ToTrov KaQapov, kal Ente atrocthvat éx Tod TOTOV' TviyeTaL \ an a \ yap Vio Tov Trovnpov TvEvpmaTOS, 1 Exo TOTTOV NELTOUPYHaaL a te \ ¢ A T® Kupio Kalas BovreTat, wratvopevov vr0 THs dEvxoNas. > \ an , ¢ , r > \ a ? / ¢ ev yap TH waxpoOumia 6 Kupsos xatouxel, év dé TH dEvyoNa 6 U > , > \ f b) \ \ b) \ diaBorXos. 4. auddrepa ovy Ta TrevpaTa él TO AUTO KATOL- a aA t b \ \ fal 2 t 5) / b KOUVTAa, acvuopoV éoTLY Kal TOVNpOY TO avOpeTr@ ExeElve eV e a ‘ ’ @ KaTOLKOUCW. 5. éay yap NaBav arpivOtoy piKpor Eis KEpa- I ? , ' HLov MméXLTOS EmLYVEeNS, oVYL Gov TO médL adhavifeTaL, Kal a / ¢ A TOTOUTOY MEAL UTO TOD éeXayioTOU awWOiov amroAdUTAL Kal td / \ / aA A \ 2 , \ ’ \ aTOANUGL THY YAUKUTHTA TOU MENLTOS, KAL OVKETL THY avTHY iv. 2 ép] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,E]; év A; dub. L,. fy) =) Cia 1 Cor Vii. 40. ef. Ps: XXXiil. 2. 324 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 5. i , / w“ Leal xapw éxet Tapa TH SeorroTn, btL erixpavOn Kal THY xpHoW avtTou amm@necev ; Eay O€ Els TO MEAL 47) BANOR TO arvivOor, yAUKU evploKeTaL TO edt Kal EvypnoToV yivetar TO SeaTrOTH lol s ll e auvtov. 6. Brétres [ody] OTe 7 waxpoOvpia yAUKUTAaTH éoTiv € \ \ / \ wv / I A / \ 3 | yey .\ Umép TO méAL Kal eVYpNaToOs é€oTt TO Kupio, cal év avtH Ka- a ¢€ My / \ Ny peer : / ? aN S Toe. 1 O€ O€vxYoAla TuKpa Kal AypnoTos éoTLV. éav ovY A a / ¢ buy 9 o€vyorla TH waxpoOvpia, wlaivetar n paKpobupia, Kal lal lal ¢€ a ovK evypnaTtos éote TO Oe@ 7 EvtevEis avtovd. 7. "HOedor, y ’ fal \ ef? rn , / t/ U gnu, KUpLE, yYOvat THY Evepyetav THS o€vxOALas, iva pvdAa- be) oe) eer) \ , / 2\ \ / eee , A Ewuat aw avtys. Kai pny, dnciv, éav un dudraén amr avis f \ a CU Kal 6 OlLKOS Gov, aTWAETAS GoU THY Tacay éATriba. aANAa , ’ ’ ) a b) \ \ \ nr ’ fe \ if \ vrata at avTns: éy@ yap meta cov eipi. Kal tavTes dé =! / 3 ’ ’ a ¢/ xX / r) / fr apéEovtas at avTns, bc0t av weTavonowary €& Ans THS Kap- la) ’ A “e dias avT@v* peT avTa@V yap écopmat Kal cuYTHPHTw avTOUS: eduxarWOnoav yap TavTEs UTO TOD Ge“voTaTOU ayyéAou. II. "Axove viv, dnot, tiv évépyevay ths o€vyonias, TAs Rosh \ a \ Uy fol a / A TOVNpa EOTL, KAL TMS TOs SovAOUS TOD Ocod KaTacTpéper TH éautis évepyeia, Kal TOs aToTAaVa avTovs amo THs SiKato- / ) b) a \ uN / yy > a / auvns. ovK amoTAava S€ Tovs TARpELS OvTAs ev TH TioTEL, SAAN °3 a / ? b) , ¢ ¢ / fal s ovee évepynoas SUvatat Eis avTovs, btu 7 SUvauts TOD Kupiov > ’ A b] fee > a \ \ ’ / \ , peT adtav éotiv' aromNava O€ Tovs atroKévous Kal difpvyous évtas. 2. OTav yap idyn Tovs ToLo’Tovs avOpwrous evoTa- a / e \ > \ / lal 2 / Oobvras, TapeuBarres éEavTip els THV Kapdiav TOU avOpwTrov, nr X AL: \ 7 Kal EK TOD pNdEevos O aVNp 7) 1) yun TLKpaiveTat Evexev Biwti- a S a KOV TPAYUaTV, 7) Tepl ElETUATwY 7 [LKPOAOYias TWOS, 7 \ J- U vA \\ / x / ww \ i mept pirov Tivds, 7 TEept Socews 7) Anrews, 7) TEpL ToLovTwY a a \ / LOpPOV TpayLaT@V. TATA yap TaVTa pwpa eat Kal Keva Kal adpova Kal acvpdopa Tots SovroLs TOD Ocod. 3. 7 dé / / > \ \ > / \ > \ / paxpobupla meyadn éotl Kai oyupd, Kai ioyupay Sivapw ” \ / \ 4) / b] fal f éyouoa kal ott Bapar, Kal evOnvovpéevn ev TLATUTHO peyaro, ,’ / Ss / / iNapa, ayadMapevn, apépimvos ovoa, So€afovca Tov Kupiov 5. i. 7 puddEy] conj. Gebhardt; g@udAdéps A; dub. L,L,E. ii. 1 viv] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A; 6é xai ps-Ath. 26 dvnp Hh yur7] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; 7 yu) 7 6 dvnp A; al. Ant. ps-Ath. ‘M.6.i]) THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 325 a \ © a Mv / ' év TaVTl KaLp@, wndev ev EavTH Exovoa TiKpOV, Tapapévovca a \ ¢ , vA - ¢ Sua TavTos Tpacia Kal novywos. av’Tn ovy 7 paxpobupula a Lal \ / ¢ / KQTOLKEL META TOY THY TioTLY exOVTwY OACKANpOV. 4. 1) bE ° / n \ £e9 > / VS L ofvyoNia TpaToy pev pwpa éoTw, éhadpa Te Kal adpwv. eita s) , ys td \ A €x THS appoovyns yiveTrat TiKpla, éx dé THS TuKplas Oupos, ex \ a fa f b] a ’ lal a“ > € a 5€ rov Oupod opyn, éx Sé THS Opyns pHvis: Elta n pHs ex lal / / ¢ TOTOUTMY KAKOY cUVLoTaMévn YlveTaL apapTia peyadn Kal fa) \ / aviatos. 5. Otay yap TavTa Ta Tvevpata Tavta év Evi 3 / Lal Ie \ \ a NeCe lal b) an adyyelm KaToLKH, od Kal TO TVEDMAa TO AryLoY KATOLKEl, OV ywpeEt al / \ TO ayyos éexetvo, GAN vrepTAcovaler. 6. TO Tpudepdv ovv A y \ a , Tvedpa, un Exov cvvnOevay peTa Trovnpod TvEevpmcTos KaTOL- a / 2) Cae “ib A na fal Kely nde ETA TKANPOTNTOS, aTOYwWPEL ATO TOD avOpwrrov TOD lal a \ / TovovTov Kai Entel KaToLKely peTAa TpaoTHTOS Kal Hovyias. 2 lal ’ fa) ’ A 7. €lTa OTay aTrooTh ato Tov avOpwrou exeivou 0 KaTOLKEl, c fal ’ A A « lal yivetat 0 avOpwros éxelvos KEevos amo TOD TYEVpaTOS TOD \ a a Sixaiov, Kal TO Aourov TeTANPwLEVOS ToOls TVEvpacL TOS a 3 a 3 / , > n Tovnpois akatactate: év Tacn mpake. avTod, TEeptoTepmeEvos 3 a Lal U a A Ode KAKEL GTO THY TYEUMATwWY TOV TroYNnPaY, Kal bAwWS aTrO- lal ’ \ a / aA 3 A e/ > / Tupnrovtat aro THS Siavolas THs ayabhs. ovTws ovv cupBai- cal fal > , =) be ss > \ A >’ / vet Tact Tos ofvyoNos. 8. améxou ovy aro THs oEvyoNias, TOU TovnpoTatov mvevpaTtos* évovaat Sé THY paxpoOvpmiav SY ’ / A {9 / \ an / i be ¢ / Kal avticta TH ofvyoNla Kal TH TLKpLa, Kal Eon EvpLoKOmeEVOS A / lel > / € \ rn META THS TEMVOTNTOS THS HyaTrnwEVvNsS UTrO TOD Kupiov. Brérre a \ \ / \ oby pntrote TapevOupnOns THY evToAnY TavTHY* eav yap TavTNS A al / \ \ \ THS EVTOANS KUPLEVTNS, KA’ TAS oLTras évTONAS SuYnoy puAAa- Eau, ds cou pédArw evTérAXea Oat. icxyvpod év avtais Kat évdv- fal \ / > ‘ ¢ SEN / > vamov, Kal Tavtes évdvvamovcbwaay bao. éav Oédwow év > a avtais Tropever Oa, *EvTowy) =. I, “EverevXapny cot, dyoiv, ev TH TpeTH évToAH iva dv- \ AaEns Thy wictw Kal Tov PoBov Kal Thy éyxpateav. Nai, pnt, Kvpte. “Ada vov Odo co, noi, SnAdcat Kal Tas / A fb A , Suvapers avtav, iva vonons tis avtév Tiva Svvapuw exer Kal ciepjier: XXIV. 7. 326 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M.6.i a / € té nr a évépyerav. Sitdai yap eiow at évépyevas adtav: Kelvtas ovv 3). 24 8 , \ 1OL 4 \ a / a 8 , fal be ert Suxaiw Kal adikw’ 2, od ody rioteve TH Sikaig, TO OE 18 iP, \ t 6 \ \ ry / > 0 \ 50 ‘ yy \ py adixkw pa miatevons' TO yap Sixavov opOnv odov Exel, TO dé y , > \ \ a 3% a e¢ A if x, 2 a adixov oTpeBAnV. GANA OV TH OpOH 08@ Tropevou [Kal dpar7], \ 4 ¢ \ 5 thv dé otpeBAnV Eacov. 3. 7 yap oTpEeBAn Odds TpiBous ovK ” , ~1) / \ / if \ a? > eye, GAN’ avodias Kal TpoTKdppaTa TOANA, Kal Tpaxela EoTL iN b] 4 \ a > \ lal > 2122) / Kal dxavOadns. BraBepa ovv éoti Tots év avTH Topevopéevots. A n lal ¢ a lal 4. of S€ TH 6pOH 08@ Topevdopevot Oparas TEpiTaTodaL Kat > / rm v \ ee wv -) / f ampooKoTTws* ov'TEe yap Tpaxela Eat ovTE axavOwdns. PNé- / lel n Meus ovv OTe cupphopwtepov eoTe Ta’TH TH 0O@ Tropever Oat. > , / / U a 7) a , 5. “Apécwes pot, pyul, KUple, Ta’TN TH 00@ TropeverOau. a Bs ld / Tlopevon, pyci, cal os av &€& Odns Kapdias ériotpéryn mpos Kupov mopevoetat év avtn. II. “Axove viv, dnol, repl THs mictTews. OVO eiciv ayyedos A 2 a a if peta TOU avOpwrrov, els THS SiKacocvvns Kal els THs Tovnpias. a > , , , \ Sila 5) , ¢ 2. Ids odv, hyul, Kvple, yoeoouat Tas avtav évepyelas, bre > nr lal Guhorepoe ayyedror peT e“ov KaTotKodow ; 3. “Axove, dna, ¢ lal / v Kal avvie avtTas. 06 pev THS SiKatoovyns ayyedos Tpudepdos i. ¢ / / eott Kal aloyvyTnpcs Kal Tpa’s Kal NovVXLOS. OTaV ovY OvTOS >) ,’ nr Lal éml Thy Kapdiay cov avaBy, evléws Nadei peta cov Tepl c \ / Suxatoovvns, Tept dyvelas, Tepl TEu“VOTNTOS, TEpl aVTAapKeELas, mept TavTos Epyou Sikaiov Kal mept maons apetns évdo€ov. fa) if > fal TavTa Tavta oTay els THY Kapdlay Gov ava, yivwoKe OTL 6 a / a a ayyeros THS OcKatocvyns peTa cov éeoti. [Tavta ovv éotl Ta 4 Lal / =e gpya Tov ayyédou THs SiKatoovvns.] TovT@ ody TicTevE Kal nan ’ A f rn \ a fal Tots épyots avtod. 4. Opa viv Kai Tod ayyédov THs Tovnpias 14 fal U Ta &pya. Tp@Tov Tavtwy dE’yoNos eat Kal TiKpods Kal ” \ Low, > an / , A , adpwv, Kal Ta Epya avTov Tovnpa, KatacTpédovta Tovs Sov- a a th 5 A Nous TOD Meod" Cray ovy ovTOS ei THY Kapdiav cov avaBy, lal > \ ’ \ A ” ’ fol A / , yvabe avtoy amo Tav épywyv avtov. 5. IIas, dyui, Kvpse, / > vonow avtov, ove érictapat. “Axove, dno. brav d€vyoXia 6. i. 4 cunpopwrepov] cuumepwrepov A. ii. 3 ove] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; cvmets A; def. E. 4 viv] conj. Gebhardt in marg. [L,L,E]; otv A ps-Ath. M. 7] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 327 7 b] / col TIS TpoTTécH %) TiKpla, yivwoKE OTL AUTOS EoTLY eV Got: / a } / elra émulupia tpakewv ToAN@Y Kal TodUTéACLA ebETMaTwY \ , A a \ TOANMY Kal weOVTMAaTwWY Kal KpaLTTAaNGY TOAA@Y Kal TOLKi- Lal ’ , A Awv Tpvpav Kai ov Seovtwv, Kai émiOvpia yvvarkdv Kal € b] TreoveEia Kal vTepnpavia Kal aralovela, Kal boa TovTOLS TAPATANTLA €oTL Kal Guova. TadvTa ovv bTay eri THY Kapdiav ’ A / vs Crab A , 5] \ \ A gov avaBy, yivwoKe OTL O ayyEeXos THS ToVnplas éoT! “ETA GOD. \ S ’ a 6. ov ovy émiyvovs Ta Epya avToD atécTa at avTov Kal a i x b] a pnodev avTo TiaTeve, OTe TA Epya avTod Tovnpa cict Kal acvp- A / a A yy s ’ / fal > a gopa Tots Sovrors TOV Meod. Eyers ovv audotépwy TAY aryyé- \ / A wv Tas évepyelas’ cvVLE aUTas Kal TicTeVe TO ayyédXo THS OL {? es >’ \ be fa) ’ a fal / . / fa) Kaloouvns' 7. amo dé TOU ayyéXou THs Tovnplas aTroaTNnh, v4 e 8 8 \ > le) Zany. Neu iN \ z OTe 9 Ovdaxn avTov Trovnpa éoTL TravTl Epyw* Eady yap 7 TLS \ ’ / \ <7! / A > I / b] Aves) A MloTOS avnp, Kal n evOUpNols TOD ayyéXov TovTOV avaBH ért A / b] a Py a \ ” > aA x \ Ta) ’ THY Kapdlav avTod, Set Tov avdpa éxeivoy 7) THY yuvaixa éEa- lol / an \ / f / 2} > \ A paptnoat Tr. 8. éav 5€ madiv TovnpoTaTés TLS 7) avnp 7) / \ > re? 26) \ \ b) an Ny ov: fal ) UA yuvn, Kab avaBy éri Thy Kapdlay avTov Ta épya Tov ayyéXou A >] ha A ’ \ A THS Suxatocvvns, @& avayKns Set avTov ayaOov Te Tomcat. J Lee) a ©. Prérress ovv, Pyciv, OT KadOv éaTt TO ayyéXo THs SiKaLo- / ’ tal nA \ b] f A / ? / ouvns akodovdetv, TA O€ ayyéA@ THS Tovnpias amoTakac Pas. \ \ \ a , ¢ (i 6) \ a a 10. Ta péev Tepl THS TWicTews aUTH 7 évTOAy SOydOi, iva Tois 14 an / a , Epyous TOU ayyedou THS SiKatocvvns TiaTEevonNs, Kal épyaca- pevos avta Cynon TH Oc@. Ticteve dé OTL Ta Epya TOU ayyéXou a / Uy b] \ > / > td iN / TS Tovnplas yaneTra éott* py epyalouevos ovv avta hon Ta Oca. L c "EvtToan ©. DoBnOnt1, dyci, Tov Kupsov cat dvracce Tas évtodas avTov’ puNacowr ovy Tas évToNas TOU Mcod Eon SuvaTos év “d ‘ \ ¢ n J 3 y ” , Taon Tpakel, Kal n Tpadkis cov aavyKpiTos éoTat. poPov- pevos yap Tov Kipiov mavta Karas épyacn: ovtos O€é éotu 0 oBos, ov Set ce hoBnOjvar Kal cwOnon. 2. Tov bé dia- Borov un poBnOns: hoBovpevos yap Tov Kupioyv katakv- ii. 8 #] conj. Hilgenfeld; ey A. cf. Eccles. Kile 13 Bae THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 7 plevoets TOD StaBdrov, bre SUvapis Ev avT@ ovK EoTW. EV @ [dé] Svvapus ovK Eotuv, ovdée PoBos: év bé SUVamus 7 EvOo~os, J a a A e Kal poBos év avT@. mas yap o Suvamw éyov poBov exe e \ AS / ¢ \ / an f 6 O€ pn Exar OVvam UO TaYTwY KaTadpovetTat. 3. poPy- Onte dé Ta Epya Tod SvaBorov, STL Tovnpa éott. HhoPBovpeEvos ovv tov Kipwov poBnOnon ta épya tod SiaBorov, Kal ovK épyaon avta, adn adéEn am’ avtév. 4. Siccol ody eicly ot poBow éav yap Oédyns TO Trovnpov épyacacba, poBod Tov / \ ? ’ id ] he SEN \ / / \ 3 \ Kupsov kai ovx épyaon avro’ éav Sé Oédns wadw To ayabov > / an \ / \ b) U b] / dA c épyacacbar, poBod tov Kupiov Kat épydon avtd. wate 0 , lal / ’ 4 3 \ ra \ BA hoBos tod Kupiov ioxupds éote Kai péyas Kat évoo€os. / S \ / \ / ) AS \ ef xX» hoByOnte ovv tov Kupsov, cat non avT@® Kal Ocou av hoBnOdcw avtov tadv pvdraccdyvTwy Tas évToAas avTod, I, A A / / / s \ lal fncovrar TO Oecd. 5. Acari, pyyi, Kvpte, elas Twept TOV TnpovyT@yv Tas évToNas avTod' Zyncovtas To Oem; “Oru, nol, maca n KTicts poBeltar Tov Kupiov, tas dé évtodas avtov ov duracce. Tov ovv pPoBovpévwy avToY Kai pudrac- / Sf 3 xX ’ lal b] / C & Ls \ A nr cOVvT@Y Tas évTONAS avTOD, éxeivwv 7 Son eoTt Tapa TO Oca a / \ a es] a Tov 5é wn pvrAacaoVT@Y Tas EVTONAS aVTOD OVE Fwn EV AUTO. *EvtoAy 77’. > / a n a Eirrov oot, dnoty, OTe Ta KTicpata TOD Deod Suda éoTtt \ \ £9 / Ae / b) / \ rated Kal yap 7 éyxpateva Sudy eotiv. él Tiwev yap Set éyKpa- ’ a / / revecOat, emi Tevwv € ov Se?. 2. Cvwpicov mor, pnt, Kvpee, ra) ’ an B évl tivev Set éyxpatevecOar, éml Tivwy Sé ov dei. “Axove, \ 7 gpnoi. TO wovnpov éyKxpatevou, Kai pr) Toles avTd* TO Oé > \ \ > / ’ \ / ’ / SUN \ b] ayabov pa éyxpatevov, adda Troies avTo. éav | yap éyKpa- ! \ ’ \ NY a iy / U ’ U 4 SoS Tevon TO ayaboy pn Trovety, duaptiay weyadnv épyaty’ éapv | \ \ a / / Sé éyxpatevcn TO Tovnpoyv jun Troveiv, SuxatocvynVY pweyadnv ey \ lf / épyatn. éyxpatevoat ovv amo Tovnpias maans épyalopevos \ > / lf VA id SN e / To ayabov. 3. Tloramai, dywi, Kvpte, eioiv at mrovnpias a , / J ab av [nuds| det eyxpareverOar; “Axove, yoiv’ aro 7.3 apééy] dpéiec A. 4 €pydoy sec. ] épydgy A. 8. 2 yap...€pyagn éav] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. M. 8] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 329 y \ ’ \ / > b] \ nr Mouyeias Kal Topvetas, aro weOVopaTos avopulas, aro Tpudhs > lal Tovnpas, aro ebecmaTw@Y TOAMGY Kal ToAUTEAELaS TAOUTOU \ ‘ \ e / \ e / \ Kal Kavynoews Kal uvnrodpocvyns Kal vTEpnpavias, Kal > \ / \ / Wi: fs \ amo Wevopatos Kal KaTadanlas Kal VTOKpicews [Kai] wynot- / \ / / a ed / Kakias Kat Taons Brachnulas. 4. TavTa Ta epya TavT@Y / aA lal > , Tovnpotata eiow év TH bon Tov avOpwrwv. amo TolTwV lal al / \ lal a fol ovv TaV épywv Set éyxpatevecOar Tov SodrAov TOD Meod. 6 ¥ X ‘ > \ , 2) A tal yap pn éykpatevomevos aro TovTwy ov dvvatat Enoar TO lal ” ° \ \ ’ / @ Ud ” / @c@. dkove ovv Kal Ta akodovGa TovTwy. 5. "Ere yap, / / \ > / / / J wy gnui, KUple, Tovnpa épya éott; Kat ye moddd, hyoiv, éotuv ad dv Set tov Sovrov Tod Oeod éeyxpatevecOar' Kréupa, A / 7 / areddos, amroctépnots, Yevdopaptupia, mreoveia, ériOupia / > / M4 > , Nace ft ¢ / Tovnpa, atratn, cevodokia, adaloveia, Kal Oca TovTOLs Sword a \ ‘ U eiaw. 6. ov doxet cot TadTa Tovnpa elvat, Kal Aiav Tovnpa, / a / la! lal , / a > [dnoi,| tots Sovrous ToD Oeod; tovrwy TwavtTwv Set éyxpa- , N , a al > / > ’ \ tevea0ar Tov dovrevovTa TO Oe@. eyxpatevoat ovv ato / f v4 / an (a) al \ > / \ A TavtTav Tota, iva Enon TO Ded, Kai eyypadnon peta Tov > , ’ / bdr ot get, \ ce a > / éyKpatevomevov avta, ad wv pev ovv det ce eyxpatever Oat, n \ \ a / TavTa éotw. 7. & Oé det ce pr) eyxpatever Oat, dnoiv, ddrAa val v \ > \ \ b) / > \ la ) f mo.elv, akove. TO ayalov un éyKpatevov, GAXa ToleL avTO. a Lal , 8. Kai trav ayaladv pot, pnpt, Kvple, nAwooY THY SvVapuy, 7 a | > a \ / ’ o vA > / iva TopevO@ év avtots Kal SovrAevew avtols, va épyacdpmevos avTa dvvn8o cwblhnvar. “Axove, dnot, Kal Tav ayabdv ta ra \ fal épya, & oe et épyalec Oar Kai pn eyKpateverOa. 9. mpaTov , 7 , / > i? ¢ / es mavtav tiotis, poSos Kupiov, ayamn, opovora, pyyata / ’ ! € 2 , > , sas Sixavocivys, adnOeva, Vvropovn TovTav ayabwrepov ovdév 3 > an a an > Us fal x7 / éoTw év TH Con Tov avOpwrev. TatTa éay Tis puracon ’ ’ a 7 ial fol Kal pa) eykpatevntal am’ avT@y, wakaptos yivetas ev TH Son a ’ / avTov. 10. e€ita To’Twy Ta aKodovJa dKovoov: ynpais a , UmnpeTeiv, oppavods Kal vaTEepovpévous emicKérTerOa, é& ? a n a a / >. avaykav AvTpodabat Tors SovAOVs TOD Dcod, dirc£evoy eivar (év yap TH diro€evia evpi ayaborroingt €), wndevi yap T) pirokevia evpicxetar ay inois tote), wndevi ’ / v4 avtitaccesGar, novytov eivat, évdeéatepov yiverOar TavTwv 6. ag dv] conj. Harmer; wy A. : cf. Jer, KXIV. 7. 330 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 8 , / rf b) avOperav, mpeaBvtas céBecOat, Sixatoovvnyv ackeiv, abed- f a cf ¢ / Lf a potnta avvtnpelv, tbBpw virodéepew, paxpoOvuoy eivat, , \ 4 U a pvnotkakiay pn Exel, Kauvovtas TH Wwuyh TapaKanety, >’ \ lal / \ > > o) éoKavoadiamévous aro THS TicTEews yn amroBadrecOat aXXr ’ lal ¢ / a emistpépew Kat evOipous Tovey, awaptavoyvtas vovdertelv, / a \ / / xpewdatas pa OriBew evdeets, Kal eb Twa TovToLs bpmoLa ral a > \ / / éoTt. II. Soxet cot, dyci, TadTa ayaa civac; Ti yap, 7 ‘ / > / U > J > dni, KUpte, TOUTwY ayab@repov ; Llopevou ov, dnaiv, év ) a \ \ b] U BILD) > A \ , an A avTols Kal pn éyKpaTevou am avTov, Kal Enon TO Oe. , 5 \ > \ ! HON Aes) \ A 12. dvAacce oy THY éevTOAnY TavTHY’ éav TO ayabov TroUNS \ \ > Ud ede) ’ lo) a an \ t Kal pn éeyxkpatevon am avtov, Snon TO Oe@, Kal TavTes 2 a a e ef Le) \ t SON \ Encovrat TH OcW of ovTw TowovyTes. Kai Tad éeay TO \ \ nr i Ul b] by J a Ud lal fol TOVNpOV fn Tos Kal éyKpatevon am avTod, Syon TO Dee, \ Ud / fal a ef SN y \ > \ Kat travtes Cnoovrat TH Mew Ocot €ay Tavtas Tas évTONAS / \ A > ] Lal duvrdkwot Kai TopevOaow év avtais. > s, Evtroan 6. ‘ oe 3 iN aA Aéyet ov’ *Apov amo ceavtod tv Supuylay Kal pndev f , 3’ / \ lal rn / Orws Supuxynons aitncacba. mapa Tod eod, Aéywv ev A ed A / > / / \ a 4 ceavt@ ote Twas Sivapat aitnoacbai Tt Tapa Tod Kupiouv a ¢ x a =} kal rNaBeiv, juapTnKas TooadTa eis avTov; 2. gn Svado- a > ih lel yitouv Tadta, adn’ €& OAnS THs Kapdias cov érictpeov ert lo) S) le) ’ tov Kupiov, cat aitod Tap avTovd adiotaxtas, Kal yvoon ’ fa) ld ’ / THY ToAVEVoTTAaYXViaV AVTOD, OTL OV WH TE eyKaTANITy, AANA Lal / , TO aitnua THS Wuyns cov TANpodopycer. 3. OvVK ExTL yap c s\ i¢ Cy sk € lal > ~) > \ , 6 eds ws of GvOpwrrot of pynoiKakodrTes, GAN avTOS apmyn- i, / b] \ / SEN \ / > fo) olkakos éotTt Kal omAayyviverar ert THY Tolnow avrTod. \ s , ' \ / Sie ! A 4. od ovv Kabapicoy cov THY Kapdiay ato TavTeY TOV a bial / \ a paTaLlwpaTov ToD ai@vos To’TOU Kal THY TpoELpNMévov ToL na \ fo) / \ > pnpatov, Kal aitod mapa tod Kupiov, kai aod Wy travta, lal > / > Kal amo TavToY TOY aiTH“aTwY cov avvaTépnTos Eon, éav > ’ oul \ aA r >\ \ ' abisTaKTws aitnons Tapa Tov Kupiov. 5. éav € ductacns >) lal / OX % \ / tal > / éy TH Kapdia cov, ovdey OU pn ANH THY aiTn“aT@Y cov. 8. 12 dm’ av’rod sec.] conj. Gebhardt; at’ro A. , hd , ot yap Sictafovtes eis Tov Oecov, otrol cicw of Sixpuyor, Kal *O\ vA ] , tal ? fk La | e \ ovdey OAS EeTLTVYYaVoVaL TOY aiTnuaTwY a’ToY. 6. of Oe ¢ a v =) a / U ’ a f SLA OAoTENELS OVTES ev TH TloTEL TaVTa aiTovYTaL TreTOLOOTES em \ / \.\ U e/ ’ / ’ A tov Kupiov, cai NapBavovow, bTt adioTaKTws alTovyTaL, \ lal r \ / > / 2A) \ pndev Supvyobytes. mas yap Siruyos avnp, éay ur) peta- f / , 0 , s \ vonon, SvaKdr\ws awOnceTat. 7. Ka0apicoyv ovyv THY Kap- 14 ’ A na / yy \ wv / vA o] / diay cov aro THs Supuylas, évdvaas dé THY Tiatu, 6TL ioxupa a nr , \ , P) €oTl, Kal Tiateve TO Dew OTL Tavta Ta aitnwata cov & > a / \ 3\ >? / / \ an /, airets Ann. Kal édy aitnoapevos tote Tapa Tov Kupiov \ Ul tb aitnua Te Bpadvtepov AamBavys, wn Supuynons OTL TAY OvK yy. Nie Sess A A - / \ \ éraBes TO altnua THs Wuys cov’ TavTws yap dia Treipac- x‘ , U a \ ’ a , ov Tia 1) TapaTTw@pa TL, 0 ov ayvoeis, BpadvTepov Aap- / \ ” / \ G \ / ] Ud Baveis TO aitnua cov. 8. av ody pn Starimns aitovpevos \ ” a a \ / Om? aN Ne , TO ailtnua THS Wuyns cov, Kai Ay avTO. éav Oé exxaKnons \ / > / \ >? A \ \ \ / Kal Siupuynons aitovmevos, ceavTov aitid Kal pr) Tov SidovTa f. \ / got. 9. PBrgére TH Supvylay TavTHY’ Tovnpa yap €oTt Kal ’ / \ \ > a ’ \ lol Uf / / ACVVETOS, KAL TOANOVS ExpLCol aro THS TioTEWS, Kal ye Niav \ Ny #3 / \ \ WA € / / TisTovs Kal iayupovs. Kal yap attn 7 dupvyia Ovyarnp > \ le) / \ / 3 \ / éotl Tov duaBorov, Kal iav trovnpeveTas Eis Tovs dovAOUS rn le ¥ 3 a / Tov @Meov. 10. Katadpovnaor ovy ths Supuyias Kal KaTa- ’ lal Kupievoov avTns év TavTl mpayyat, evdvadmevos THY TiaTLW \ THY iaxupav Kat duvvaTny. 9 yap TiotTis TdvTa éerrayyér- / a ¢ \ / \ / AeTal, Tavta Terewot: 7 dé Supvyia pu) KaTaTLcTeVovca tal / A , A EQUT TAVT@Y aTroTUYXavEl TOV Epywv avTHS ov paced. / 2, / t/ e / v / > \ a If. Prérrets OUD, pnow, OTL ) TTLOTLS avobév éort Tapa TOV \ Kupiov, cal eyes Svvapiv peyarnv' n 5é Supuyia ériyevov n fe ee) \ a , U \ » \ TVEDMA EOTL TAA TOV SiaBOXoU, SuVAapLY fn ExovTa. 12. od Ss Ul lal > / / a A ’ \ a ovv SovrAeve TH Exovon Svvauw TH TigTE, Kal ato THS , ’ A a NGS) / / MY f A A Subuytas dtrocyod THs wn éxovans Siva, Kal Enon TO Geo, , a A A a Kat Tavtes Snoovtat TS Oe@ of TadtTa PpovovrTes. *Evtony v. I. *Apov amo ceavtod, dyai, Tv AUTHY Kal yap a’Ty adergy éote THs Supvyias kal THs dEvxodas. 2. Ids, cf. James Ie) Onn 7s Bae THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 10. i , ,’ / UY Y a 9 pyul, KUpte, adeAyn €oTL TOVT@Y; GAO yap jou OoKel eivaL 5 , f ofvyoNia, Kal ado Supvyia, Kai Gro AUTH. “AowveTOS a of / \ ’ a ¢/ ¢ U U A el avOpwros, pnai, [kai] ov voets OTL 1 AUTH TavToY TOV ’ / \ a Tvevpatwov Tovnpotépa éati, Kai Oewotdtn Tois SovdoLS le) lal ay U \ / NX Tov Qcov, Kai Tapa TavtTa Ta Tvevpata KatagdGeiper Tov wv \ ’ / \ lal \ vf \ / / avOpwrrov, kai éxTpiBer TO TVEDMa TO ayLov, KaL Tad owcet. a0) , , t Chea 2 ! 3 \ , r \ BY yo, dnl, KUpLEe, GoVVETOS ELL Ka OV GUViw Tas Tapa- ‘ ’ A \ / 5) , \ ' Boras tavtas. mas yap Suvata. éxtpiBew Kal madwv ‘ > an y [fear ¢ / b] 2 cote, ov vod. 4. “Akove, dnoiv’ of undétrote épevynoavTes \ A ’ , Se ’ , \ n , mept THS aAnOelas pmde éemitntncayTes epi THs BEeoTyTOSs, / Z / \ J TisTevoavTes O€ povov, eumepuppévos Sé Tpaypartelats Kal a \ bys a mrovTw Kat diriats €Ovixais Kal dAdNats TodXais Tpay- a al no 5 U / fLatelats TOD al@vos TOUTOU' OGL OvY TOUTOLS TPOTKELVTAL, OU lo) \ a f la) voovdat Tas TapaBoras THs OeoTnTOs* eTLTKOTODYTAaL Yap UTFO lal / \ , \ / ToUTwY Tov Tpakewy Kai KaTapUElpovTat Kal yivovTaL KexYEp- te \ e€ 3 “~ e / ef ’ / cwpévot. 5. Ka0ws ol apumer@veEs ol KAaXOL, OTaY apedeias a SaaaN a p) a \ a }- i TUYWTL, YEepTovVTAaL aro TOV aKavOGy Kai BoTaVaY ToLKioD, € Uy > if ovT@s of avOpwirot of micTevcarTes Kal els TavTas Tas / \ \ b] / \ f b) mpa&ers Tas Todas éeutrimtovTes Tas Tpoeipnuévas arro- fa 2) \ fal / 3 lal \ b) \ e/ lal TAAVOVTAL ATO THS Stavolas avTa@V Kal ovdevy bAWS VoOovGL \ r , 4 / f) , Tept THS OiKaLoTUYNS Kal yap OTav akovowat Trept OedTHTOS ¢€ la) ’ a \ \ la) b) A Kal ddnOelas, 0 vous a’T@y Tept THY paki avTeOY KaTa- Wi la) e / ylwerat, Kal ovdév BAXws vootow. 6. ot dé PoPov éxovTes lal \ > aA \ / \ 3 / \ \ Ocod Kat epevvovtes wept OeotnTos Kai adyOeias, Kal TV / ” \ \ u / \ Ul ’ r Kapoiav éxovtes Tpos Tov Kupiov, ravta Ta deyoueva avTois A \ / v4 4 \ A TayYLov VvoovaL Kal cuViovaLv, OTL Exovot Tov doBov Tod Am, la \ ¢ / lal lal Kupiov év éavtois’ orov yap o Kupuos xatouxel, éxet Kal / t > a / \ / ovveots TOAAH. KOAAHOnTL ovv TH Kupio, Kal Tayta cuvy- \ , oELS Kal VONTELS. a J DS seys, a II. “Axove viv, dynciv, avonte, ras 7) AUTH exTpiBeL TO 10. i. 2 dvOpwiros, pyol] conj. Harmer [L,]; illegible in A; dvOpwre (om. gnol) AS; att L,; et dixtt mihi (om. av@pwros) E. 5 Ka0ws] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,E]; xai ws A; def. L,. ii. 1 vv] conj. Harmer [L,E]; ovv A; ergo nunc L,. Na \ / / ¢ / TVvEevpa TO Uytov Kal Tad cate. 2. OTav O Sirpuyos éemi- t a / ’ / N Barna rpakiv tia, kai tavTns atrotiyn Sia THv Sapuvyiayv b} A ¢ / 7 / ) \ SY \ n avTOU, ) AUTH AUTH ELoTropEveTat Els TOY AVOPwrTrOY, Kal NUTTEL \ Lo) \ Vet) / ona yl, 3 , c TO TVEVLa TO AyLoy Kal exTpiBEL AUTO. 3. Elta TadwW 7 3 if? v4 an n ’ 4 \ / / ofvyonia Otay KOAANOH TO avOpeor@ Tepl TpaypaTos TLVOS, \ 4 a / ¢ / >] , >] \ Kat diav mixpavOn, Tadw 1 VIN EloTropeveTaL eis THV bu lal > fA) , fa) ’ We \ La) bLSaN Kapo.iav Tov avOpwrrov Tov ofvxoAncarTos, Kal AVTrEtTaL ETL A / b) a #® » \ ned \ > , ™ pater avtov 7) Empake, Kal petavoet OTL Tovnpov Eipya- it 3 ¢ , a y ” id \ gato. 4. avtn ovv 7 AUTH SoKet GwTHpiay ExELV, OTL TO N fi % / 3 e / movnpov mpakas peTevonoev. appotepar ovv at mpakeus an \ A 3 ¢ \ / ef b) > / A AuToveL TO TVEDMA’ 4 meV Sipvyia, OTL ovK eTréTUXE TIS U 5 A ¢€ \ > I A \ fo) v4 4 mpatews avTns, 1 Se o€vyodia UTE’ TO TvEDWA, OTL ETpake \ ’ , 3 A , A TO Trovnpov. apupoTepa ovvy AUTINPa é€oTL TH TvEVvpATL TO cae? ¢ / Ge , 5 3 as A ayio, 7 Supuyia Kain o€vyoXla. 5. Gpov ovy ao ceavTod \ , \ \ a \ A Ay te ahh) \ Thy AVTnVY Kal wn ONIBE TO TvEdWAa TO AyLoy TO Ev Gol a Y \ la a A N KaToLKOUV, pntote évTevEntas [Kata cov] Te Oe@ Kal b] a >? \ a \ \ a A A \ 8 Oe bd aTrooTH avo cov. ©. TO yap TvEedUAa TOV Oeod TO doGEv Ets A U / / b ¢ f baa y TH TapKa TavTHY AVTTNY OVX UVTropEeper OUSE TTEVOYwpiar. v 5) s\ e 4 \ / yy III. “Evévoai ody thv ihapotnta tTHv TavtoTe éxouvcay ’ \ A a \ ’ ' > Te \ xapw Tapa T6 Oe@ Kal evTpocdeKtov ovoav avT@, Kal > / > So. nr \ ¢. N 2 \ > \ > U évTpuda €v avTh. was yap ihapos avnp ayada épyaferas, \ +] \ an \ A A / - € kal ayala dpovet, Kai Katadppovet ths AVIHS 2. Oo Sé \ b \ / / Lal / AVTNPOS AYN TAVTOTE TOVNPEVETAL TPWTOV MEV TrOVNPEVETAL, ed a \ a Weld \ \ A > f ¢. bees OTL AVTTEL TO TrVEDWA TO AyLov TO SobEV TO aVvOpdTw ihapov / \ A \ la) \ a ’ / b] / SevTepov O€ AUTOV TO TVEDWA TO ayLoV avouiay épyateTat, Nos) / NYS / A A Ul \ Le) evtvyxavev pnd éEouoroyoupevos TH Oew. Tavtote yap A > \ Co ? ” , (ats gh) A AuTNpod avdpos n EvTev&is ovK Eyer Svvamwv Tod avaBhvat AES. \ rn a / > 7 él TO Ovcvactyptov Tov Meod. 3. Acari, dnul, ovK avaBai- aa, \ A , 7 vet €Tt TO OvctactnpLov n évTevEts TOU AVTrovpévov; “OTL, / ¢ , 3 U ’ \ fy ’ fo / dyoiv, » AUTH éyKaOnTas eis THY KapdStav avTOD' pEewlypevn 5 e / \ A 3 , =! >’ / \ y ovv AUTH pEeTA THS évTevVEEWS OVK adinat THY EvTEevELy > lel WV SUN. \ / ef \ ” avaBivar Kkalapay ért to Ovsiactnpiov. daomep yap ofos ” / > \ \ > \ \ ~ \ ‘O \ 3 BA w OLVM MEMLYLEVOY ETL TO AUTO THY AVTHV NOOVHVY OUK EXEL, OUTW \ ¢ / A Kal n AUTN mEewLypéevNn peTa TOD aylov TVEvuaTOS THY aUTHY 334 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 10. iii 54 > 4 6 f kd \ res, | a évrevéw ovK exe. 4. Kabapicov otvy ceavTov ato TIS a / \ / a o, \ / AUTNs THs wovnpads TavTHs, Kal Enon TH Oe@’ Kat TavTes lal lal / > ae Lol 4 / tnoovta TO Oe@ bc01 av aroBadkwow ad’ Eavtav Thy uTHY Av3 , n © , Kal evOvTwWYTAL TAacaV LNapOTHTA. / *Evtonvn ta. / \ "KberEé prot ert cupredriou kaOnpévous avOpetrovs, Kai o ” fa) f > \ fal £6 \ 4 ~ érepov avOpwrov Kabnpevov emi Kabédpay. Kal Reyer pot r / Brérreis Tovs err ToD cumWedArlov KaOnpévous ; Brérra, pyyi, / Ka / / > : Ul ee, \ kupie. OdTor, pyol, TurTot elor, Kal 0 KaOnwevos emt THY \ > Kabédpav Wevdorpogpytns éaotiv [ds] aréddvoe THY Stavovay an la le) tea / \ , ~ tév SovAwv TOD Ocod: Tov Supvywv bé€ atoddvaLW, ov TAV an e > e / e ’ \ / y \ TicTov. 2. ovTot ody of dixpuyor ws er payor EpyovTal, Kal a \ ‘s > a > an € érepwTaow avTov tl dpa Extat avTois* Kakelvos 6 yrevdoTpo- pytns, pndepiay éxov ev éavt@ Svvayw rvevpatos Geiou, a n U lal NaNEl peT aUTaY KaTa Ta éTEepwTHpwata avTov | [Kal KaTa \ , , fal / ’ lal \ na \ 4 Tas émiOupias THs Tovnpias avT@y], Kai TANpOL Tas ~uyas > lal \ ’ \ Ul >’ \ \ \ a avtov |, KaQ@s avtol BovAovTat. 3. avTOs yap KEvos wv a \ \ \ lal Keva Kal amoxpivetat Kevois 0 yap éav éepwrnOy, pos fa) / \ TO Kévopma Tod avOpwrrou amroxKpiveTat. Tia Sé Kal pnuaTta ’ fal Lal ¢ \ / Lal > \ A 3 nr / ddnO7 Naret: 6 yap SuaBoros TANpPOL avTOV T@ avTOD TveEv- y ' en a ’ o > pati, eb twa dSuvnoetac pyEar Tov Sikatwy. 4. boot ovv > / ’ > n / lal / > / \ bl] / icyupoé eiow év TH wictes TOU Kupiov évdedupévor Thy ady- lal / / b] A b] > ’ J Qevay, Tots ToLovTOLS TYEVLAaTLY OV KOAN@VYTAL, AAX aTreyov- Sf ’ Aa ts \ if ¥ > \ Lal fal Tat am avTov. bao 6é dipvxol eiot Kai TUKVA@S mETAVOODEL, A 2, \ lal pavtevovtar ws Kal Ta €Ovn, Kal EavTots pelSova awaptiav lal e \ lal éribepovoly eidwXoXaTpodyTEsS* O yap éTEepwTav rrevdoTrpo- / x U iP, > U b \ \ \ > \ gntnv Tept mpakeds Twos ELOwdoAaTpS EoTL Kal KEVOS ATO A 2) / \ v An \ ~ r THs adnOeias Kal abpwv. 5. wav yap Tvedpa ard Ocod \ > , fol ; \ ” \ LA a , Soév ovK émepwtatat, dra Exov THY Svvamw THis OedTNTOS 11. 1 dete] [L,L,E]; @dofe A. xabédpay | xafépay sic A. és] ins. Harmer [L,L,]; ef E; om. A. 2 kal Kara Tas émOuulas...puxas abrar] LE; om. A by homeeot.; L, omits as far as movnpias atrav, perhaps rightly. M. 11] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 335 , iat lal r f li t =! ’ a , ad éavtov Nadel Tavta, Te dvwbév eotiv ato THS SuvapeEws cf. James a , , NU LGIN a NGS t iil. 15. Tov Oeiov Tvevpatos. 6. TO dé TrEdpa TO ETEpwWTMmEVOV Kal aA \ Nees , a 5) , CRY (AIRS \ Nadovv Kata Tas ériOupias TOV avOpweTraV Eeriyelov éeote Kal > / a b) ral eXadpov, SVvamwy pn Exov' Kal ONws ov Nadel Eady jun) EeTrEpw- = / / 4 4 TnOn. 7. Ids otv, hyyi, Kvpue, advOpwros yvodcetas Tis > / / / avTay Tmpopntns Kal Tis Wevdorpodytns éotiv; “Axove, pyai, \ > / an rf \ ¢ /- , TEpt aughotéepwv ToY TpopnTtwyv* Kal MS ToL pEeArAW DeyeELY, vA / \ , \ \ , > \ oUT@ Sokimaces TOV TpOPHTHY Kal Tov YrevdoTpopHTHy. ard A n / \ v \ ” \ A A THS Cons Soxiwale Tov advOpwrov tov ExovtTa TO TVEDWA TO lal a \ (fame \ Lol \ A Naa Geiov. 8. mpa@rov pév 6 exwy TO Tvedpa [TO Oetov] TO dvwOev of. , \ ’ mpais éoTs Kal ynovxios Kal TaTrewoppwVv Kat aTrexXopevos ’ \ E f A lal aTo Taons Tovnpias Kat eéemiOvpias pataias Tov ai@vos Lal / A ,’ TOUTOU, Kal éavTOY EvdeécTEpoY Tole, TaYTwY TaV aVvOpwTrwr, b] >] \ Kal ovdevi ovdev atroxpiveTat ETEPWTWmEVOS, OVSE KATA ovas a / » tal a \ a Narel—ovdé btav OédXyn avOpwTros AanEiv, Nadel TO TvEdUA TO vs \ / an / ETAL Y fal aylov—a)nXa ToTE Nadel, Stav OerANoH avTov 6 Eds AarAfoa. v4 > o- ere Cae: \ fal \ a DI 9. Stav ody EXOn 6 avOpwiros 6 Exywv TO TrEdWa TO Oétov Els \ ’ A / a U cuvayoynv avdpav dikaiwy Tov éyovtwv Tiotw Belov TveEv- vy \ lal lal patos, Kal évtevéts yévntar Tmpos Tov Deov THs cvvaywyns A ’ lal a la) TOV avopOv exElvwV, TOTE O ayYEXOS TOU TpodNTiKOD TvEv- ¢ \ > \ rf U \ HaTOS O KEiwevOS TPOS aVTOY TANpPOL TOV avOpwrov, Kat TAN- \ (septs A Uy Pac , A ’ \ a pwleis 6 avOpwTros TO TrEvpaTL TO Ayiw Nadel Eis TO TANOOS, ¢ / UA =) V4 Ka0es 0 Kvpios BovNeTat. 10. oVTws ovv havepov Extat TO a fal dA 3 lal / a mvevpa THS OcdTHTOS. oon OY TrEepl TOV TVEvpaTos THS OEd- n / ¢ , e/ v nr / TnTos Tov Kupiov, 7 Svvauts avtn. II. axove viv, dnat, la] nr lal / Tepl TOV TVEvpaTOS TOU émrLyEloU Kal KEVOU Kal S’VapmLY bn Bla b \ v a a \ ¢ v €YovTOS, GANA OVTOS pwpod. 12. Tpa@Tov pev oO cvOpwrros 3 lal ¢€ A lal ” e Ase \ \ f exeivos 0 Soxay Trredua Exew vipot EavTov Kal Oéder TpwToO- f ” \ ba as ? t 3 Nees \ \ Us Kabedplav exe, kal evOds itapos eat Kab avatd)s Kal Trodv- x ra a Nados Kai ev Tpudpais todrais dvactpepopmevos Kal év ETépats Lal ’ / A modnais amatats, Kail picOov AauwBaver THs TpodyTeias > aA 2\ \ \ ! > ' , 3 a avTov: éay Sé yu) NaABy, ov mpodnTever. SvvaTas ovy TrEdWa Q Tpopytikod mvetuaros] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,E]; rod mpogyjrov A: al. L,. 11 viv] conj. Harmer [L,L,]; od» A; om. E. 336 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 11 lal ? / Oeiov picbdv AapBavew Kal mpodnrevew ; ovK éevdéeyeTas TovTo Tovey Ocod mrpopytny, GAda TAY ToLOVTwY TpodynToV > / b \ a > ¢ ’ \ emiyelov é€oTs TO Tvedpa. 13. €lTa brAwsS els TUVAYywYNY A“ / > , , avdpav Sixalwy ovK éyyifer, GXX arrodevyes ators. KOd- an \ lal / \ a \ \ / , lal rdrat S€ Tots Supdyous Kai Kevols, Kal KaTAa ywviav avTols / \ , Lal > \ nr \ \ b] / mpobntever, Kal amtaTa avTovs Aad@Y KaTa Tas ériOvpias na a \ \ ’ \ avT@Y TavTa Kevas' Kevols yap Kal aTroKpivetal. TO yap lal A n / KEvOV oKEdOS PETA TOV KEvoY auVTLOéWevoyv ov OpaveTat, ra) if GAXA cuphwvovaw adrrANdAoWS. 14. OTav dé EXON eis ouVA- lal / lal / yoyny tAnpn avdpav Sixaiwy éyovtwyv Tvedua DeoTnTOs, Kat ’ “ lal lal évrevéis am’ avtay yévntat, KevodTat 6 dvOpwtros eKetvos, Kal \ fal \ 3 / id \ r / / ’ > +) lal A TO Tvevpa TO errityeLov Uo TOD PoBouv devyet arr avTov, Kal la! € ” > a \ so / \ Kopovtat 6 dvOpwros éxeivos Kal d\ws cvvOpaverat, pndev A \ \ duvapevos AaAnoTaL. 15. é€av yap els amoOnkny ctiBaons 3 A \ > , a a / / \ / olvov 7) EXaLtov Kal év avTois Ons KEepaploy KEvov, Kal TradL ’ B U fa} vy U \ > fal / \ / b] lal Oy aToatiBacat OerXnons Ti)v amoOnKny, TO KEpdutov exetvo, b \ re) / in : éOnxas Kevov, Kevov Kal evpnoeis* oUTwW Kal of TpoPHTat ot “4 / ¢ a Kevol, Otav éOwow eis Tvevpata SiKaiwy, o7rotoe HAOor, a \ C:_/h x 3 / fal ToLovToL Kal evpicKovTal. 16. éxets aupoTtépwy THY Tpody- A \ 4 5 / > 3 \ A a \ tal 4 Tov tv Conv. Soxiwafe ovv ato THs Cwns Kal TOY Epywv \ ” \ / e \ / s Tov avOpwrov Tov héyovta éavTov mvevpatodpopoy elvat. I AY Oe / Lal / lel b] / b] \ fal e lol 7. ov Oé WiaTeve TO TrEVpPAaTL TO Epyouév@ G7rd TOD Oeod fal / lel Kal éyovtse Sivauw: te b€ Tveipate TO erriyeio Kal KEVO be / vA b] > A bu ’ 4 > \ lol pndev ricteve, OTL ev avT@ Svvapis ovK EcTW* ato TOU b.a- \ 4 y a e Borov yap épyetar. 18. axovoov [otv] tiv mapaBorny iv , \ MéeAAW ToL réyerv. AaBE ALMov Kai Bare eis Tov ovpavor, ide / 3 fol el Stvacat GrpacOat avtod: 7 wadiv AaBe cidwva UdaTos \ , > \ ’ if ” > , A \ Kab otpwvicov €lS TOV OUPaVO), 1O€ €b dvvacat TPUTNCaAL TOV 11. 13 AadGv] Nadody A. 14 0e67nT0s] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; @e- ratov A. am’ avitév] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,]; dv7’ airfs (sc. rhs cwaywyns) A; zs E. émlyevov] conj. [L,L,E]; dyov A. bd] conj. Schmidt [L,]; awd A; def. L,; dub. E. Kwpodra] Kovmotra: A. ndev] conj. Hollenberg [L,L,E]; my A. 16 rhs fwhs kat Tov pyar] conj. Harmer [L,L,]; 7av épywr kal ris fwhs AE. 18 ody] ins. Hollenberg [L,L,]; om. A; zune E. oipuvicov] cupwricov A. M. 12. ii THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 350 bl , al ovpavov. 19. IIds, dni, xvpte, S¥vatar TadtTa yevéoba; ’ , \ 3 , lel ” ¢ oN ) / advvata yap audotepa Tada eipnkas. ‘Os Tavra ovv, dyciv, > advvaTa éoTiw, ovTw Kal Ta TYEevpAaTA Ta ériyela adUVaTa \ ’ 2 €oTt Kal adpavn. 20. AaBe vov Thy Svvauy THv avobev > , c , , / b] / \ aw epxowevnv. 1 xYarala éraxytotov éote KoKKapLov, Kal bTaV b] f ae \ 3 , A f , Dy / emiméon emt Keparny avOpwrou, THs ToVvoY Trapéyer ; 7) TAadwW / U a 3 \ le] / y / ‘ a NaBe crayova 4) dro Tod Kepapou mimte. Yamal, Kal tpuTa ‘ r Tov AiBov. 21. PrEreEIs ovY OTL Ta avwbey edKaxyLoTAa TiT- TovtTa él THv ynv peyarny Svvamuw exer’ OUTW Kal TO TYEDUA a , nr TO Ociov dvwbev epyopevoy Suvatov éott. Tol’Tw ovv TO ! / ANNA Aleks asd, TTVEUHLQATL TTLOTEVE, ATO Ys TOU ETEPOVU ATTEVOUV. ’Evronn uf’. I. Aéyes por: *"Apov amd ceavtod tacav ériOupiav / »” \ \ 3 @ / \ ’ \ \ y) . movnpay, évdvoas Se THY emlOupiay THY ayaOny Kal cEemyny- evdedupmevos yap TV éTLOvpiay TaVTHY pLonoELs THY Trovnpay b] , \ la ’ \ \ , 3 f emOupiay Kal yadwvaywynoets avtnv KaB@s Bovret. 2. aypia yap éoTw 1 ériOuuia » Tovnpa Kal SvaKddAws 1)pmepodTas: oBepa yap éott kai Aiav TH aypioTnTe avTHs SaTrava Tovs > / / NaN 2) / ? SESEN nr A avOpotrous* padiota Oé éav eutréon els avtnv dSotros Ocod i \ 5 i fn € , ] A A A A kal pn 7 ouvetos, Saravaras vr avris Sewds. Satravd 8é TovS TOLOUTOUS TOS wn ExoVTAas Evdupa THs émiOuUpias TIS 5 fol > \ > / A 3A ji / > ayabijs, dAAA eutrehuppévouvs TO aidyt TOUT@. TovTOUS odY Tapadidwaw eis Oavatov. 3. Ilota, dnui, Kipse, épya éortt THS eTOupias THS Tovnpas Ta Tapad.idoyTa Tovs avOperrous els Oavatov; yvwepioov pot, va ape~oua am’ avtov. ~Axkov- cov, [dnoiv,| ev roto épyous Oavatot n émiOupia 1 rovnpa \ / a a tovs dovdovs Tod Oecod. Il. dvrwv rpoéyovoca ériOupia yuvaikds adXorTpias 7) avopos, Kat TodvTedelas mAovVTOU Kal edeopaTwY TOAAGY \ U Nees a A ‘ patalov Kai peOvopatwv, Kal érépwv Tpvpav ToArKOY Kal pwpav: Taca yap tpudr) pwpad éote Kal Kevn Tots Sovdous 11. 20 viv] conj. Hollenberg [L,L,]; of A; al. E. 12. i. 3 dnoiv] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. A. AP! FATH. 22 cf. James lll. 2, 4. cf. James Avene Ps. clii. (civ.) 15. ag THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 12. it rn a 3 tov Oeov. 2. avtas ovv ai émiOvpiat wovnpal eict, Oava- fal \ ry WN A e a ed \ € b] fa} / ¢ Tovcat Tos dovdous TOV Deod. av’Tn ydp 7 ériOupla 7 \ A 8 / fa) / > / 3 / 3S Py a movnpa tov diaBorov Ouyatnp éotiv. améxerOat ovv det amo Tov éTiuuiey TOY TonpeY, iva aTroaxopmevoe EnanTE a a 4 be x 06 (ee) ary < \ TO Ocd. 3. dc0t Sé dv KataKxuptevOdow UT avTodV Kal pH 3 A ’ A > A > , / avtictabacw avtats, atoQavodvtat ets TéXos: OavaTwdes U ’ C559) , ia \ Ny \ 5) yap elow ai émuupias avrar. 4. ov O€ &vdveae THv émiOv- t a / \ i? AN f fal plav ths Stxacocvvns, Kal KafoTTALcadpevos Tov PoBov Tod i“ a € \ 4 a lo) A Kupiov avtictn& avtais. 0 yap poBos tod cod KarorKel év A 5) 6 s a > On Cos. fa} / ¢ / 3N 18 TH éeriOupia TH ayaby. 1 émiOupia 7 Tovnpa, éav ibn cE / al / la) a \ > / J. Kabwrrcpévoyv TO HOB TOD Ocod Kat avOectnKOTA avTH, Vf > \\ lal / \ > yy b] 4 hevéeTar ATO Tod pakpay, Kal ovK ETL cot OPOncEeTaL hoBov- \ 5 ? Soy Mévn Ta OTAG Gov. 5. ov ov otehavwlels Kat avTHs éAOe \ \ FY} / a / \ \ Sm \ mpos thy émiOupiay THs SuKaLocvVns, Kal Tapadovs avTH TO a e , 2A \ \ , vinos 0 édaBes, SovAEvcov avTH KaOas avT7) BovdreTat. éav / a 39 i? a 2d A \ ¢ A Sh aa jf Soudevons TH ETLOUpia TH ayay Kal vroTayns avTH, SuYnoH THs émiOuulas THS Tovnpads KaTaKuplevoat Kal vrroratat / avtnv Kalas Bovrec. III. "HOerov, dypt, cipte, yvOvar trotous TpoTrous pe Set 8 DN a a ’ Q la a ? On A. ere ee ovredaa TH émuOvpia TH ayadn. Kove, pnolv' épyacat t \ > i? > / \ ie / / Sexarocvynv Kal apetnv, adynGevay Kai hoBov Kupiov, miotw li / rn Kal TpaoTyTa, Kal boa TovTOLs Gpmotd eoTLW ayaba. TadTa épyalomevos evapeatos éon SovAOS TOV Beod Kai Enon avTa’ pyatouevos evapeotos eon Non avr \ A a X Uy a >) / a b] a 4 fal Kal 1ds 0s av Sovdevon TH EmiOupia TH ayaln, Enoeta TO A \ \ / cd. 2. Suverédrecev ovy tas évToXas Tas Owdexa, Kal Neyer / / =) an pou’ "Kyeus Tas évToNas TavTas* Topevou év avTais Kai Tovs aKovovTas Tapakanre iva 1) weTavota avTa@yv Kabapa yévnTat lol na , Lal \ Tas AoTras Nuépas THS CwHs avTa@v. 3. THY Siakoviay TavTHV v , 5) } 5) A \ Nua / J uty Hv cor Slows ExXTEAEL ETWLEAWS, KAL TOV Epyaon’ EevpHaELS lal an / a yap xapuv év Tois méANOVGL peTavoely, Kal TELcPnTOVYTAL TOU cal \N rn b) Tols pHmacLV’ EyYO yap META TOU EcOpMal, Kal avaYKaTW aUTOUS metaOnval cot. > an 4. Aéym avt@: Kupse, ai évtorai adtrar peyadas Kat Karat kal évdokol ciate Kal Suvapevat eYpp&nal KAPAIAN AN- M. 12. iv) THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 339 t a / a > / > td \ > / OparTroy Tod Suvapévou THpHaoat avTas. ovK ola 6é ef SVVaVTAaL e \ e ¢ is al / at évroNal aita v0 avOporov dvraxOnvat, dvoTs TKANPAL > , ’ \ , ? \ \ A a elot Niav. 5. amroxpileis Neyer pots Kav ov ceavt@ mpobijs 7 lal ] / J \ oTe OUvavTat dudaxOjvat, evKOAwWS aUTas PvAdéE«ELS, Kal OUK ” / OVA Ni SS as \ / ” . nr \ écovtat oxAnpai: éay Oé él THY Kapdlay cov 75n avaBh pn / > \ ¢ \ > / fal ’ dvvacbar avtas vd avOpemov dvraxOyjvat, ov hurakers ’ fal / \ avtas. 6. vov &€ cor Néyw* éadyv Tavtas pn hudrdEns, adda a ? 4 , v \ fA ” ¢ TmapevOupnOns, ovy éEets owrTnpiay, oVTE Ta TéKVa Gov OTE 6 i ae A , a \ r; olKos cov, émel 75n TEeavT@ KEKpLKas TOD pn dSuvacOaL Tas ¢ ’ , évTovas TavTas VTO avOpwrrou purayOjvat. lal / f. IV. Kai tatra wot Xia opytios éXadnoev, daTE ME TVY- an , a ¢c la) yuOjvat Kai Niav avTov hoBnOjvar: 4 popdyn yap avTod ’ Wa) vA \ Py Uy Vv ¢ lal \ ’ \ MAXON, OoTE wn SVVaTAaL AvVOpwrroy VTrEevEyKEiY TV OpynY > lo) a id \ bé , v4 \ f avTov. 2. idav Sé pe TeTapaypévoy brov Kal cuyKeyupéevor Yj la b) , » Rs / lal npEaTO poe emrietKéaTepov [Kal (AapwTeEpov] NadEtY, Kal NEyeEL* ” e] , \ > lal lal lal Adpov, aaovvete kai diipvye, ov voeis thv b0€av Tod Oecod, A U > \ \ > \ A / (sé + \ TOS peyadryn éotl cal icyupa Kal Oavyacrny, OTL ExTice TOV t / lal ' A la Kogmov Evexa Tod avOpeTov Kal Tacay THY KTioW avTOD ei / a , \ \ > / A ” ) fod umétate TO avOpworre@, Kai THv eEovciay Tacay EwKev avToO lal A ¢ \ \ TOU KATaKUpLEVELY TOV UTTO TOV OUpaVoY TaVTwY ; 3. Et OUD, / v / fr [dyci,| mavtwv 6 dvOpwros KUplos eats TOY KTICAaT@Y TOU la) / / > Ud A @cod Kai Tavtwv Katakvuplevet, ov duvatat Kal TovT@V TAY 2 nr a Ud / / al evTOAGY KaTaKupLedoa ; SvvaTat, pyal, [TWavTer Kal] Tacady lal , a ¢ / ¢ TOV EVTONMY TOVTWY KaTaKUpLEevaaL 0 aVOpwTros O ExwY TOV t > aA / ’ an ie N b} \ a f y” Kupwov év 7h xapdia avtod. 4. ot 5€ émi Tots yelAeow Exov- \ / ,’ a / tes Tov Kupiov, thv 5€ Kkapdiav avtdyv TweTwpapévny, Kal \ yv ’ \ a ’ > 7 (SMS \ e pakpav ovtes ato ToD Kupiou, éxelvots ai évtoAal avtat oKdy- , ] a pat eat kal SvcBato.. 5. Oécbe ovv vpets, of KEvot Kal Ny 238 a U ¢ lal MN / eXadpoi dvtes ev TH wicTeL, TOY Kupsov vuav els THY Kapdiar, \ , @ A 7 5] > , a ’ al U Kat yvooed Ge bre ovdév oti EVKONMTEPOY TOY EVTONO@Y TOv- v , wv id / > Ul c A TWV OUTE YAUKUTEPOY OTE HuEcpwTEpoV. O. emLaTpadnTE VmELS 12. iv. 1 rH dpynv abrod] Here follows in A a gloss of some forty words. 2 kai ikapwrepov] ins. Gebhardt in marg. [L,E]; om. A; def. L,. bro Tov ovpavor | bro Tay ovpavdy A. Z22—2Z, cf. James 6 fs 340 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 12. iv a a / a of Talis évToNais Tropevopevor Tod SiaBorov, Talis dvoKoXOLS \ an \ > if \ > LZ \ \ / \ Kai TuKpais Kai aypiats Kal aoedyéot, Kai pur) oBHOnTe Tov ’ lal / fal dvaBorov, OTe ev avT@ Svvapis ovK Ectw Kal vudv' 7. eyo lq > ¢ lal ¢ / a yap Ecopat pel vor, 6 dyyedos THS pmeTavoias 6 KaTaKU- / ’ rn plievay avTov. 0 buaBoros povov PoBov Eyer, 6 5é hoPos ’ la! / | »” \ f s > / \ UA avTov Tovov ovK exer’ un HoBnOnTe ovv avTov, Kal hevEeTat 9. 9) Fe. a ap vpov. / ) a U bs 4 ? I e / V. Aéyw avt@: Kupie, adxovcov pou odtyav pnuatov. / ee A U U Aéye, pnoly, 0 Bovre. ‘O pev avOpwrros, pnui, KUpte, TpdOv- / DJ \\ >’ \ A lal / \ ’ / b) id fos ote Tas EvTOAAS TOD Mcod hurdccew, Kal ovdEls eoTLV 6 \ > / \ la] / 7 > A b] Lal Hn aitovpevos Tapa Tov Kupiov, iva évdvvapwbn év tais évToNais avTov Kal UTOTayH avTais: adr’ oO diaBoros oKANPOS €oTl Kal KATAOVVaTTEVEL aUT@Y. 2. Ov d’vaTat, dno, KaTa- duvactevew Tov SovAwY TOV Deov TAY EF GANS Kapdlas éArTrU- / ’ > ’ / U ¢ / 3 lal Govtwy er avtov. dvvatat o diaB8oros avtTitadaical, KaTa- a \ > / >\ s 3 a on \ manraicat Oé ov Svvatat. éav ody avTicTabnTe avTo, viKNnOeis / b] Se. fal / v4 / / > / / pevéerar ap vuav KaTynoyuppévos. Ocot 5€é, dynciv, atroKevol > an il ¢€ celal, PoBovvTat Tov SiaBorov ws S’vamwy EyovTa. 3. OTav o / nf a avOpwros Kepayia ikaveTtata yepion oivouv Kadod, Kat év ToIs Kepaplous exelvous OAlya aTroKeva 7, EpyeTar eTl TA KEpamLa \ ’ lal \ t a 3 \ v4 i res 1 fe5 Kal OU KaTavoel Ta TANPN’ olde yap OTL TANPN eicl’ KaTa- A \ \ 3 U , / wv \ A X voel O€ TA aTroKEVvAa, PoBovpevos untroTte BEvcav: Tayv yap Ta 2 / / ’ / \ b) t € ¢ \ la) 7 aTroKxeva Kepapia o&(fovat, Kal aTrOAAUTAL 7) NOOYN) TOD oiVvOU. \ a 4. ovTw Kal 6 duaBonros épyetas él TavTas Tovs SoUNOUS TOD a / f Ss lol Ocod éxmetpalwv avTovs. boot ov TAHpELS cioly ev TH TiaTeL, a oJ fal a ’ avOeoTnKacwW avT@® ioyupas, KaKelvos aToywpEl aT avTaOY \ oy” 4 A >] / ” 5S / \ \ Hn €x@V TOTOV Tov EcicéNOn. EpxEeTa oY TOTE TpOS TOvS aTOKEVOUS, Kal Eywy TOTOV EloTropeveTat Eis avToU's, Kal 0 bé t p) b} lal ] / \ if ’ fal id / BovreTat ev avtots epyalerat, Kal yivovTat aVT@ vTOdovAoL. VI iat) \ be CA ré (she Dv. a , é \ . "Eyo 6€ vuiv Néyw, 0 ayyedos THS weTavolas: my / poBynOnte tov dtaBorov. amectarny yap, dnot, pe? vuov Y S a A \ eival TOY eTavoovyTwY €& dAnS Kapdias avTéY Kal icyupo- 12. v. 1 dkovcov] [L,E];...ovcov A; def. L,. kuplov iva évdvvapw0y] conj. Tischendorf [L,E]; k...a 4 duvayw0y A; def. L,. 3 TAHpn sec.] wAjpers A, s. 1] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. ‘ZAI . ’ \ > a , ‘ gs a al Tomoat avrovs €v TH Twictel. 2. TWioTevoate ovv TO Oe@ ¢ A e \ \ ¢ / ¢ a =) i? \ \ ¢ a Duels of Ova Tas auaptias vwov ameyvaxotes THY Conv Vuav VA € / \ r Kal tmpooriévtes awaptiats Kal KkataBapivovtes tHv Cony € a 4 2’ ’ a \ \ 4 b J a VPBY, OTL €av EemLaTpapHte Mpos Tov Kupsoy €& brAns THs Kap- A / U dias vpov Kal epyaonabe THY SixatocivnY Tas NouTras Hwépas A A b] fal THs Sons vudv Kal SovrevonTe avT@ 6pOas Kata TO OédAnwa ’ na a / ¢ a ¢ AUTOD, TOLNTEL Lac TOIS TPOTEPOLS VUwVY AwapTnmact, Kal v4 / a Aa A 4 A f é€ere OUvamly TOU KaTaKuplevcat TeV Epywrv Tod SiaBorov. a oe Thy Sé azrethajy TOV StaBorov OrAwS pH PoBHOnTE: aToVvos yap la a a > / 5 €oTLY WOTEP VEKpOU VEevpa. 3. AKOVoAaTE OvY Lov, Kal hofn- ’ n \ A . Onre Tov TavTa AYNAMENON, CHCA Kal ATTOAECAI, Kal TNPELTE James iv. \ / fal fal r 12, Tas évToNas Tavtas, Kat Enoecbe TH OG. 4. réyH avTe: Kupte, viv évedvvapwOnp ev raat tots Sixatd act Tob Kupiov, a N TEA OS. Nae) oe r \ , a OTL OD MET Emov Ei’ Kal olda OTL cUyKO ers THY SVVAamLY TOD a € a ’ lal dvaBorou Tacay, Kal nmEis AVTOD KaTAaKUpLEevoOMeEY Kal KaTL- A Yj la) oxXvoouEey TAaVT@Y THY Epywv avTod. Kal édXrrifw, KUpLe, dUVa- if a AY ’ \ , e\ b] / lo) / a0ai pe viv Tas évToXas TavTas, Us évTéTadcat, TOD Kupiou lal / ¢ evduvapovytos duvaEar. 5. Pvrakes, dnoiv, édv 7 xapdla if cou Kabapa yevntat pos Kipiov’ Kat travtes dé dudaEovoww 3 le) 3 an dc0t av Kabapicwow éavT@Y Tas Kapdlas ao THY paTalwy > A la) ,:A Uy Ni / A A em LOvpua@y Tov ai@vos TovToV, Kal EjncovTat TO Oca. TIAPABOAAI A> EAAAHSE MET’ EMOT. , rn ¢€ A a Aéyer poor’ Oldate bre em Eévns KatoKetre vets of Sod- A Lal e \ U € lad , ? b] \ a dot TOD Bcov' n yap ToALs VueY maKpav éoTLY ato TIS / > \ , ¢ aA TONEWS TAVTNS’ EL OvY OldaTE THY TOALY VUaY ev 7 wéeAXETE a e a 2! \ \ / KaToLKEely, TL WOE vpels ETOLWAleTe aypors Kal Tapatakess a“ \ > \ \ Sub oh , rn MTONUTENELS KAL olKOdOMAS Kal OlKnWaTa paTala; 2. TadTa > ei Ne ' > ! \ ’ ’ aA 5) ovY Oo ETOLMalwy eis TaUTHY THY TOALY OU StavoEiTaL éTrava- vi. 2 auaprias] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; dmaprias A. 4 be vov] conj. Harmer [L,]; nev A; dub. L,; def. E. Sim. 1. 1 otéare] L,L,E; add ono A. ml ot A. oldare] L,L,E; add pyct A. 2 dvavoetrar] conj. Hollenberg [L,L,E]; dvvara: A. 342 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (S. 1 / Kaprpas eis THY Olav Tod. 3. appov Kal diAfuye Kal Tadai- mwpe avOpwrre, ov voeis OTL TAVTA TavTAa adrOTpLA eoTL, Kab € , , / ec , ) / ’ r \ € / An , vm éfovalay étépov eiaiy; épet yap 6 KUpLos THS TOAEwWS lal , \ Yi ravtns’ Ov Oédw oe KaTouxetv eis THY TOM pov, GAN EEEAOe a nr eo] a ‘ ex THS TOAEWS TAUTHS, OTL TOLS VOMOLS ov OU ypacal. 4. TU eS ” ,’ \ \ , “ \ € / € / f obv éxwv aypovs Kal oiknoes Kal étépas VapEes Todas, > ‘ c , , rn / / \ , \ \ \ éxBarromevos UT avTod TL Toinoets Gov TOV aypov Kal THV a“ ’ / \ \ ey e / / / oixlay Kal Ta OUTTA boa NTolwacas GEeavTa; éyEs Yap ToL lal / r duxaiws 6 KUplos THS Kwpas TavTns* “H Tots vopow pov ypa, % fal > 4 Lal ) exxdper ex THS YWpas pov. 5. av ovy TL wédArELS TroLEl>Y, fal lal lal ,’ nr lal éywv vouov év TH of oder; Evexev TOY aYp@V Tov Kai THS a , \ Aourns vrapEews TOV VOmov Gov TavTwWS aTapYnon Kal Tro- , fal / A / / / ’ / U pevon TO vo“m THS Toews TaUTHS; PETE p17) aovppopov a Ul eoTW aTrapyncat TOV Vomov Gou* éay yap évavaxaprat Oedn- , , \ “/ > / ons eis THY TOAW GoU, ov pn TapadeyOnon, [OTL aTnpYnow \ / “a / ‘ \ > f > > , lal TOV vomwov THS TOAEWS GoU,] Kal ExKAELGOnTH aT avUTHS. 6. Bnrére ody ov: ws emi Eévns xatoikdv pndév Tréov EroL- n ’ / \ , pate seavT@ ef yur) THY avTapKeLay THY apKETnY Gol, Kal ¢ / A v4 / € ‘ a / Ul Erouuwos ylvou, iva brav OérXyn O SeatroTns THs TONEWS TAUTNS > r , / lal / , fr , f , lal éxBarelvy oe avtitaEapevov TO vopm avTov, EEEAOnS ex THS , > A NS > \ , \ a a ee TONEWS AUTOD Kal aTréNOns Els THY TOALY TOU, Kal TO TOW VOMO xenon avuBplotws ayaddudpmevos. 7. BréreTE ovy vpels ot Sovrev 0 Oc Kal Eyovtes avTov eis THY Kapdiav’ épya ovAevovTes TO Oe@ Kai ExovTeEs y els THY KapoL pya- fecbe ra Epya Tod Ocod pynuovevovtes THY éEVTOAGY aUTOD Kal TOV eTAYYENLOV OV eTNYYELNATO, Kal TLCTEVTATE AVT@ OTL , > U IN co \ ’ r A ’ \ Tomoe avTas, dv al évTodalt avtod dvraybaaow. 8. avti aypav ovv ayopatete Yruyas OAiBouévas, Kaba Tis duvaTtos 5) \ Na? \ 3 / \ \ / €oTl, Kal Ynpas Kal Ooppavods erricKéTTTETOE, Kai pun TapaBré- \ a ¢ A METE AUTOUS, Kal TOV TAOVTOV UuwY Kal Tas TapaTakels Tacas > t b) \ \ Say a a t is eis TOLoOUTOUS aypouvs Kal oikias daTravaTe, ds éXaBeTe Tapa 1. 4 brdptes] conj. Gebhardt [cf. tardptews below, § 5]; mpatecs A; dub. E. 6 @éXy] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; €&\@y A; dub. E. eis Tiv mow] conj. Harmer [L,E]; & 77 woke A; al. L,. dyadhiwuevos] conj. Hollenberg [L,L,E]; xal d-ya\Nwudvus A. 7 9e@] conj. Harmer [L,L,]; xupig AE. S. 2] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 343 Tov cov. 9. eis TOUTO yap érroUTICEY Vas 6 SeotroTns, iva \ A Tavtas Tas diaxovias TedéonTe avTo* TOAD BéATIOV éoTL bd \ ’ / \ , £ TolovTovs aypouvs ayopatew [Kal xTnwata] Kal olxous, ods ees bd a / 7 bd / > b) 2 eupnoels EV TH TONEL Tov, OTaV ETLOnUNnONS Eis avTHY. IO. / ¢ \ avTn 1 TokvTéAELA Kar Kal ihapa, ATHY pr) Eyouca pNdé b. 3 A poBor, éxovca Sé yapav. THv otv ToAVTEELaY TAY COVEY [1 Mpaccete’ acvudopov yap éotiv viv Tots SovXoLs Tod Mcod* 11. tv 8é diay wodvTérevav Tpaacere, ev 7 Sivacbe yaph- la! ’ vat’ Kal pa) Tapayapdocerte, unde TOU adroTpiov arrnabe 5) 5) f) A Sete \ eS OD > / > pndé eriOupette avtov’ Trovnpov yap éotwv adXoTpiwv érLbu- a \ be \ v > Ud \ fa} , petv. TO dé cov Epyov epyafou, Kai cwOnon. "AdAn tapaBorn. al / > ‘ > \ \ fal 1. Ileperrarovytos pov eis Tov aypov Kai KaTavoodyTOS TTEANaV Kal auTredov, Kal StaxpivoyTos mepl avTav Kal TOV A ’ n lal / e A! \ la = / Nees KapTov avTav, davepodTal jou o Trolmny Kal Néyer* Ti ov év e lel ‘a ale Ul \ a XE i ™m , éx o al éaut@ Enreis; Ilepi tis mredéas cal THS aputrérou avlynTa, pni, [Kupte,] OTe evUrpeTréctatai Eiciy AAAnAaLS. 2. Tadta Ta dvo dévdpa, hyaiv, eis TUTov KEeivtat Tois SovAOLS TOD Oeod. "Hoerov, dnui, [kvpte,] yuovat tov TUTov Tadv Sévdpwv TovTeY / av réyets. Brérreis, dnol, thv wredéav Kal THY autredov; / c Ui if / Brera, pnt, xvpie. 3. “H aprredos, hyoiv, avtn Kaptrov / / , , hépet, ) O€ WTEAéa EVOV dKapTrov é€oTW" ANN 1 apTrEdOS a +N ee) Ags \ , ) , A avTn, éav pr) avaBy eri tTHv TTEdEay, ov SUVaTaL KapTodopy- / / Nia ak cal TOAY éppimpevn Yapal, Kal Ov dépet KapToOV, ceanTrOTa / \ 4 wet a / 4 a > Ae Peper pu) Kpewapevn err THs Treas. OTav odv exippidy 1 ” SEtNA 15 y \ re a / n \ aumrenos el THY TTEdéav, Kal Tap’ éEavTHS Peper KapToV Kal Tapa THS Treas. 4. PBA€TrELs OvY OTL Kal 1 TTEdéEa [TOAdY] Kaptrov didwow, ovK éhacaova THS aumédov, wadrov 8 Kal / a 7 Me CO mretova. | Ids, hnul, xvpce, rrelova; |"Ort, Pnoiv, cyrre- ie b] \ \ / ‘ \ \ \ \ os Kpemapmevyn ETL THY TTEEAY TOY KapTTOY TTOAVY Kal KaXOV 10 iapa] conj. Hilgenfeld [LE]; iepa A; al. Ly. é@vav] A perhaps reads €Ovix@v. 2. 1 kUpe] ins, [L,L,E]; om. A. 2 KUpte] ins. [L,L,E]; om. A. 4 7Qs...mNelova] ins. Gebhardt [L,E]; om. AL, by homeot. 344 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 2 / > / \ \ \ Ab Ja iv. / d SiSwowv, éppyupéevn S€ yapwal campov Kai orALyov péper. avTH 3 ¢ \ > \ PS) / nr 2) lal n ’ A ovv 1) TapaBoAn ELS TOUS OOVAOUS TOV Deod KeEtTaL, Evy TTWYOV , n / / ” Kal twAovotov. 5. Ids, pynui, Kvpie; yvwpicov por. “Axove, Vf € \ / ” / / \ ‘ 4 4 dynoiv: 6 wev TOVaLOS EXEL XpHNpaTa TOA, Ta d€ pos TOV ‘ \ lal lo] \ Kupiov mTwyevet TeplaTrpevos TEpL TOV TAODTOY avTOU, Kal 7, \ v \ > / \ \ ” s \ lav puixpav exer THY EEoporoynow Kal THY évTevEwY pos TOV Ad \ A Kupcov, Kai iy exer, wixpav Kat PAnXpav Kal advw pa Exovtav a ’ \ ‘ 4 Suvauw. Obtav ovv advaBh O mrovaLos eri TOY TévyTA Kab n Uy / « ‘ Yopnynan avT@ Ta SéovTa, TisTEV@Y OTL O EpyaceTas Eis TOV , , \ \ ¢ lal \ lal lal ¢, ¢ mévnta Suvnoetas Tov picbov evpeiy Tapa TH Oew—OrTL oO / / Ul 3 a lal > / \ lel , ‘4 mévns TAovaLos éotw év TH evTevéer [Kai TH eEoporoynoet,| \ / / ” Ae A ] r \ fal tal Kal Svvapev peyadrnv exer 9 évtevEis avTov Tapa To Oe@— a a / emuyopnyes ovv 6 ToVoLOS TO TéevyTL TavTa adicTaKTOS* e al / 6. 6 mévns 5é Ervyopynyovpevos VIrd Tod TAOUGIoU EvTVYYaVEL avTa, TO Oe@ evyapicta@v Tepi ToD Sidovtos avT@. KaKelvos BA b] U \ lal / A > / / ére éemiamovdater wept Tov mévynTos, iva abidrerTTOS yévnTaL b] a fal ’ r L \ v4 <poor. lal / év TH Sw avTov* olde yap bre 7 evTevEis Tov TévHnTos TpoG- / -) \ / \ \ / , ‘ > SexT €oTe Kal TAOVTLA TpOS TOV Decoy. 7. auoTepot ovy At oe, fal ¢ \ J, > Ul \ 4 b] e TO épyov TeXovaLW* O ev TEéVNS Epyaterar THY EvTevew ev 7 fal r > x lal r mouTel, [iv EXaBev amo Tod Kupiou:| tavtny atodiéwct TO an an > lal Kupio Té éreyopnyobvtt avTe. Kal 0 TOVGLOS Waa’TwS TOV n a Be ’ \ n / > U , tal TAovTov dv EXaBev aro Tov Kupiov adiataKxtws Tapéexel TO Tévntt. Kal TOUTO épyov péya éoTi Kal SexTOVv Tapa TO Oe, a A > fo) OTL GuUVHKEY ETL TO TAOUVT@ aUTOV Kal EipyacaTo Eis TOV / 5) a U lo) / oe at \ TévnTa ek TOY Swpnuatwv Tov Kupiou Kal éréXece THY Staxo- le] / 3 a \ a , viav Tov Kupiou dp0ds. 8. mapa Tots avOpdtrots ovv 7 TTEAEa _ \ \ / \ > ” 3O\ lal vA 3 doxel KapTrov mn pepe, Kal ove oldacty ovdé voodow OTL, éav By , , ¢ , HO v f \ yy aBpoxia yévnTat, n TTEdAa VdwWP Eyovca TPépes THY ApuTrEdo?, ¥ a Kal 7) GuTredos adtadeTTTov Eyouca Vdwp Surrody Tov KapTrOV , A. Hew te a ACRE) LOIN a , ov \ e did@ot, Kal UTEp EavTNS Kal UTEP THS TTEAéaS. OVTW Kal Oi \ \ y TEVHTES EVTUYYaVoYTES Tpos TOY KipLov Urép TOY TAOVTLwWY 2. 5 BAnxpav] Brrypav A. dvw] conj. Tischendorf (cf. apud dominum L,); avod (=dvOpwmrov) A; om. L,E. avaB7] conj. Hollenberg (cf. above, § 3); dvatdH A; dub. L,E; om. L,. S. 4] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 345 lal \ lal ’ rf A , e ’ TAnNpopopovat TOV TOVTOY aVT@V, Kal TaN Ol TAOVELOL a a / A Kopnyowvres Tois Téevnoe Ta S€ovTa TANpopopovar Tas rpuxas “d a a aQuTayv. 9. yWwovTat ody augoTepor KoLVwvoL TOD épyou Tov f lal ts ¢ lal b) > / ¢€ X lal dixaiov. TavTa ovv 0 TroLdy ovUK éyKaTarechOnceTat UO TOD lal p \ U a cod, adr Ecrat eruyeypappevos eis Tas BiBXous Tov CovTa@v. s\ 7 \ a 10. pakaptot oi éyovtes Kal cuviévTes OTL Tapa ToD Kupiov fal lal / mrouTivovtar’ of yap tavta dpovovytes Suvycovtar ayabor >] , TL epyalcer Oa. "AdXAn tapaBonrn. \ M4 / - I. "Edev&é pos Sévdpa trodra pn Exovta PuAAa, GAN wel S25 3 - g Xue ie G \ , x Enpa édoxet poe eivat’ bwoa yap jv Tavta. Kal Neyer pot 4 fa} / / ld y Bréreis Ta Sévdpa tatta; Br€érea, dnl, Kvpte, duora ovta ’ , / x a \ / \ Kal Enpa. amroxpibets pot Néyer’ Taira ra dévépa, & Brérress, e a SPELN b) al IA U / c- , ol KaToLKODYTES Eloly ev TO al@ve TOUT@. 2. Atati ody, dyut, / ¢ \ U > Ne ies / v e t Kuple, woel Enpa eiot Kal bwova; “Ort, dyoiv, ote of Sixacot / bd © 2e Nis ge) el bial , b] ith / paivovTat ovTE of duapTwAol év TO Ai@vt TOVTM, GAN OpoL0L e lal / / , , elo" 0 yap aiwy odTOS Tois SiKalols YELwV EoTL, Kal ov hat- lel ¢ “ lal / VOVTAL META TOV AwAapPTWNOY KATOLKOdYTES. 3. WaTTEp yap eV A a \ / ’ , \ U a ‘ ’ TO yeywove Ta Sévdpa amoBeBAnKOTA Ta PAA Omota Elo, L ov haivovtas Ta Enpa Troia eiow 7 Ta Sava, ov y TO Kal ov paivovt np v7) , OUTMS ev TO 3A / P. / wv e / v € ¢ , aiwve TOUT ov palvovTaL OVTE Ot SiKaLot OVTE Of AuapTwXoL, 7 i 49 GNA TayTes bmotol Eiow. "AXA TrapaZonrn. I. “EdecEé wou wadw dévdpa modda, & péev Bractrorta, & dé Enpa, kal éyet por’ Brérecs, pyoi, ta dévdpa tadra; Brérra, dni, c’pre, TA wev BracTovTa, Ta be Enpd. 2. Tadta, gyncl, Ta Sévdpa Ta BAacTaVTA ot SiKatol cio of wéddoVTES KaTOLKELY Els TOV aidva TOV épyomevov’ 6 ydp aidv 6 épyope- , bd \ n U a NG a , vA vos Gépos éati Tots Sixaloss, Tois 5é dwapt@drols yemwov. Stay g bd] conj. Hollenberg; dd A. 10 of yap...€pydfecda:] L,L,E; om. A. 4. 2 Jépos] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; Opivos A. 346 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 4 \ lé / / ody éridapryn TO Edeos TOU Kupiov, Tore havepwOncovTar ot , A a \ / 1 a dovAevovTes TH Oee, Kai wavtTes havepwOncovtar’ 3. waTep \ A / e \ € / / e ‘ lal \ yap To Oépes Evds ExaaTov Sévdpou ot Kaptrot havepodyTaL Kal / 4 tal eTUYLVOOKOVTAL TOTATTOL EloLY, OUTH Kal TOY OiKaiwy of Kap- \ » Wahid \ / U das U mol pavepot Ecovtat, Kal yuwrOnoovTat travtes [oi EXayioToL wv ,’ al ” 3 al 7A > / \ \ » ‘ ovtes] evOareis dvTes ev TO aide exeiv@. 4. Ta dé EOvN Kai oes / a Ss \ / \ t fa ¢ , of cpapTwroi, ola cides Ta Sévdpa Ta Enpa, ToLovTot evpEeOnaov- \ Naf. ’ ’ / Lal >a) \ ¢€ t tat Enpol Kal akaptroe ev exelv@ TM ai@vi, Kal ws EVKa KaTA- Uy [3 lal >’ nr xavOnoovtat Kal pavepot écovrar bTin mpakis avT@v Trovnpa A ial fal Ly \ , yéyovey ev TH CoH avTa@v. of wey yap apwapTwroi KavOncov- a ¢ Nora) 1 s VO. » D Tal, OTL HuapTov Kal ov peTevonaay’ Ta Sé EOvn KavOnoovTat, + , OTL OUK &yvMoaY TOY KTicavTa aUTOUS. 5. ov ovY KapTropo- an na ’ / pnoor, iva év TO Oéper Exeivw yowaOH cov 6 KapTos. a7réxou \ > \ lal A / \ > \ f c \ dé dwo Tév TOANGY Tpakewy, Kai ovdéev SiapapTys. of yap \ NV’ if \ \ ¢ / / Ta TOAAXA TpacaoVTES TOAXA KAL AapapTavoval, TEeplaTTa- \ A U ’ lal \ \ / a mevol tept Tas tpakers avTov Kali pmdecy SovrevovTEs TO- n A ¢ a / Kupio éavtév. 6. Ids otv, dnoiv, 6 tovodtes dvvatai Tt lal lal Ud lal aitnoacQar mapa tod Kupiov Kat AaBeiv, un SovrAevayvy TO / a al \ >] Kupio ; of [yap] dovNevovtes ava, éxeivor Aorta Ta aiTn- =) fal € \ \ / A r / > Lal 2 \ pata avTav, of 5é 7) SovAevovtes TO Kupio, exetvor ovdev a , / Anortar. 7. éav Sé play Tis Tpakw epyacnrat, dvvatat Kal a , lal = > \ t ¢€ > a TO Kupiw Sovrdedoau’ ov yap SvuapOapyoetar 7 Sudvowa avTov amo Tov Kupiov, adda Sovrevces avT@ Eywv Tv Siavotav a fa) \ avtTov Kabapav. 8. Tavdta ovv éayv Toons, dvvacat KapTro- bd a \ / 3 fa) hophaat eis TOV ai@va Tov épYopevoy’ Kat Os ay TavTa TroLNeN, KapTropopycet. "AdAn tapaBonrn. I. Nyotevov cai cabnpevos eis dpos TL Kai EevyapioT@V a / \ , fe 3 , ’ > a / \ t® Kupim wept wavtTwv wy émoinoe eT emov, PETw TOV / 4 / \ / / ’ \ 3 Toweva Tapakalnpevoy mot Kal éyovta’ Ti dpOpivos wde 4. 3 oi éAdxioror dvres] conj. Harmer [L,]; of edOane’s ovres A; dub. L,; om. E. 4 ola] conj, Schmidt [L,L,]; d@ A; dub. E. 5 ovdev] eae ss preriouss usp etsy i. éauTov] €...A. 6 yap] ins. Hollenberg [L,L,]; om. A; def. E. / / , / / eajrvOas ; “Ort, dnui, kvpte, oTatiwva éyw. 2. Ti, dnoir, , , , éott otatiov ; Nnoteva, dni, xvpie. Nyoteia 5é, dni, 7 \ , e TL €otiw avTn[, iv vynotevete]; “Os eiwbew, dni, Kvpre, t/ , > ” / / A / oUTw vynotevw. 3. Ovx oidate, dyoi, ynotevew TH Kupio, ’ / > / e/ ¢ 2 \ e\ / ’ A ovoé €oTWW vnoTEela avTn 1 avodedys iy vnoTeveTe avTa. , / A / / Acari, pnt, Kupte, ToUTO réyers ; Aéyw oot, dyoiv, ote ovK \ a / 3 ’ éotiv alty vnoteia, Hv SoKeite vnoTevey’ AAN eyo oe SidaEw jee) / Ul \ \ A , v Tb éote vnotela TANpNS Kal SexTn TH Kupio. dxove, dnow. ¢ \ > , , iA / dA 4. 6 @cds ov BovreTat Tovav’THY vnoTElay paTtaiay’ ov’Tw \ / A A ION > f lal / t yap vnstevmv TH Oe@ ovdév Epyaon TH Sikatocvyvyn. vynatev- \ A A , t 2 \ , cov 6 [TO Oe@] vyotetay TovavTny’ 5. pondev wovnpevon > A A \ , A / > A igi év TH Swn cov, Kai SovrAevoov TH Kupiw év xabapa Kxapdia THPNTOV Tas evTONAS aU’TOD TopEvdpEvos év ToOis TpoTTay- pac avTov, Kal pndewia ériOuuia trovnpa avaBytw év TH / : / \ A A, NEN a b) fe \ Kapoia cou" mictevooy 5é TO Oc@’ Kai éay TavdTa éepyacn Kal / 3 \ \ lo) ‘ poBnOjns avtTov Kat éyKpaTevon amo TavTOs Tovnpod Tpay- a n, \ A \ D ! patos, Snon TO Oew’ Kai Tav’Ta éav épyacn, weyadnyv vnoTtelav \ Lal TeAETELS Kal SexTHY TO Oc. \ ¢ II. "Axove tyv tapaBornv Hv wéd\Xo coe EyEeLY avnKOU- A , ~! / > \ \ , f \ Gav TH VnoTEia. 2. Elyé TIS aypOY Kal SovAOUS ToOAXOUs, Kal / fal ’ lol b] / 9 Aa \ > i) fépos TL TOU aypov éedpuvTevoey auTreNa@va. Kal éxrceEdpevos lal , SodAGY TiVa TioTOY Kal EvapeoToY EVTLBOV, TpoTEeKaécaTo / > a. \ > a fal auTov Kal réyer avT@’ AaBe Tov aumeddva TodTov [ov > , \ , aN 4 ” Vie: \ éputevoa] Kal yapaxwoor avTov [ews Epyowar], Kal Erepov 5é A / fn) Toons TO apuTedove’ Kal TavTHY pov THY évTOAnY ’ , A ¢ pura€ov, cal édevOepos Eon trap’ euot. €&NAOe Sé 6 Seaororns Tov SovAov eis THY arodnuiav. 3. e&eAOdvTOS Sé av’TOD id rn a éXaBev 0 SovX0s Kal évyapdKkwoe TOY auTrEeX@VAa. Kal TEeXécas \ / a ,’ A Le \ 2, lal A THY Kapakwow Tov aptreNa@vos elde TOV auTrEeNova BoTavav U A > , TAnPH OvTa. 4. €v EavT@® oy EdoyicaTo éyov' TavTny \ 5 \ a , , 3 , \ \ > TY €VTOAHY TOU KUplov TeETENEKA’ GKar~w oLTTOV TOY ap- TEAOVA TOUTOV, Kal EotaL evTpEeTTeaTEpOS eaKapmpévos, Kal 5. i. 3 vnorela pri.) pref. 7 A. 5 Tedécers] conj. Gebhardt in marg. [L,L,]; motets A; def. E. 348 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S.5. ii ‘ ¢ 4 Botavas bn éxov doce. KapTrov TeElova, yn TvUyopEVvos UTO a lal \ ” \ fal U tov Botavav. AaBwv éecKxarpe TOY autrEedava, Kal Tacas wv fal , a \ tas PBotavas tas ovoas év T@ aptreda@ve eFéTINNE. Kal - Ney ¢€ , \ b] lal ? / \ ’ / \ éyéveTo 0 GuTreXwy €xelvos evTpeTrécTaTos Kal evOadns, “1 ” ' ' ee A \ , *s c éywv Botavas mvuyovcas avTov. 5. peta xpovov HAVE O / fa) / 1% rn > fal \ ’ lol ’ \ SeamroTns Tod SovAov [Kat Tov aypov], Kai elanrOev Eis TOV lal ? fal GuTexXava, Kal doy TOY auTEXOVa KeYapaKwpéevoy evTpE- A yv \ \ ’ / \ / \ / > Tas, Te O€ Kal éoxkappévor, Kai [7acas| Tas Botavas éxTe- ,’ al wv \ , / / , Tidpevas Kal evOarels ovcas Tas apytédous, éxapyn [Alay] sek lal ” fa) Ui , a ‘ €ml Tois Epyous ToD SovAov. 6. mporkadecdpevos ovy Tov n a s / \ viov avTov Tov ayamnTtov, Ov elye KANpoVvOmoy, Kal TOUS f- \ s / / , lal v4 - / girous, os elye cupBovdous, Eyer avTOis ooa EveTEeLhaToO Aa fa) > al TO Sovw avTod, Kal boa evpe yeyovoTa. Kakeivot ouVE- fal nr / e ’ A- (& xapnoav TO SovrAw érl TH waptupla 7 ewapTUpnaEev avT@ oO / \ / ’ a. > \ fal / U SeamvroTns. 7. Kal réyer avTtois’ “Eyd tH SovrAm TOvT@ / / " édXevOepiav ernyyerkaunv éay pov THY évToAny purdEn Hv > / > A > Uy 4 A > \ \ évereinapnv avta: éedvrake S€ ou THY évTOARY Kal Tpoc- ta) “ ’ XO v Xd \ 3 \ rL wv EOnke TO apTred@ve Epyov Kadov, Kal €Ewot ALaY NpEeceD. ’ \ / ce a” e >] / / , 4 avTt TOUTOU OUY TOU Epyou ov ElpydcaTto BédXw avTOV cVYKAN- , A en a ¢ \ \ / ’ povomoyvy TO vi@ pov Toijoat, OTL TO KadOY Hpovnaas ov A 4 ¢ mapeveduunOn, arr érérXecev ato. 8. Ta’Tn TH yvoOuN O e\ lal i? t >] A ~ / vids Tov SeaTroTOU cuynudoKnoev avTo, iva cuyKAnpoVvomos / ¢ lal A tn \ ¢ / I / cal yévntat 6 SodAOs TO Vid. YQ. peTa Nuépas oArLyas Selrvov b] la) A fo) emoinoev 6 olKobEeaTOTNS AUTOD, Kal Emeurrey avVT@ EK TOD ¢ n deirvou édécpata ToAna. AaBov é 6 d0dXos [Ta édécpata ’ al la] > lo) fal Ta TeupOévTa avT@ Tapa Tod SeatroTou] Ta apKovvTa avTe a ) rn : Hpé, TA Nowtra S€ Tols suvdovroLs avTOD SiédwKev. 10. of 6€ fal f \ / auUvdovrXoL avtod AaBovTes Ta edécpata eyapnoay, Kal y ” enn 52) TAO ey ! , or A jpEavto evyecOat UTTEp avTOU iva yapw peifova evpyn Tapa A la >) a lal / T® O€oTOTH, OTL OUTWS ExpyoaTo avTOls. II. TavTa TavTA \ , ¢ l b a \ t , - ay Ta yeyovota 0 SeaTrOTNS AVTOV NKOUGE, Kal Tad ALaY Eyapn 5. ii. 6 avrod sec.] air A. 7 &vere\duny] conj. Hollenberg [L,E]; éernyyerdunvy A; dub. L,. Q 6 oixodecrétys adrod] ins. Hollenberg [L,L,E]; om. A. S. 5. i THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 349 ’ \ A / ’ lo) > / ay \ } emt TH mpage: avTov. cuyKaderdpevos Tad Tovs didous , \ ’ n ’ an lal 6 SeoTroTNs Kai TOY VioV avTOD amnyyeidev avTots THY Tpakw 3 aA WwW ” SAN a“ 207 ’ a ie oY ; e \ avTov hv érpakev eri Tols eéopacw avTod ols éXaBev" of bé \ rn €TL padAov cuvevdoKncay yevéoOar Tov Sodrov cuyKAnpo- lal ’ la) VOMOV TO Vid avTod. , \ , ‘ III. Aéyw: Kupie, éyo tavtas tas tapaBoras ov y.vo- >] \ , ie) bP , > , ’ , oK@® ovdé S’vVamat vonaal, Eav pn pot éeTLAVENS avTas. 2. ’ , f a Ilavra cot éridvow, pyci, Kai boa adv Nadnow peETA od, SelEw cor. Tas évtodas | TOU Kupiov dvaAacce, cal eon eva- rn A \ > / ’ ‘ > \ lal peatos TH Oew Kai eyypahyon eis Tov apiOuov Tay durac- / \ > \ ’ A 3\ / b] \ , covtwy Tas évToNas | avTov. 3. édav dé TL ayabov TOONS ,’ n tal 3 Lal An Lal cal , / EKTOS TIS EVTOANS TOU Ocov, ceavT@ wepiroinon So£av Tepic- > \ a ® cotépay, kal éon évdokdtepos Tapa TH Oe@ ob EwedXes elvar. \ \ A na lal éay ovv purddcowy Tas évToXas Tov Ocod rpocbAs Kal tas ty , , 2\ / NetTOUpylas TavTas, Yapnon, €av THPHONS av’Tas KaTa THD , , A, a Eunv evtornv. 4. eyo avT@ Kupue, 0 édy poe évteiry, purakw avto" oida yap ort ov pet euod ci. "Eoopat, dna. Aa / U / 4 n META COV, OTL ToLa’THY TpoOvplay ExeLs THS ayaborroincews, \ \ / Aw: / vA / / kal meta Tavtwy b€ Ecoual, nol, boot ToLavTny TpoOvplay yv € Id ids / / A > Lal éyovow. 5. 1 vnotela avlTn, dyoi, Tnpoupéevwy TOV évTON@V A / UA tov Kupiou Nilay Kady éotw. ovtws ody dudaktets THY vyo- e\ / A na telav TavTny [Hv wédreELs THpEly]. 6. TMpa@Tov TavTev dvdak~au nr \ / n GTO TAVTOS PHMATOS TOVNpOD Kal Taans eTLOU{Las TroVNnpas, td , lal Kal Kabapioov cov THY KapSlay aro TavTwY TOY paTaLoLaToV lal wn / > ya an y ” vA ¢ Tov ai@vos TovTov. éav TavTa pvdAdEns, eotas cor alTn 1 R t ¢/ be / é , \ vnoTela TeXEla. 7. OVTW O€ ToOlNnTELS’ GUYTEAETAS TA Yyé- , > b] / (ole 2K / e , \ , ’ \ ypaupeva, ev exeivyn TH NMEepa 7 vnTTEVELs pendev yevon EF p71) v \ HO \ > A 26 , ba v aptov Kat Udwp, Kal €k TaV edecuaTwY cov av euEdXrES , a Tpeyew auprpndicas THY TocoTNTA THS SaTraVns exelvns THS 4 , a yy ral , > \ / x > A BY nuepas ns eueddes Trovetvy, Swcets avtTo yApa 7 opdave +) >’ VOTEPOUPLEVO, Kal OUTM TaTreLVoppornaels, tv ex THS TaTrELVO- iii. 1 Tas] cas A. 2 Tod Kuplov...€vToNas] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. AE by homeeot. 3 6€] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; yé A. 4 ToLavTnY sec.] conj. Harmer [L,]; ravrqv riv A; idem (riv airy) L,; def. E. cf. James i. 5, 6. 350 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 5. iit , c » \ ’ / \ id lol ‘ A ppocvyns cov o eiAnpws euTAnon THY EavTOdD YruxnVY Kab ” Cia NX rn \ \ ' 2A 3 / evéntat UTrép Tov Tpos Tov Kupiov. 8. éav ovy oT TEhEaNS \ / ¢/ > / ” ¢ / 4 TY VnoTElav WS GoL eveTetNapnv, Ectat 7 Ovaia cov dexTy \ fal e lal \ ” ” ¢ ( e/ \ ¢ mapa TH Qed, Kal Eyypapos ectat n vnateia a’Tn, Kal 7 ¢ ’ f ¢. Netoupyla oTws epyalouévn Kady Kal ihapa é€oTt Kal , / a / lal f \ evrrpoasextos TO Kupig. 9. Tadta o’Tw THpHnoELs aU peTAa a / a . ToY TéEKVWY TOU Kal bAOU TOD olkoVv Gov’ THpHaas bé aUTA x ’ ! pakapwos gon Kal boot ay dKkovoarvTes aUTa THPHTWOL, MaKd- « / a > por éoovtat, Kai boa av aitnowvtar Tapa tov Kupiou , AmpovTat. fal 7 IV. “Eden@nv avtod modda iva pou Sntoon THY Tapa- an 5 la) a) f r > Body Tod aypod Kat Tov SeatroTov Kal TOD apTrEN@VOS Kal a lal / \ b] lal A Tov SovNov TOD YapaKkwaavTos TOY auTeNova [Kal TOY Yapa- a a A > f fa! > a Kv] Kal Tov BoTavev TOV EKTETIAMEVOV EK TOU AuTENOVOS \ a Cla \ A 2 An / a ‘ Kal ToD viod Kat TOV piiov TaV cUUPoVrAMY. TUYNKA yap OTL TapaBorn Tis éoTe Tad’Ta TavTa. 2. 0 € amroKpiOeis 5 ? sy / > A ; por elev’ AvOadns et diay eis TO éeTEepwTay. ovK odethes, A O\ d > A [dnoiv,] érepwray ovdev OdXws" av yap cot én SyrAwOivaL, / suas , / 0 Snr@OnoeTa. Aéyw avT@ Kupie, dca av pou Sei—ns Kat \ , / Mv e \ ’ \ \ \ lel UA pn) SnrOons, MATHY ExoMal Ewpakas a’TA Kal pt VO@V TL ) i € t Se \ r \ \ €oTL’ WoavTws Kal é€av pot TapaBoras AaAnoNS Kal py ,’ / 3 / v ’ Zi r emidvons mol avTas, eis paTnVY Ecomal aKnKOwSs TL Tapa aod. b] / / a) A 3. 6 O€ Wadi atrexpiOn por rEyov' “Os ay, dyat, Soddos 7 a nr ee eld \ , e a 3 A / 3 rn tod Qcod Kal éyn Tov Kupwoy éavtod év tH Kapdia, aiteirat ’ > a / \ Ul \ n \ jap avTov cuvecw Kai NapBaver, Kal Tacay TapaBornpy 9 av , \ \ b] a / \ Cyd fal K / €TINVEL, KAL YYWOTA AUT@ ylvovTat Ta pynyata Tod Kupiov \ ld \ Ta Aeyopeva Ota TapaBordr’ boot Sé BANYpoOL ciot Kal apyot Lad , Lal Lol mpos Thy évTevéw, éxetvor Svotafovow aitetalar Tapa ToD Pe 2 ¢ Q\ ' , / a Kupiov’ 4. 6 6 Kupwos rodvevorrayyvos éott, Kal Tact A ny , ’ ’ a ’ a / \ \ Tois aitovpévois Tap avTovd adiareitTws Sidwot. ov &e ] / (< AY nr € / is) , \ > \ 3 evoeduvapwpévos UO TOU ayiov ayyédouv Kal eiAndws Tap rn Ul ss wn ’ ’ A avTov TotavTnv évTevéww Kal pr) @Y apyos, Sati ovK ait 5. iii. g aitjowvrat] conj. Anger [L,L,]; axovcovra A; def. E. iv. 3 map’ avtov] conj. Gebhardt; map’ aire A. \ lel 7 Ud \ fe ’ ’ fal mapa tov Kupiov cvveow Kat AauBavers tap avTod; 5. L LNA / Se NUKE N ore a2? y Aeyw avT@ Kupre, eyo eyov cé pel Eavtod avaynny éyw oé > A \ \ (ate F \ aiteiaGat Kat o€ éTepwrav’ avd yap po Secxviers TavTa Kal A ’ hal > \ Yj la] S) Nanreis per ewov ef Sé atep cod EBreTrov 7) HKovoy ava, b) oy \ t) a npotov av tov Kuptov iva pot dndo67. oe / / \ Y rh, a V. Kirov cot, ¢yoi, Kat apti, bt Twavodpyos «i Kal ’ / A \ / a A avOaéns, émepwrav Tas émidvoets THY TapaBorav. é7rELd7) s ¢/ / ee > Us \ \ la) 6€ oUTwm Tapapovos el, emiAvow cou THY TapaBodnV TOD ’ fol \ a A Lal >’ / / vf \ aypov Kat THY AoLT@OV THY akoAoVOar TavTaY, va yvooTa a a 5h ” a / \ / 7 ¢ . Tat TOLNONS AVTA. AKOVE VU), dyat, Kat GuVvle AUTA. 2. O cf.S. Matt. bd \ € t e@ 7 5) ¢ \ / a 2 Ae , xiii. 38. aypos 0 Kocpmos otTOS eat: O b€ KUpLosS TOU aypod, 0 KTicas nN f \ > / ’ \ \ b / ¢ \ Ta TavTa Kal atapticas avtTa Kai évdvyauwaas. 6 8é cf. Ps. An ¢ a A , CIN / € Ixvii. dodNos 0 vids TOD Ocod eoriv: ai dé dumedot 6 ads [obTds] (xviii. 28. ] \ , A > / e \ / e ‘/ eat ov avTos éepvTevoer. 3. of Sé yapaxes of [drytor] ” (eee a / ¢ a \ \ Sie alae ayyerot erat TOU Kuptov ot cuyxpatobytes Tov Nady avTod e \ / Fer) / BI fel hd A Ces , ati 0€ Boravat ai éxretirpévas x TOD auTEed@vos, at aVvopiat A , na a) / A ’ A etait THY SovAwY TOU Beod' Ta Sé edécwata a éreprpev avT@ cf. S. John > A / 3 pS) \ x5 a fal ’ a Ss \ ly. 34- €x TOU Seimvov, ai évToAal Eiow As wKEe TO AAG avTod bia an la) ? a. }- \ Uy e / f TOU Viov avTOU' of Sé Piro Kal avuPovXroL, of dyLoL ayyEXoL a L Eee ? / a / ¢ ot Tp@Tot KTicOeyTes 1 O€ ATrOdnuLa TOD SeoTroToV, 6 ypdovos ( / > \ / b) A / ’ A 0 TEpiocevwY Els THY Tapovoiay avTov. 4. éyw alT@ / / \ Lal / > \ \ ’ / Kvpue, weyddos Kat Oavpactés [ravta éoti] Kai évddEws U 7 \ fea fi 8) \ +8 / A A Joe TAVTA EVEL. pn OV, Hnwl, yo Novvauny TadTAa vonaat ; OVE iA a 3 , aA / Ni “ea By / érepos Tav avOpwrwv, Kay lay ocuveTOS 7 TLS, OV dUVaTaL A b] U yy / U / / \ / > vonoat avTa. eT, Pnwi, KUpLE, SHAWTOV pol O MEA GE ErTE- A / / porav. 5. eye, pnotv, et te Bovrer, Acari, dnui, [Kvpre,] c e\ a aA 3 t / aA ’ A A 6 vids TOV Meod ets SovAOV TpdToV KeiTas ev TH TapaBorn ; , / an ¢ VI. “Axove, dnaciv: eis SovA0U TpoTroy ov KelTaL O vids fe a > ’ > > / / a \ U Tov Qeov, adr eis eEovoelay peyadynv Keira Kal KupLoTyta. A t > A / / ¢ \ \ Ilas, dynut, cvpte; ov vod. 2. “Ore, dnoiv, 6 Oecs tov =) lal > r Ayan: »” \ \ 4 \ J Gu“TEX@Va EpUTEvaE, TOUT EoTL TOV NaOV EKTLCE, Kal Trapé- a A ’ A / \ ’ I SwKe TO Vid avTOD: Kal 6 vids KaTéaTHTE TOUS ayyéXoUS er Vv. 3 ovykparovyres] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,]; cvyxporodvres A; def. E. ait tert.] ins. Hilgenfeld; om. A. vi. 1 ov pri.] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. ci. Ps. xvi- rte cf. John x.
18.  352 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 5. vi le) ’ \ ’ Lal aUTOUS TOU GUYTNPELY aUTOVS* Kal AUTOS Tas auapTias avTOV éxalapioe ToANA KOTTLATAS Kal TOANOUS KOTTOUS NYTANKOS* ’ \ \ , a ” , * t jae | ovdels yap Suvatat cxapedaoat aTep KOTrOU 7) LOxXOov. 3. avTOS mm / X e / Los a ” ’ n \ ovv Kabapicas Tas awaptias Tov aod EderEev adTois Tas / a lel \ ’ a \ / a ” \ n tpiBous THs wns, Sovs avTois Tov vowov dy EXaBe Tapa TOD \ > 6 / / d ,’ \ ‘ / b] matpos avtov. 4.| Brémes, pnolv, Ste avtos KUpios eoTe lal lol OF / “a iN \ lal \ , n ToD aod, éEovciay Tacay AaB@Y Tapa TOD TaTpos avTOD. | Ore 6€ 6 KUpLos cvpBovrOY EXaBe Tov vidv avTod Kal TovS évdoEous aryryéXous Trepi THS KANpovosias Tov SovAOV, aKoveE. 5. TO Tvedpa TO yoy TO Tpoov, TO KTicav Tacay THY , , ¢ \ > U \ ? / cf s KTioW, KaT@KLoEV 0 Meds els capka nv HBovrAETO. avTn ovV ¢€ / > ® , \ lal \ ied b] / al n oapé, év KaT@KNTE TO Treva TO GyLoV, EdoVAEVTE TO / A b] / \ € / a A TVEVMATL KANWS eV TEUVOTHTL Kal ayvela TropevOeioa, pndeVv dAwS pliavaca TO Tvedma. 6. ToALTEVoaMEeVNnY OvY avTHY Kados Kal ayvds Kal cuyxoTidcacay TO TvEevpaTL Kab cuvepynoacay é€v tavTl Tpayuatt, loyupos Kal avdpeiws avactpadeicav, peTa TOD TMVEvpaTOS TOU ayiov etAaTO KoL- vovov' mpece yap [tO Kupio] 9 mopela THs capKes TavTS, ad , a a a 7 OTL ovK emiavOn eri THS yHs Exyovta TO TVEDWA TO ayLoV. 7. ovpPovrov ovv éhaBe Tov vidv Kat Tos ayyéXous ToOvsS evdofous, iva Kal n capE airy, SovrAevoaca TO TvevpaTe ) 7) P 1], OOUAEV ‘ ld AMELTTWS, TX TOTOV TWA KaTacKnVeTews, Kal yn SoEn Tov \ A / ’ lal ’ / a ah \ pucbov | ris SovAelas avTHS aToN@AEKEevat* Taca yap capé a ’ atrormperat pc Oov | 7 evpeOeioa apiavtos Kal dominos, ev F \ a dA / ” \ / a TO TVvEDWA TO Aylov KaT@Knoev. 8. EvELS Kal TaUTNS THS TmapaBorns Thy éridvasy. VII. Hudpavénv, dni, Kkvpce, Tavtny thy éidvow > U wv a / \ / / f akovoas. “Axove viv, noi’ THY capKa cov Ta’TnY dirAaccE \ NG SNIP \ A \ a 5) 5) xkalapav Kat ALLAVYTOV, LWA TO TTVEVULA TO KATOLKOUV EV auTn 5. vi. 2 ad’r&v] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; judy A. oxagedoat] conj. Geb- hardt [E]; cxagjoa A; dub. L,L,. 4 Br\éres...av7o0] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. AE by homeeot. mept] conj. Anger [L,L,]; wapa A; def. E. 6 T@ kvpiw] ins. Harmer [L,E]; deo L,; om. A. 7 THs Oovdelas ... jug Boy] ins. Gebhardt [L,]; om. A by homeeot.; def. E; al. L,. 5. Gien THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 353 , b) a \ e paptupnon avtTn, Kal SdixatwOy cov cap&. 2. Brére , = x / , pntrote avaBn ert THY Kapdiay cov THY GapKa cov TaUTHY \ 2 \ XA a \ pOaptny eivat, Kai Tapaypnon avTH év place Twi. éay \ / \ / a \ \ A [yap] pravns THY capKa cov, mLavels Kal TO TVEDUA TO GyLOV" , ) éav Sé puavns frnv capKat, ov Enon. 3. Hi Oé tus, dnpi, 3 A Kuple, yeyovev ayvota TpoTépa piv akovabdct Ta pnwata lal lal fal if / , ° an TavTa, TAs cwOn 6 dvOpwTos Oo pLavas THY GapKa avTOD ; Ie ’ , A Ilepi tév mpotépwr, dyciv, ayvonuatwv TO Oe@ pov dvvarov a a Lo / le tacw Sodvat: avtov yap éott Taca éEovcia. 4. [adrXAa vov / / \ c , ¢ / / dvAacce ceavTov, Kat o Kupios 0 mavtToxpatwp, toXv- A 3 oTayxXvos OV, Tepl TOV TpOTEépwY ayvonuaTaY lacy SwceL, | \ , a éav TO AowTroy jn pLavns gov THY capKa pNdée TO TvEdMA’ 3 / \ 4 > \ v ’ t A appotepa yap Kowa éott Kat aTep AdAHAWY plavOnvat } Suvatat. aupotepa ovv KaBapa dvdacce, Kai 67 m ov duvatat. auporepa ov pa dvracce, jon TG Oc. [IlapaBonry $’.] fi rs A ” \ / \ / I. Kaénpevos év TO oikw pou Kal S0€afwv Tov Kupsov / ® / \ a A a Tepl TAVTM@V OV EwpaKely, Kal oUCHT@VY TEpt THY EVTOAWY, A \ NAL ES: \ \ 14 \ U OTL KaNal Kal duvaTtai Kal tXapai Kat évdoEor cal duvapevat Ca \ > / v. bd > a / ” coca Wuxnyv avOpedmrov, éEdeyov év éuavTa: Makapios Ecouar \ A lal y a nv x / éav Tais évToNais TavTats TopEeVOw, Kal Os av Ta’TaLS TropEevOy, / ‘ ¢e A a / / fakaplos éoTtat. 2. ws TavTa ev ewavT@ éAadovY, BETO >? \ I] / fy / \ , lal - / avtov é€aidyns Tapakalynmevoy mot Kal Néyovta TavTa* Ti a \ a ’ A e > / / ’ Supuyels Tepl Tav EvTON@Y WV ToL éveTELhauNY ; KaNal elowy* th \ / 3 o lj lal / dAws pn Oupuynons, add’ éevdvoas THY TictwW Tod Kupiou, Ss Se rs Y P \ ! , > Re Kal €v avTais Topevon’ eyo yap ce évduvauwow ev avTais. ho Ce 35: \ / 4 ’ A / la) 3. avTat al evToNal avpdopoi eiot Tots peNNOVOL METAVOELY* SEN \ N A ’ lal / ce I)! €av yap un TopevOdaow ev avtats, Eis waTny é€oTiV Nn wEeTaVOLA re n e Es} lol , / \ / avT@V. 4. Ol OvY pEeTaVoodYTES aTTOBaNXETE Tas TroVNnpLAS a IA , Uy C a , TOU ai@vos TovTov Tas éexTpLBovcas vuas’ éevdvoapevor é cad > / aA \ Tacav apetny SiKatocvyns Suvncecbe THpHaaL Tas évTONAS vii. 2 yap] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. AE. 4 GANG vov...ducev] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. A; sed nunc custodi te E. AP, FATH. 23 cf. James 1. 27. cf. James Vv. 5. 354 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 6. i \ / / re e an TavTas Kal pnKéTe TpooTiOévat Tais apaptias vuarv. | éav > , \ A > ’ a ody pnkeTe pnoev TpocOnTe, amoatnaecbe aro THY TpoTépwv tal ¢ lal / s a a dpaptiav vpav. | ropeverbe oty tais évtodXais pou TavTass, a \ / lad Led / > lal Ul kal Cnoeobe TH Oew. Taira [wavta] wap éwod NeXaAnTat € ral \ \ \ lal na ,’ \ es os a ‘¢ vulv. 5. Kal META TO TAVTA AAANHCAaL AVTOV MET Epov, NEEL eit > > a \ / \ , a por’ “Aywpev eis aypoy, kat deiEw cot Tos Toimévas TOV v / / \ Yj mpoBatov. “Ayopev, pnt, Kuple. Kat 7AOopen eis TL Trediov, / / / kat Serxvver por Trolméva veavioxoy évdeduuévoy civOecw id , tal lh / ” \ / iwatiov, TO xpepaTe KpoKwdn. 6. EBooKke dé tpoBaTa IN / \ \ U fa) ¢ A rn > A TOANG Alay, Kal Ta TpOBaTa TAaUTA wWaEL TPYPOVTA HY Kal I a Not ie Ae. a ie > a. ‘ Nav omatadevta, Kal ihapa Hv cKLpToOVYTA wbE KaKEt’ Kal ¢. \ io \ A / b) fa! QUTOS O ToLmNY TavU ihapos HY ETL TO TroLmvi~ avTOD’ Kal >) \ e > , lal EL e \ > / \ > Lal avTn n idea Tov TroLmévos ihapa HY Nilay, Kal év Tots Tpo- “ Bartow TepieTpexe. f / a II. Kai rye wor: Brérrets Tov trowméva TovTov ; Brézra, , , e , , a \ . , onut, KUpte. Odtos, pnotv, ayyedos Tpudyns Kal amatns \ lel a lal éotiv. ovtTos éxtpiBes tas wuyds Tov dSovAwY TOD Oeov \ , a \ , \ nr ’ yf 5 lal , Af Kal KaTaoTpépes avTovs ato THS adnOElas, aTaT@Y avTOUS a > / a a > 4 9 3 f > tais émOupiats tats tovnpais, év aig amoduvTat. 2. éme- \ lal A an nr lal lal NavOavovtat yap Tév évToh@v Tod Oeod Tov CavtTos, Kab b) 6 \ ~ ’ Topevovtat atratas Kal Tpvpais patatas, Kal aToNdvVTAL id \ Lo ’ la \ \ >’ / \ \ > UTO TOU ayyéXov ToUTOV, TiVa pev els BavaTov, TLVa 5€ Ets ie / b] fal Tad ’ / BI \ / KatapOopav. 3. eyo avT@e’ Kupte, ov ywoonw eyo Th > 5) / \ hens , ” fe MEN éotiv eis Oavatov, Kal Ti eis KatapOopay. “AxKove, dnow* a 5 ll ¢ \ \ lal e / >] e >) eldes TpoPata iNapa Kal TKIPTHVTA, OUTOL Elo OL aTrecgra- J b) \ lol lol >) f \ / € \ opévot amo Tov cod eis TédXoS Kal TapadedwKoTeEs EavTOdS a , an A t 5 , tals émiOupiats TOD ai@vos TOVTOU. €Vv TOUTOLS OvY METAVOLA lal ’ yy ees: \ IN Visv; a A ,’ ’ \ Cons ove got" 6TL Kal TO Ovoua Tov Deod Ss avTovs Brac- fal a / e \ t Uy. 2) e\ \ pnmeitat. tTav TowovTwv n Con Oavatos éotw. 4. a Oe 6. i. 4 ay ovv...0uv] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; al. E; om. A by homeeot. 5 dywpev sec.] dyouey A. kat 7\Oomev K.7-A.] From this point to the end of Sim. vi. (with a few breaks) ps-Ath. (Doctr. ad Antioch. c. 18, 19) becomes an authority for the text. 6 wepiérpexe] AL,L,E; ps-Ath. adds Kat GAda mpoBara eldov (MS ldudv) craradwyTa Kal Tpuparra év Tory Evi, ob mevTOL OKIpTOVTd. 70. 58 \ Lal rr’ as cea t t eloes mpoBaTa pn oKipT@YTa, aA’ ey Evi TOTM Bookopeva, a , > € / A A OUTOL Elo Of TrapadedwKoTeEs pév EavTovs Tals Tpudais Kal ’ , AY e atratats, els 6€ TOV Kupsov ovdev €PXacdynuncav. ovTOL ovv > b) \ A > / , KatepUappévot cic aro THS adnOeias ev TovTOLs éXtis éoTE / «e / tal ¢ > petavotas, év 7 dSvvavtat Goat. 1 KatapMopa ody édrrida »” ’ / ' ¢ \ , >) / »” > Mot é éxyet avavedoews Twos, 0 6€ Pavatos aTa@deay exer aiwrov. t / / 5. wadw TpoéBnmev puKpov, Kal Sevxvver pot Troiméva péyav ¢ an / , @oel aypiov TH idéa, TeptKeipmevoy Sépwa aiyerov NevKOV, Kal / \ Cd > \ fe! yy \ (yt Ma f Tpav TWa eiyev ETL TOV WuwV, Kat paBdSov ckKANpaY Aiav ae Si; Bg \ U U A \ \ , Kai ofous exyovoav, Kal pacTiya peyadny’ Kal TO BrAEupa 5 , di a / ) , a => eixe TepiTiKpov, Wate PoPHOHVaL we avTOV* ToLODTOY EiyE TO f > ¢ \ , \ / Bréupa. 6. ovTos ovyv o Trouuny TapeNauBave Ta TpoBaTa n fa / lal \ tal GTO TOU TOLMéVvOS TOD VEavicKoD, ExElVa TA OTATAAwYTA Kal lol A ’ \ TpudavTa, un ocKipTovTa Oé, Kat EBadXev ata els TLva TOTTOV \ > \ , 6 A Kpnvedn Kat axavOaddn Kal TpLBorWdn, Bote ato TOV , ral / / \ / axavOav Kat TpiBorov pn dvvacbat éexTrréEat Ta TpoPaTa, a ’ ' rn GXN [eumréxecOar tais axavOats Kai TpLBorots* TadTa ovr] b] / > / > lal ’ , \ / éumeTreypwéeva €BooKovto év Tais axavOais Kai TpLBoross, \ I > , / (eRe a] [NF \ & 3 A Kal Niav éTaXaiT@povy Saipomeva UT avToD' Kal GE KaKeEt / ’ / A > , ’ r 2 , / \ TEpinAaVVEY AUTA, Kal avaTravol avTols ovK edidov, Kab 7d > > an \ ! ey a OAwS ovK evcTalotdcay Ta TpoBaTa éxeiva. / 3 ede FAS df Ill. Bndéra@v ovv avta otTw pactiyovpeva Kal TaXaiTO- , > , 3 b] ’ lal vA tf ’ U \ povmeva éXvTrovpNY eT avTols, OTL OUTwWS EBacavifovTO Kal > \ WA > , A , A Se9 A avoxnv hws ovK Eixov. 2. éyw TO Toipéve TO peT €wov n is e e eG AarodvTe’ Kupte, tis €otwv ovToOS 0 Touuny oO [o’Tws] domday- \ \ \ cd \ / b] \ \ ff XVOS Kal TLKPOS Kat ONS py OTTAAYYULCOmeEVoS ert TA TpOBaTa rn a Ys ’ \ c v A 7 2) \ tavta; Otros, dyoiv, éotiv 6 ayyedos THS TYywwpias’ éx Sé lal ’ / A / lal TaV ayyékov TOY Sikaiwy éeoTi, Keiwevos Sé ETL THS TYLWpias. ’ , ’ \ lo) a 3. waparapBaver ovv Tovs atoTAavnOévtas amo ToD Oecov , A \ ’ A 2a Kal tropevOévtas tais émiOupiaius Kal aTatais Tov ai@vos / \ a > , \ v fd > a \ ToUTOV, Kal Tiyuwpel avTous, KaOads aELot eiot, Sewais Kab Toukinas Timwpiats. 4. "HOedov, pnui, Kvpie, yvevae Tas ii. 4 évi] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. ps-Ath.; def. A. ae cf. James ry (0) MBE 356 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 6. iil ! / eer ) wv er e motkiias TavTas Tiywwpias, ToTaTral eiow. “Axove, pnoiv' ab , / \ / , > / Toikirat Tyswpiar Kal Bacavot Biwtikal eior Bacavor: TYLw- an A € ‘ / e Ae / e Ad 2D / poovrat yap ot pev Enuiais, ot 6€ VoTEpHcecy, of O€ acOeveras , e \ / > / e \ ¢€ / e ‘ mouinass, of dé [racy] axatactacia, of d€ UBpifouevos VIO dvakiwv Kai érépats TroNAals mpadkeot TaaxXovTEs* 5. TOAOL yap axatactatobvtes tais Bovdais avtav émiBaddovTat , r lal mora, Kal ovdey avTois bAwWS TpoXwpEl. Kal EéyovaLY Eavtovs pu) evodovacbar év tais mpakeow avtay, Kal ovK ,’ , ,’ a ee \ f 7 ” , avaBaiver avtov érl tv Kapdiay 6Tt éempakav trovnpa, a] a J = a GAN aitidvtat tov Kipiov. 6. btav obv OuBdow Tracy Oriver, ToTE euot mapadioovtar ets ayaOny Taweiay Kai icxupotovodvtas év TH mloter TOU Kuptov, Kat Tas doumras ely a A Dag ! a / > a nuépas HS Cans avtav Sovrevover TG Kupio ev nxabapa / 2\ \ , , > / es \ / xapota’ | éav dé petavonowat, ToTe avaBaiver et THY Kapdiay , a \ ” ac ” / \ ' / \ avTav Ta épya & €rpatay rovnpa, Kat ToTe doEafover Tov y ¢ / f<03 \ s ” Ocov, NéyouTes OTL Sixatos KpiTNs é€oTt Kat Sixaiws Errabov ¢ \ ‘ U b] lal ‘ \ A A éxaotos Kata Tas mpakets avtov: SovNevover Sé outro TO Kupio év xabapa Kxapdia | aitadv, Kai evodobytas év macy , ’ a / \ lo) Le / ¢, x mpaker avTav, NauSavovtes Tapa Tod Kupiov Twavta bca av Sian A \ L t \ / sex aitavTa’ Kat tote d0fafoucr. tov Kvpioy ote éuot mape- Sd0ncav, Kal ovKéTL ovdev TaTYOVTL TOY Tovnpar. IV, Aéyo avrd: Kupie, re pot todto dyrwcov. Ti, / > a > ” / ‘ A ’ \ / dnoiv, éritnreis ; Ei dpa, dni, xvpie, Tov avTov xpovov e lel a Bacavifovrat of tpupavtes Kal aTraT@pmevol, bcov Tpudact Wane a , : \ 324K , / Kal atatovTar; Eyer por’ Tov avtov ypovov Bacavifovras. 2. | Erayiotov, byt, xvpie, Bacavifovrar: | édec yap Tovs t/ tal A ee J a Ave i ovTw Tpudertas Kal ériNavOavopévous Tod Ocod ErraTdacias wv a lal BacavitecOar. 3. réyer. pot: “Agpawv ef Kal ov voets THS / \ / ’ \ > f / / ’ x Bacavov thv Sivauiv. Ei yap évoovv, dnui, Kipre, ovK av / i éernpwteyv iva por Snrtwons. “Axove, dnoiv, audotépwv thy / a an \ a / A a \ duvapwy, {THs tpudhs kat THs Bacavov]. 4. THs Tpudns Kal 6. ili. 6 éay dé...xapdig] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; def. E; al. ps-Ath.; om. A by homceot. iv. 2 €AdxucTov...Bacavlfovrat] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; def. E ps-Ath.; om. A by homeot. 3 / ¢ / e/ 3 \ / Lal \ , Cf, , aTaTNS 0 Xpoves Wpa éoTl ula? THS Sé Bacavov 7 wpa TpLa- ¢ lal , > KoVvTa NuEepav Suvau exe. €ay ovy piav nucpav Tpudynon Tis pe pe) lal Uy, ¢€ fe lal Kal aratnOy, play oé jwépav BacavicO7, Orov éviavTov ioxver 7) Gr OP A a / Spee , nuepa THs Bacavov. boas ovv npuépas Tpudynon Tis, TOTOUTOUS 3 x / / Ko / / A A eviavtous Pacaviterar. Brérreis ovv, dyoiv, oT. THs Tpudis \ ’ , ¢ lal Kal aTaTns 0 ypovos éhaxyioTOs eoTL, THS Sé TLwplas Kal Bacavovu Tonvs. V. “Ors, dnt, Kvple, ov vevonKka brws Tept TOD YpdvoU TS atTatTns Kal tpupdns Kal PBacavov, TnNavyéoTEpov pot Sydwoov. 2. atroxpiGels pot Aéyer' “H adpoovvn cov trapa- t > \ > , \ , , \ fuovoes €oTl, Kal ov Oédets cov THY Kapdiav KaBapicat Kal / A a / / / ¢ f fad Sovrevew TO Ocwd. PréErre, [hyot,] uynmote 6 ypdvos TANnPwOH, Kal ov appar evpeOys. dxove ovv,[pyoi,] Kabads Bovre, iva vonoNsS aUTa. 3. 0 Tpupey Kal aTaTopmevos play nuépay Kal mpacowy & BovreTat TOA HY adppocvyny évdéduTat Kal ov a “ a al voet THY mpakw iv Trovet: els THY avpLoy émiNavOaveTat A ¢ \ yap Ti Tpo plas érpakev> n yap Tpudn Kal adratn pynpwas , ” \ \ > , A ] / ¢ \ / Nee: ovk éxer Sia THY appoovyny Hy evdéduTat* 7) Sé Tiwa@pia Kal U v4 an a b] / / ¢ , la Bacavos Stay KorddAnOn TO avOpdTr@ play nyépay, méxpls eviauTov Tiwpeita Kal BacaviteTas’ pvnwas yap peyadas ” ¢ / \ ¢ if / 5 \ éyer 7) Tyswpla Kal 4 Badoavos. 4. Bacavifcpevos ovv Kal TLLwMpOUpEvos OoV TOV evLaVTOY pYnmoVvEvEL TroTE THS TPUPNS Kal atratns, Kal ywooKes OTe S¢ avTa Tacyet TA ToVnpda. aA Ce v € a \ > / ef he mas ovv dvOpwios 6 Tpupav Kal atratodmevos o’Tw Bacavi- vA ” \ > 4} f e \ Py 6 f erat, OTe eyovtes Cwny eis Oavatov éavTo’s TapadedwxKact. a / lal 5. Ilotas, dni, cvpie, tpupal eiot BraBepai; Ilaca, pai, A Re ale , AY So sony An \ \ mpakis tpupyn eats TO avOpdrra, 0 éay noéws Tron’ Kal yap Ges Ul By oe a f We \ A aie \ ¢ 6 o&0yoXos TO éavToU Taber TO ikavoy TroLav Tpupa’ Kal oO \ NpaKe , \ ¢ r Ne / V te poorxos Kal 0 pwéOucos Kal 0 KaTaNAaXOS Kal Oo WevaoTyS Kal O \ he MNEOVERTNS Kal 6 aTooTEpNTNS Kal O ToUTOLWe Ta opmola lal A *O7 f \ e \ aA. A a: DDN a Tov 7TH Lola voow@ TO ikavov Toler’ Tpupa ovy emt TH fo! A / al mpaées avTov. 6. atrat wacat ai Tpupal BraBepat etou Trois v. I 67t] conj. Harmer [L,L,E]; é7: A; def. ps-Ath. 2 kabapicac] Kabapjoa A; def. ps-Ath. 358 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 6. v / r lal \ / io A b] / / e SovAols TOD Oeod. Sia TavTas ody Tas aTaTAaS TAaTYOVOL OL / \ ak S \ \ \ Tyswpovpevot Kal Bacavifopevot. 7. eiciv bé Kal Tpupat cwlovaat Tors avOpwmous’ Todo yap ayaba épyalopuevot A lel e lal ¢ lal / dh i € \ Tpupaot TH éEavT@v noovn pepopevot. aivtn ow 1 Tpudy / / , an , fal r \ \ r cuppopos ots Tos SovAOLs TOD Ocod Kai Cory TepuTroveitat an ’ 4 an / e \ \ \ id T@ avOpaT@ TH TOLOVTM* AL 5é BraBepat Tpvpai at mpoerpy- a rn \ pévat Bacavovs Kal Tyswpias avtols mepiTrovovyTal’ éav e nr Sé émipévwct Kal pur) pwetavonaowor, Oavatov éavtois tTept- TOLOUVTAL. \ [IlapaBory ©] 5 b] \ \ Mera nuépas oriyas eldov avtov eis TO Tediovy TO avTO o \ \ l c / Nees . 1 ns Omrou Kal Tos TroLmevas EwpaKely, Kal Néyer woe’ Ti erruEnTels ; + fe Tlaperpr, nui, Kipte, iva TOV TroLMeva TOV TYLMpNTHY KEAEVTNS an lal / fal / éx Tov olxou pou é&edOety, OTe Niav pe OriBer. Ac? ce, dyai, a y € OrLBhvac’ ovtw yap, dnot, mpocetakev 0 Evdokos ayyedos TA \ Cy , f n / U ( / mept cov’ Oéret yap ce TeipacOnvat. Ti yap, pypl, Kvpse, Ul la tA A ’ Z A eroinca oUTw Tovnpov, va TO ayyéX@ TOVTM Trapacoba ; 2. "Axove, dnciv’ ai pev apaptiat cov troddal, aA’ ov nr t/ an 3 A , fal 5 > 9 \¢ Sv 7, TOTAUVTAL WOTE TO AYYéA@ TOUT TrapadoOHVaL’ AX O OLKOS ’ aN c cov peyddas avopias Kal auaptias eipyacato, Kal Tape- / Cc Oo. v7 > \ a ” +) a \ \ muxpavOn 6 évdokos ayyeXos emt Tois epyous avT@v, Kal dia lal See , f \ a iv ’ an ToUTO éxédevaé oe Ypdvoy Twa OALEHVaL, va KaKeEivOL peTA- ’ lal vonowat kal KaSapicowow éavtovs aro Tacns émOupias Tod rn i oa / a aiévos TovTov. OTav ovy pEeTavonawot Kal KalapicOdct, ’ ¢ / lel n TOTE ATOOTHGETAL O AyyEdos THS Tiuwplas. 3. NEyW aVTO: aint: > ’ a an ] / / A ce Kupte, ef éxelvor Totadta eipyacavto iva TapamixpavOy 6 » L339 A / Vy évdoEos ayyeNdos, Ti éy@ erroinca ; "AXAos, hyciv, ov SdvayTat al an \ x 5 e rn €xetvot OAuBHvat, éav pr) ov 9 KEepars) Tod olKkouv [dAov] rh ay an \ / > / b) rn OrxLBns' cov ydp OrBopuévou é& avaykns Kaxelvoe OALB- > fal fal ~ covra, evotadovvtos Sé cod ovdeulay Sdvavtar Orbe y ’ b} > / / éyew. 4. “AXN’ dod, dnul, KUpte, wetavevonxacw é€& OANS , ’ lel Ss / , Kapolas avtav. Oida, dnol, Kayo bre petavevonxacwy é& 7. 1 mdpeyu) map’ éwol A. 2 kadaplowow] kabapjowow A. 3 Odov]} ins. Harmer [L,L,]; om. AE. dé cov] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; 6...A. Sap] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 359 a , ’ fede A - , ’ \ a OAns Kapdias avTav' Tay ovy peTavoovyvTav evOs Soxels € / 2 te eo] lal a Tas apaptias apierGat ; ov TavTed@s’ adda Sel TOV peTa- fa) / \ a \ voovrvta Bacavioat Thy éavTov Wuyny Kai TaTevodpovncas ? / LE. ’ na ) aA \ aN By 3 , év taon mpage. avtod icxyvpos Kat OURyvar ev Tacats 7 f- ¢ / Orixpect ToiKinals’ Kai €av vVTrevéyKn Tas Oriers Tas émrep- / ’ n / id NOMEVAS AUTO, TAVTWS OTAAYYVITOnCETAL 6 Ta TaVTA KTiCAS Ne) / N\. 36 / / ’ \ A de ¢ Kal évovvamdcas Kal laciy Tia doce’ 5. Kal ToT oTay [6 \ n la) N \ f ’ ®cos] Tod weTavoodytos Kabapav idn Thy Kapdiav amo TayTés TOVNpOV TPAyWaTos. Tol dé Tuphépov éoTl Kal TM OiKW COU a lal 7 , “ / lat vov OruBiva. ti 5é Got TOAAA eyo; OALAHVAL ce Sei, ‘fh an ¢ Kalos tpocétakev 6 ayyedos Kupiou éxeivos, 0 tapadz.dovs ry ps \ a > / a , cr issih ae éuol’ Kal TovTO evyapictes TH Kupim oT. a&iov ce e / an 8 a / \ fa} a v4 \ , \ nyNTAaTO TOV TpOdnA@cai cot THY OriNrLY, va TrPOyVvOUS aUvTNnY ¢ / > a / ’ A / \ ’ ’ fal umTevéyKns toyupos. ©. éyw avT@ Kupie, od per’ ewod Sos l A A i yivou, Kal [evxorws] Sumjpoowat tacav OrjWpw UreveyKely. 5) , 4 \ n, 2? ! a \ \ ” Eyo, dynoiv, coma meta cov" épwtncw Oé Kal Tov ayyedXov \ \ / b] TOV TyLwpHTHY iva ce EhKadpotépws OAiy* adr’ Odyov ypdvov , \ , > , y \ 5 OrxuBnon, Kal Tadw atokatactabnon eis TOY otKOY cov’ Lal \ lol ral pOvov Tapdpeivov TaTreLvoppovayv Kal NeLToupyov TH Kupio a Uy. \ \ / ¢ \ év Ka0apad Kapdia, Kal Ta TéKVa GOV Kal O OikKds Gov, Kal / > a > a “2 > \ / mopevou év Tais évToAals pov ais cou evTéARopat, Kal duvn- / c / > A \ \ oF: CETAL TOV 1 peTAVOLA LoxUpa Kal KaOapa ecivas’ 7. Kal éav U \ a A Tavtas dvAaEns peTa TOV oiKOU DOU, aTOaTHGETAL Taga a > \ a, Nie) veuant , , / > Q Ores a0 cov’ Kal ato TavTwy &é, pyc, aTootnaetat a an A U A Orirpis, Gcot av Tals évToNais wou TavTaLs TropevOacur. [Mapafon} 1] I. "EdecEé prow itéay [weyarnv] cxerrafoveay media Kat opn, Kal UTo THY oKeTny THS itéas TavTes éEXnAVOacLY of / Ayes) f ji: ty / \ ” fal KeKAnMEvolL T@ OvOmaTL Kupiov. 2. elaTynKes S€ yyEeXos TOU @ 4 €060s] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A. tacw] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; isxtv A. 5 drav 6 Beds] conj. Harmer; wdvtws A; st L,3 si camen L,3 cum E. xkabapav...rmv xapdtay] conj. Harmer [L,L,E]; xa@apés A. 6 ev- xédws] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. A. xadapa] L,L,E; pref. mdoy A. 7 éav sec.] conj. Hilgenfeld; & A. 360 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8.1 4 / , Kupiou évdo£os Nav i nros Tapa tHv itéav, Spérravov Exov / \ ” / 2. \ a ee Z 4 , / A“ péya, Kal éxoTTe KAdbovs ato THS iTéas, Kal éTrEdidov TO ~ lal / | \ lal ‘ Aa® TO oKeTTalopéevw Vr THS iTéas* puKpa Sé paBdia é7reE- / +! al id \ lal \ \ \ / lal didov avrtois, doel Tyyvaia. 3. peta Sé TO TavTas aPelv Ta paBdia €Onxe TO Spétravoy 6 dyyéXos, Kal TO Sévdpov exelvo ¢ \ s 2 \ oe , a tir > , Nt ris +: ‘ae Uyles Hv olov Kat éwpaxew ato. 4. eOavpavoy dé eyo eV > tal / cal iy , / \ / €uauT@ Néywv: Ids tocovTwv KNabov KeKoupév@v TO SévOpov Uylés €oTL; Eyer poor 6 Trosunv' M1) Oavpate ei To dévdpov ¢ \ »” / / / v Rf / Uyes Ewetve TOTOUTM@Y KAaOwV KOTEVTMY. aes SE Ews TAVTA idys, Kal SntwOncetai cou TO Ti eat. 5. 0 ayyEédos O éTt- Sedwxos TO AaG Tas paBdous Taw amnTEL aw avTaY* Kal \ ” dA \ 3 r \ , / A o Kabos éaBov, ovTw Kai éxaXodvTO TpOs avTOV, Kat els Exac- Tos avT@V aTedidov Tas paBdous. éAawBave SE 6 wyyEros an r / \ ' au ' = tov Kupiov cal KatTevoes avtas. ©. Tapa Twev éapPBave Tas paBdous Enpas cal BeBpwpévas Ws vTO onTOS* éxéNevoEV ¢ ” ‘ \ / | Co A > A A 6 adyyeXos ToUs Tas ToLavTas PadBdovs émidedwKoTas ywpis iatacOa. 7. €repor O€ émedidocay Enpas, adr ovK joav / € x / \ f > A \ / BeBpopévat v7r0 onTds* Kal ToVTOUS ExéNEUTE Ywpis icTacOat. 8. Erepos Sé érediSovy nutEnpovs* Kai odToL ywpis iotavTo. 9. Erepor S& émediSovy tas paBdous avTav jurEnpous Kal oxXLopmas éyovoas: Kal ovTOL ywpis ictavTo. | 10. Erepot dé > / \ er rye \ \ \ > , émredidouy Tas paBdous avTaY YAwpas Kal cyLTpas éxoUcas* \ e \ vA v4 413 / x CE Kal ovTou ywpls ictavto. | II. Erepor dé érredidouy Tas paBdous NC? \ \ ASC t \ Lo \ v4 TO nutov Enpov Kal TO Hutov YAwpoV* Kai ovTOL ywpis ioTarTo. 12. €repor 5¢ mpocépepov Tas paBdous avTav ta dvo pépy a ey ! \ \ / ian \ 2 \ Tis paBdouv xAwpa, TO de Tpitov Enpov' Kal ovTOL ywpls ioravtTo. 13. €repo de emredioouv Ta Svo pépn Enpa, TO dé / tes et NV e ny tpitov YAwpov' Kal ovToL Ywpis totavTo. 14. repo bé érre- disouv tas paBdous avtdv Tapa piKpov Oras xYAwpas, €da- \ fal ey >] a \ 5 >) \ \ xv . xictov b& Tav paBdwv avtav Enpov nv, avTO TO aKpov oxicpas S€ eiyov év avTais* Kat ovTor ywpis ‘totavto. 8. i. 4 des 5€ ws] conj. Harmer [L,]; aq’ 7s 6¢ dyot A; dub. L,E. 10 érepot...iaravTo] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. TO pri. J om. A. | ee Se , a
15.  érepav o€ Hv €XayioTov YNwpOr, Ta Se NoLTA TOY paBSwv La \ a Enpa’ Kat ovtot xwpis totavTo. 16. étepos 5é Apyovto Tas Ore \ / ¢€ yf la) paBdouvs xAwpas épovtes ws EXaBov Tapa Tod ayyédov- \ \ Lal , a TO O€ TElov pépos TOD dyAoU ToLaVTas PaBdSous érrediSovr. € meal) see ' ey? , - \ e \ od 0 d€ ayyedos erl TovTOIs exapn lav’ Kal odTOL Xopis ic- TavTo. 17. érepo. dé éediSovy Tas paBdous a’tav ydwpas \ t) Kat Tapagbuaoas éyovaas’ | Kai odToL ywpls iotavTo* Kal éml ToUTOLS O€ O ayyedos Alay éyapyn. 18. Erepoe Sé éwediSouv , - , Tas paBdous avTav XAwpas Kal Tapadvadas éyovaas’ | ai dé / >! Lal ¢ x / i \ / ¢ \ Tapapuaces AUT@OY WoEl KAPTOY TWWa eiyoV. Kai Nav ihapot 5 ©: Sf b] nr @ Go erat A Clas, noav ol avOpwrrot éxetvol, ov at paBdor ToradTat evpéOncav. \ c v 3 \ fi; ’ r \ is \ / Kat O ayyeAdos emt TOUTOLS NYaAALATO, Kal O TroLWNY LAV iNapos Hv él TOVTOLS. ? Bb) A II. ‘Exédeuvce 5€ 6 ayyedos Kupiov otedavous éveyOijvat. Ny. / c Sars, , , Ary kal nvéxOnoav otépavot woe x howiKwy yeyovores, Kal éoTe- U \ yy \ > s \ Coe \ gavwce Tos avdpas Tovs émidedwKOTas Tas paPdous Tas UY \ éyovoas Tas Tapaduadas Kal Kaprrov Tiva, Kal amédvoev avtovs eis Tov TUpyov. 2. Kal Tovs GAXous bé atrécTeLhev > \ / \ \ ef \ \ > f eis TOV TUpyoV, TOs Tas PaBdous Tas YAwpas émidedwKOTAS Kal Tapapvabas éyovoas, Kaptrov Sé wn eyovoas Tas Tapa- f \ 5 r al € \ \ \ ») \ gudbas, Sovs avtois odpayida. 3. (watiopov 5€ TOY avTov TavTes elyov EVKOY WEL YLOVa of TopeEevomeEvoL Eis TOV mupyov. 4. Kal Tos Tas paBdous émidedwKoTas yAwpas ws éraBov arrédvuae, Sods avtots iwaticpov [AevKor] Kal ohpa- Lal \ \ la) / at ” f a yidas. 5. peta TO TavTa TehécaL TOV ayyEedov EyEL TO ye Bie Ny rey Las Ns \ 9k , > , 5) \ , Towmeve’ “Eye vrayw* od d€ To’TOUS aTroAVaeELs Els TA TELXN \ vy / 2 / a f/ \ \ Cyr. Kaos aids €oti Tis KaTOLKElY. KaTavonooy 5é Tas paBdous > a > a \ dA > / 5 b A \ QUTOV eTLmEed@s, Kal OUTwS dTroAVGOV' émrimEeAws SE KaTA- vonoov. Brétre pwn Tis ce wapédXOn, dynoiv. éav S€é Tis cE UA > \ > \ Sin AN \ f f a TaperOn, €y@ avTovs éml TO OvotacTypLov Sokipmacw. TadTa ’ A A iE ’ A A \ \ wv A 7 elTov TO Trowwéve andre. 6. Kal pera TO amredOeiv Tov i.17 kal ovro...€xovcas]ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. ii. 2 oppayida] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; opayidas A. 4 \evkov] ins, Harmer [L,L,E]: om. A. Bo2 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. il € / / diyryeXov Eyer pow 6 Troyunv: AadBopev travtwv tas paBdous ’ n n Kal puTevowpev avras, el tives EE avtav Suvynoovtas Cnoat. is / ) lel A K / \ E \ T la) a an Py / & s éyo avT@ Upie, Ta Enpa tadta Tas SdvavTar Kyoal; 7, amoxplOeis poor Neyer TO S€évdpov TodTo itéa éoti Kal 1 \ / CEN 5 n \ Nair / fpirotwov To yévos* éav oly putevOdou Kat pixpdy ixpada NapBavocw ai paBdor, Enoovtat Twoddai €€ avtdv’ eita bé al / lal Teipacwpev Kal Vdwop avTais Tapaxéew. €ay Tis avToV A A r We ta eas \ \ ! > SuvnO4 Choa, cvyxapnoopar avTh* éav b€ pn Shon, ovx £. / 5 \ -t / 3 A / ¢ \ evpeOnoopmat eyo dwedjs. 8. éxédevoe Oé por O TroLmnY f / , lal > 10 Ss / / Karéoat Kabws Tis avTav eotabn. dMov TaypaTta TaypaTa, A v / Kat émedioouy Tas paBdovs TO Troimevt. €ENapPave O€ 6 TroLuny ‘ (cays \ \ Ud > Ud , / \ \ Tas paBdovs, Kal KaTa TaypaTa éepUTevoey avTas, Kal peTa \ la) ¢/ ’ Lal \ / ¢/ ? \ a TO dutevoar Vdwp avtais Todv Tapéxeev, HaoTE avo TOD Udatos pn paiverOat Tas paBdovs. 9. Kal peTa TO TroTicaL avtov Tas paBdous reyes por’ "Aywper, Kai per oALyas ¢ / ’ / Ky) t \ ed: / * nmepas eTavérOwpev Kai éerucxeWopeOa Tas paBdovs macas: ¢ \ / \ / n I if na \ 6 yap Kticas TO dévdpov TovTo Oéder Tavtas Chv Tovs da- ' an ' / \ Bovras é« tod dSévdpov TovTov KAadous. édTrifw dé Kayo OTL NaBovta Ta paBdia TadTa ikuada Kal ToTicbévTa VdaTe lal / ’ an tnoovTat TO WAELTTOV MEPOS AVTOD. f 3 a \ a III, Aéywo avt@: Kupie, To dévdpov Todto yvwpicov pot a \ , nr Tl éoTW’ ATropodmat yap Tepl avTov, OTL ToTO’T@Y KAdwY / ¢ / > \ / \ 2O\ / KoTeVTMY vYyLés €oTL TO Sévdpov Kal ovdéyv haiveTat KEeKop- r . 9 Sevens ! Na) n ” / févov am avTod’ €vy TOUT@ ovY aTropodpat, 2. “Axkove, dnl’ \ t la} \ / \ / / \ v \ TO dévdpoyv TovTO TO wéya TO oKETratoy Tedia Kal Gpyn Kal a \ fal / A 3 \ ¢ \ > ¢ \ Tacav Tv yHv, vowos Beod éativ o dobeis eis OAOV TOV , PLEIN ! e e\ PO) IN \ > \ Koapov’ 0 S€ vopos ovTOs vios Deov eoti KnpuyOels Els TA / lal ale ic \ {s \ X / \owv C3 if mépata THS yHs’ ob O€ VITO THY oKEeTNY aol dVTES, Ol aKov- a / CaVTEs TOV KNP’YpLaTOS Kal TLoTEVoaVTES Eis aVTOV" 3. 6 O€ Né ¢ \ ayyeros 6 péyas Kal évdo£os, Meyanr 6 éyov thy éEovciav t rn A \ A 2 , ’ ¢ \ ToUTov Tov Aaod Kal SaxuBepyav. ovTosS yap éoTLV o Sid0vs a \ / \ / A avrolts Tov vomov eis Tas Kapdias TOY TLcTEVOYTwV' é7L- 8. ii. 7 av’ry] conj. Harmer [L,L,]; adrais AE. g &ywper] ins. Anger [L,L.E]; om. A. , 5 7 Oi) LS, > + , See, OKETTETAL OUV aUTOS ois EdwKeEV, EL Apa TeTNPNKATLY avTOP. U \ 4. Préreis dé Evds Exactov Tas paBdous* ai yap paBSou 6 fe ’ ee IA 3 \ Cah vomwos é€oTt. PrETELS OY ToAAAS paPdousS NX peLwmévas, / \ ’ \ , ‘ \ , yvoon S€ avtovs TayTas TOUS pn THPHTAaYTAaS TOV vopor, Kal Ove éEvos ExacTouv THY KaTOLKiaV ré itm Ku n » 5. Aeyw avtw UpLe, / \ \ ’ / >) \ LA ON \ \ / dati ods pwév aéducer eis TOV TUpYor, ods b€ cot KaTEELeV; yi / / e\ a “Ooo, dnci, TapéBnoay Tov vowov dv EXaBov Tap avTod, eis \ nd \ ¢, \ ThHv éunv e€ovoliay KaTéduTrev avTovs eis peTavovay’ bao. bé U A , ’ HON EUNpecTHnTAaY TO VvOUw Kal TeETNPHKATLY AUTO, VTrO TV YA b] if ” =) / / s / fe Sgen totay e€ovovav eye avtous. 6. Tives ovv, dnl, Kvpte, eiciv epee) / \ > \ , ¢ , ¢ ol éotehavwpévor Kal els TOY TUpPyov vrayovtes; [”Ocot, / / a t ede ’ i b dnci, cuptraraicavtes TH SiaBorw évixnaoav avrtov, éate- / ie ty c rn pavepévo eiciv'| ovTot elow ot vVTép TOV vouou Tabdrtes’ © \ / 7. ot d€ ETEpor Kai avTol yAwpas Tas paPdSous émrided@KOTES \ / b) / \ \ Nee iy Qui \ a Kal Tapaduadas éyovoas, kaptrov O€ un éyovcas, of Vrép TOD , , \ , \ \ ° U \ / vopov OruBévres, ur) TaOovTes SE wnde apynoapevot TOV Vomov fal / avtav. 8. of dé XYAwpas erdedwKOTEsS olas EXaBov, ceuVOL \ 6d \ / Gé > @ Aa PA \ \ Kal Sixator Kal Niav TopevOévtes ev Kalapa Kapdia Kal Tas \ \ \ ll évtonas Kupiou medunrakores. Ta dé Nora yvoon, OTav KaTa- \ / vonow Tas paBdouvs TavTas Tas TepuTEvpévas Kal TeTTOTIC- / pévas. \ ¢ / , ' IV. Kai pera nuépas ordtyas 7AGopmev eis Tov ToTror, PERE yy, ¢ \ ? \ , ee) n BLN Kal éxabioev 6 Troiuuny eis TOV TOTOV Tod ayyédov, Kayo ’ fal / 2) / mapecTadny avtT@. Kai réyet pour Ilepifwoar @worsvor, | Kat >] 1h Suaxover prot. Kal trepreCwodunv wpmorsvov | €x ocaxKov ye- \ la ’ v / / N a yovos KaBapov. 2, idov 5é pe Treprefwopévov Kal Ero.pov lal A ’ tal / / » e ovTa Tov Staxovely avTo, Kanreu, dnci, Tos avdpas ov elolv LSE at 2 , \ \ / € iva y \ at pabdor TepuTevpévat, KATA TO Taypa ws ExacTos EdwKeE TAS a , paBdous. Kal arjrOov eis TO Tediov, Kal éxaddeoa Travtas* \ f ’ fal kal éoTnoayv TavTes KATA Ta TaypaTa. 3. Ayes aUTOIS: lil. 6 6c0...€0Tepavwpévor eiciv] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. iv. 1 Kal dtaxover...duodwov] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homceot. 2 ws €xagros] conj. Harmer; dors A; sicut L,L,E. TAVTES KATH TO Tdyuara] conj. Harmer; ravra ra tayyata A; universt ordinibus suis Ly; locts suis L,3 ontnes ex ordine E. 364 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. iv "“Exaotos tas iolas paBdous é€xtiAaTw Kal depéTw pds PE. a \ 4. mp@rto. érédwxayv ot tas Enpas*Kai Kexoupévas éoxn- ¢ KOoTES, Kal WaavTws evpéOncav Enpal Kal Kexoppéevat éKé- ’ oN ss n L. ’ / € \ Aevoev avTo’s yopis oraOjvat. 5. eita émédwKay ot Tas fal / Enpas Kal pur) KeKoupévas éxovTess Twes Sé EE avTav éTé- dwxav Tas paBdous yAwpas, Ties dé Enpas Kal Kexoupéevas WS ¢ \ / \ 5] / > \ Seay, \ UT onTOS. Tovs éTLdedwKOTAS OY YAWPAS EKédeUTE Ypis a \ \ AY \ / bP] t IR A otaOnvat, Tovs bé Enpas Kal KeKoppévas EeTrLOEdMKOTAS €éKé- ANevee ETA TOV THOTwV oTAaOnVvaL. 6. elTa éTédMKaY OL TAS ¢ / \ \ ’ / \ \ ’ b] lal \ npEnpovs Kal oyLa pas eyovaas* Kal TOANOL €€ avT@Y yYNwpas émédwkav Kal pn éxovoas oylopas’ Tives O€ YAWPasS Kai / ’ / \ > \ / / ~ mapaduddas éyovoas, Kal els Tas Tapadvadas KapTrovs, olous elyov of eis TOV TUpyov TropevOévTEs eoTehavwpévor’ TLVes Sé / érrédwxav Enpas Kail BeBpwpévas, twes dé Enpas cal aBpo- tous, Tuves O€ olat Hoav nulEnpor Kal TYLopas ExovTaL, €KE- AevoEeVv avTOvs Eva ExaoTov ywpis cTaOHnval, TOUS meV TPOS Ta lola TAYpMaTA, TOUS SE Yopis. V. Eira éeredidovr oi tas paBdous yNwpas puev ExovTes, \ , oxicpas b€ éyovcas’ otToL TavTes yYAwpas émédmxKay, Kal éotnoay eis TO idvoy Taypa. éexyapn Sé 6 ToLpny emt ToUTOLS, v4 / bd 4 \ ’ / \ \ b] lal OTL TaVTES NAXOLWOncaY Kal aTrébevTO TAS TYLTMAaS aUTOD. 2. émédwxav S€ Kal of TO Hutocv yNwpsy, TO O€ Husov Enpov ij n > lal €yovTes’ TLVaY ovY EvpéOnaay ai paBdor OrAOTEADS YApAL, A e a lal Tivav nulEnpoL, Tvav Enpai Kat BeBpopévat, TWav SE ydwpal \ J ” e U ’ i v4 Kal Tapapuadas Exovcat. ovToL TayTes aTreAvOncay ExacTosS Tpos TO Taya avTov. 3. e€iTa éemédwKay of Ta dvO mépy XAwpa Exovtes, TO Oé Tpitov Enpov' TodXdol €E avtav yAwpas émédwKay, ToANOL S5é nutEnpous, repos dé Enpas Kab BeBpo- pévas’ ovToL TavTes EaTnoapy eis TO ldvovy Taypa. | 4. eiTa 5) / oS \ , / A.V, \ \ Lf / éréd@xav of Ta Ovo mépyn Enpa ExovTes, TO Sé TpiToY yA@por. b] fal Torro €€ avtav nulEnpovs éemrédmxay, tives Sé Enpds Kal 8. iv. 4 woatTws] conj. Gebhardt [L, Mss egue =aegue]; ws avrac A (om. kai app.); def. L,; dub. E. 6 crabjvac]...ac A; oradnvae (corr. out of orjva) AS. v. 2 Twwv be] Trav dé A. 4 elra émédwkav...Taypua] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. S: Siva] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 365 / \ Nae , \ \ 3 , LY? BeBpwpévas, tives S€ nusEnpous Kai oxiopds eyovaas, ddiryoe \ / « 5é yAwpds. otro Tavtes EoTnoay eis TO idiov Taypa.| 3 , \ e ‘ ae ’ A N , , 5. érédwxav dé of tas paBdovs avtav xAwpds eoynKéTEes, a LU be \ \ \ b , b , \ eXaytaTtov O€ [Enpov] kat cytopas éyovoas. éx ToOUTwY TIVES A > , \ \ \ \ , >) f yAwpas érédwxay, Tives 6 yYNwpas Kal Tapadvasas eyouoas. Sit une \ e ’ Q , 2A 3 ay. amnrOov xal oboe eis TO Taypa avTov. 6. eita érédmxav e CG ou eXayLoToy EvovTes yNwPOY, TA SE NOLTraA pwépn Enpa’ TovT@Y e cree, id / \ n lA NY \ at paBdo. evpéOncav TO TrEioTOY pépos YAwpal Kal Trapa- U 14 a , gudbas éyoucat Kai Kaptrov év tals Tapadvaci, Kai érepas MS krd b) \ ji} fal ev > , e \ , YAwpai brat. él TaVTaLs Tals paPdo.s Exapn O ToLmnY Niav U vA ef ¢ £0 ? A @ Oe e vA [weyarws], OTe oVT@S EvpéOnaav. amndOov Oé ovTOL ExacTOS > \ fi? els TO lOLov Tayma. \ Aa VI. Mera to wavtwy Katavoncat tas paBdous [Tov t i. 4 U A mouseva| Eyer pot’ Kisrov coe ote TO Sévdpov TovTo ptdo- t > / / / / \ b] / Swov éoTt. PréETrELS, Pnol, TOTOL peTEVONTAaY Kal éowOncaP ; VA J / UA Brérro, dpi, kvpte. “Iva idys, pynot, THv ToAveveTrAAayyviav a / vA U Niue kv: t 3 Ngapoe A tov Kupiov, 6Tt pweyadn Kat évdokos eats, Kal ESwKe Trvevwa A ’ / > / , L 2 / t f Tots a&iows ovot peTavoias. 2. Atari ovv, dnt, KUple, TavTES ov petevonoay ; “Ov cide, Pyat, THY Kapdiav wéXovoay Ka- ’ Aa vA Oapay yevérOat Kai Sovrevey avT@ é& OAS Kapdias, ToUTOLS y” \ , Pi ges Vhs nN , \ , édmxe THY peTavotay’ ov 5é Eide THY SoALOTHTA Kal Trovnpiar, a / peAXovT@V év UToKpiceL peTavoEtV, ExElvoLs OVK EdwKE peETa- / ii Weel? A votay, pntore Tad BeBnADowoL TO bvowa avTOD. 3. Aéyo Sour: t n > / Ni \ er 3 avt@ Kupie, viv ovv jot dydwoov Tos Tas paBdous ému- ? a / \ t SedwxKoTas, ToTATOS Tis AUTOY éoTi, Kal THY TOUTwWY KaTOLKLaY, a ’ , e , Nis f \ A iva akovoavTes of TicTEVoayTES Kal EiAnpoTes THY chpayioa \ -~ Kal teOXaKoTes avTHY Kal fu) THPNTAVTES Vyu, émUyvoVTES \ ie A ” , r CaneN aA A Ta €avToY épya peTavonawot, AaBovTes VTO cov adhpayida, \ , \ , o > / 29 ry \ \ kal doEacwot tov Kupsov, dts éorAayyvicOn ém avtovs Kal aTECTELNE GE TOU dvaKaWwicat TA TYEvpaTa a’ToV. 4.” AxKoue, ¢ gnc’ av ai paBdoe Enpal cal BeBpwmévar vrd onTOs Eevpé- Onoay, obTol eiow of aToaTaTaL Kal TpodoTat THS exKANTIAS v. 5 €Adxuorov] édaxiorou A. énpov] ins. Gebhardt [L,E]; om. A; def. L,. vi. 1 Uéys] eld7js A. 2 Svart] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; ovr A. cf. James Weiye 366 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. _ [5.8 vi \ , > a ¢ / i si \ ' Kat Bracdnunoartes ev Tals apaptiats avt@y Tov Kupsov, / \ f 5 \ 4 éru 66 Kal éeracyuvbévtes TO bvowa Kupiov ro émuxdnOev / y / fal 7 a / ér avtovs. ovToL ovy eis TENMOS AT@AOVTO TO Mew. PETrELS \ n / / t 5é bre ovdEe Els AUTOY pEeTEVONGE, KAITEP AkOVaAaVTES TA PNH_aATA eo / ’ a WA ? U - Ld \ n U e & éXddnoas avTois, & cot éveTethapnv’ ato TOY ToLOVTMY 7 \ , / e A \ \ \ J / ’ ‘ fon améotn. 5. of dé Tas Enpas Kal aonmTovs émbEdwKoTES, \ e b] \ en ae 7 ‘ ¢ \ \ ‘ Kal ovTOL éyyls avTay’ hoav yap vToKpiTat Kai didaxas / \ / fal lal Eévas eiadépovtes Kal exatpépovtes Tovs SovNovs Tod Oeod, x \ 4 U ,’ / ca pandtoTa O€ TOUS NMapTHKOTAS, pn apLevTEs pmeTavoEty avTOUS, , \ al al lal nr ' BJ Uy ? = adra tais didayais Tats pwpats meiovtes avTOUS. ovTOL OV éyouvow éAmida Tod petavonoat. 6. BrémeEis 5é ToXoVS > ’ fal \ / , , a > Ud > - \ €& avT@y Kal peTavevonkoTas ad 75 €hadnoas avTOis Tas 4 , \ , éyTo\as pou’ Kal éTL peTavoncovow. Obcol dé ov peTavon- ,’ ‘ > ~ v a , , covow, am@eocav THy Conv avTov’ Ocot Oe peTevoncay €& n , / a avtév, ayabolt éyévoyto, Kat éeyéveTo 1 KaToLKia avToV eis \ / \ al \ ’ ‘ , / Ta TeLXn Ta TpP@Ta’ TLvés O€ Kal Eis TOY TrUpyov aveBnaaD. , 3 / dA ¢ , lel e a A »” Brérrets ovv, [Pnoir,]| ore n peTavora TOY apapTiov Cony Exel, \ a U TO O€ pn peTavonaat OavaTor. 7 rn A VII. “Ocor 8é nucEnpovs éerédmxay Kai év avtais oxiopas S v 3 a f C0 6 \ ‘ elyov, axove Kal Tepi avTaY. bow joa ai paBdor KaTa TO CYA LT ee , , ’ ss ” \ a ” , av7To nulEnpot, Sirvyot eicw" ote yap Coow ovte TeOvy- ¢ e , Vv 4 Kaow. 2. of O€ nuEnpous ExovTEs Kal Ev avtais cyLopMaS, e \ / A / / 3 \ / > ovToL Kal Oipvxyot Kal KaTdAaXoé Eliot, Kal pNdéTroTE Eipn- Ul 3 e Uy > \ lal / > at VEVOVTES ELS EAUTOUS, AAA SuyooTaTtovrres TAVTOTE. GAAAG J if / , Kal tovTos, [dnoiv,] éixertar petavoia. Prérrews, [dnoi,] \ Si tes) , \ Twas €& avT@y peTavevonkoTas. Kai ETL, now, eat év b) fal > \ ' AULey. f 5) b] - avtots é€Amis petavolas. 3. Kal dc0L, dnoly, €& avTwY peTa- , \ ' 5) \ , y ey, a VEvVONKAGL, THY KaToOLKiay eis TOV TUpyoV ExovowW' boot Oe EF , A / >) \ / , avTov Bpadv’TEepoy pEeTavevonKacl, Els TA TELYN KATOLKN- a ih, \ ’ fa) > “) / a , covatv" ocot dé ov peTavoodaw, GAN eupévouvcr Tals Tpakeow avtav, Oavato arolavodvTat. 4. of O€ yAwpas ETrLbEdwKOTES 8. vi. 4 Kaimrep dxovcavres] conj. Anger [L,L,]; xat mapaxovcavtes A; dub. E. éddAnoas] conj. Gebhardt [L,]; éAdAnca A; def. L,E. vil. I Kata] kaa A. 3 éxovew] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; €fovow A. \ / ? a \ Tas paBdovs avTéyv Kai cxyicpas éyovoas, TavToTe ovTOL \ \ > \ / \ a TigTOL Kal ayalo. éyévovTo, éxovTes [dé] SfrAOv TLva év GXXN- f / Rows TrEepl TpwTelwy Kal Tept SOENs Tivos’ ANNA TraVTES OUTOL / S| > / Pm@pol elo, EV GXANAOLS EXOVTES TrEplL TPwTElwY. 5. AAAA L > tal > a ’ Kal OUTOL akoVcaVTEs THY EVTOA@Y pov, ayaol bYTES, éKxa- e \ Es , 5 Oapicay Eavtovs Kai peTeVOnTaY TAX. éyévEeTO OvY 7 KaTol- ’ na > \ / iN / / b) / Knols avT@Y els TOV TUpyov. éav Sé Tis Taduw émLoTpé wy > \ 4 > / > \ lal / \ eis THY Styootaciay, ExBANOncETAL ATO TOD TUpyov, Kab , , \ \ ’ rn 6 € ow / > \ A \ amronréces THY Cwnv avtov. ©. » fw?) TavtTwy éotl TaY Tas an / hf lal a évtoXas Tov Kupiov dudXaccovtwr’ év Tals évToNats dé Tepl / X \ / \ ] v ’ \ \ Tpwteimy n Tept Oo€ns TWOS OUK EaTLV, GA TEPL pbaKpo- \ , > an , Oupias Kal Trept Tatrevvoppovncews avdpos. €v Tots TOLOVTOLS 3 Us \ n / > a / \ \ / ovv 1) wn Tov Kupiou, év Tots duyootarais Sé Kal Tapavopmos Oavaros. VIII. Oc €€ eridedwxotes Tas paBdous Hutcv pev ydo- / ® Ys e al as, Hutcv 6 as, OUTOL eioty of év Tails TpaymwaTeLats ’ / \ \ al ¢ an éuTrepupmévot Kal pt) KONNWpEVOL TOS aryiols. Sta TOUTO TO ce lal a \ / / Hutocv avtav Hh, TO O€ Hutov vexpov €ott, 2. ToAXOL ovY J a A / / fa) akovcavTés mov TOV e€vTONOY pETEVONTAaY, OGOL YyooY peTe- Li Lal \ an vonoay, 7) KaTotKia avTe@v eis Tov TUpyov. TuvEes bé avTav r , lj els TEXOS aTrégTNTAY. OTOL OvY pEeTAVOLaY OUK ExovaLY> Sia \ \ / > A 3 / \ rel \ yap Tas Tpaypateias avtov eBAacdnunoav Tov Kupiov kat , / ») / 3 \ \ , n \ si amrnpyycavTo. amadrecav oty thv Cony avtov ova THY / e Yj > a movnplav iv érpaéay. 3. TodXol Oé €& avTav ebupvynoar. e \ \ ovToOL ETL EYoUTL METAVOLAY, EaY TAYXV METAVONTWOL, Kal ErTAL ’ an ¢ / / avTov 7 KaTotkia eis Tov TUpyov: éav 5é BpadvTEpov peTa- , VONTWOL, KATOLKNHTOUOL Eis TA TElyn’ Edy SE un pETAVONTWOL, \ ) \ ’ , \ \ b) A e \ \ PS / / Kal avtTol am@decav THY Conv avTov. 4. oi O€ Ta OVO péEpN / \ 6e / \ b) ey } / & / b] (ee) xAwpa, TO é Tpitov Enpov émidEedwxKOTES, OUTOL ELoLY OL apYn- ve Vy Capevot ToLKiNas apynoect. 5. ToANOL ovy meTevOnaay && al bs lol a \ \ avToV, Kal aTHAOoV eis Tov TUPYov KaToLKEly’ TrOANOL OE ? /- a a @ \ a bd / > f amréatnoav els TéXOS TOD Mcod: ovTOL TO EHv Els TEXOS ATTO- vii, 4 6é¢ sec.] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. Vili. 4 xAwpd, Enpdv] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; Enpd, xAwpov A. 368 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. viil \ S lal / if Aecav. Ties O€ &E a’TaY edubvynoay Kai edvyooTaTnoaDY. / \ / \ TOUTOLS OY éoTl peEeTAaVOLa, Eav TAaYY pEeTaVonowaL Kal pn) lal € a , an Sen \ na / eripetvwot Tails noovais avtav: éav dé éripelvwor Tals Tpa- lal / e ° / Eeow avTor, Kat odtot Pavatov éavTois KaTepyalovTas. td \ IX. O¢ &€ érridedmxotes Tas paBdous Ta pev VO pépy / \ \ / / La , , \ \ , Enpa, TO O€ TpiTov YNwpOV, OTOL ElaL TLOTOL pEev YyErYOVOTES, , Oe \ / ” 8 \ “ Aa) mNouTicavtTes S€ Kal yevopevot EvdoEot Tapa Tois EOveow Yee 3 4 , Umepnpaviay peyadny évedvoayto Kat virndodpoves éyévovTo, ’ / / a Kal KatéXurrov THY adnOevay, Kal ovK éxorAXANOnaav Tots O«- i, b} \ \ \ ” \ ¢e/ ¢ c NY Kaiols, GANG KaTa Ta &Ovn cuvétnoav, Kal avTn 1 0605 lal 3 \ a lal ’ / > , ndutépa adrois éyéveto* aro 5é Tob Ocod ove atéotnaav, AXX / fal \ / \ BA a / évépetvav TH TloTel, “Nn Epyalouevol Ta Epya THS TieTEwS. \ ss ’ ba n / \ > / ¢ fd 2. ToAXOL ovY EE AUTO@V METEVONTAV, KAL EYEVETO 1) KATOLKNOLS bY an 5 nan {2 4 \ 3 } a nr ’ A avTav €v TO TUpyw. 3. ETEpos Sé Eis TEXOS peTa THY EOVaOY n f a / A / aovlavtes Kal POeipomevot tais KxevodoElas tav eOvadv arré- > \ la) le) owe Ae ‘ U A 2) A oTnoav amo Tov Meco, cai Erpatav tas mpakes Tov EOvor, e an \ ’ “ ovToL peta THY eOvaY éXoyicOncav. 4. ETepot de EE avTav r ‘ , a \ / “A edupvynoay pn édrifovtes cwOnvar dia tas mpakeus as €- ivf \ > UU \ / b] ec lal mpatav: Erepor O€ eduptynoay Kai cyiopata év EéavTois 3 / U ie a NY \ f éroincav. TovTows ovv Tois Supuynoact Sia Tas Tpakeus ’ A , yy b] / BI 5 € t 3 an \ avT@v peTavoia ETL éoTiv' GAN 1 pEeTavola avToY TaxXL > /- oy / ¢ / b] A Lf b] \ lol odetrer elvat, (va 7) KaToLKia avTOY yévnTat EvTOS TOD TUpYoU" nr \ \ / > ] b] / lal ¢ an ¢ Tov 5é pn METAVOOUYTMY, GAN erripwevovT@V Tails ndovais, Oo if Pavaros éyyus. ¢€ if X. OF dé émidedxortes Tas paBdouvs yAwpas, avta bé Ta ” \ \ \ ” Ce U ) \ \ dxpa Enpa Kal oyiopas éxovta, odToL TavToTe ayabol Kal \\ Ar. \ a NO EDL, b f \ %e7 TiaTol Kal évdofor Tapa TH Oe@ eyévovTo, EXayvoTov bé é&y- \ \ b] / \ \ 2 a. f ” paptov ova piKpas émOuplas Kal wiKpa KaT adAnOY EXOVTES b] > >’ / / A id / WN Lal / \ aX AKOVTAVTES MOV TWVY PNHLATwWY TO TAELTTOY [MEPOS TAYU / / ¢ a METEVONT AY, Kal eyéVvEeTO 7 KATOLKiA a’Ta@Y Els TOV TUpyoD. \ ’ , 2. tives b€ €& avtay eupvynoar, twés 5é Supvynoavtes duyootaciav melCova étroinacayv. €v TovTOLs ovY ETL eoTl peTa- / ’ if ivf b) \ U b] B 4 / volas éXris, OTL aya0olt TavToTe éyévoyvto: SucKddAws Sé TIS avT@y aTodaveitat. 3. of d€ Tas paBdous avtay Enpas émt- S.. 8:50] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 360 , / \ \ ’ Ud e f/ ’ ta Sedwkotes, EAXdyioTov Sé yAwpoY eyovaas, OvTOL cial Oi \ ’ /, Ul rf miotevoavTes mév, Ta dé Epya THS avoulas épyacapevor” ovcé- \ ’ \ aA A ’ , \ BY egos ? , mote O€ ato TOU Mcov aréotnaay, Kal TO dvoma ndéws éBa- \ ’ lal ¢ , ¢ \ oTacayv, Kal eis TOUS oiKoUS avTaY NOéws UredéEaVTO TOUS le) a > t 7 \ dovAous ToD Ocov. akovoavTes ovy Tav’THY THY pETaAVOLAY , \ , A ‘ \ aAOLOTAKTWS peTEVOnTaY, Kal épyafovTat Tadcav apeTnY Kai ’ a \ € , diuxatoovvny’ 4. Tuves € €E avTev Kal ExovTes OrLBovTat, ‘ 2, a \ ” ’ ylveoKovtes Tas Tpakets avTay as Erpakay. TovTwy ovy Tav- ’ \ / 4 TWY 1 KATOLKLA Els TOY TUpYoV ETAL. / SN b) fe a XI. Kai pera 70 cuvtedéoae avtov tas emidvoes TacoV A / f a S Tov paBdeav réyer pour “Trraye, Kat mace déye iva petavon- ‘ , tal @ on JA € K , ” , cwot, Kat CnoovTat TH Oe: OTe 6 Kupios erreur é pe a la) / , A \ omrayxvicbeis Tact Sodvat THY peTAavoLaY, KAiTEp TLVOY pL) 4 Yes \ wi ” ? a > \ / Sy ¢ édvtav akiwy dia Ta Epya avToy: GAXRA paxpobvpos ov 6 lal \ n Chee: a Kupios OéXeu THY KAHoW THY yevouévnv Sia TOD Viod avTod > A U4 “4 f awlecbar, 2. A€Eyw avtw’ Kupre, eArrifw OTe TavtTes aKov- / / vf 4? CavTes avTa peTavonaovat. TrEeiGopat yap OTL els ExacToOs Ta ” ” > \ \ \ \ \ / idia Epya ériyvovs Kal ghoBnOeis tov Oedv petavoncer. , f aC, , / 3. amroxpibeis por AEeyer” “Ooo, [Pnoiv,] €E Ans Kapdias A / \ / a avtev [petavonowot Kai] xabapicwow éavtods amo Tév A lal to) / \ \ TOVNPLOY TATOV TWY TPOELPNMEVOY Kal wNKETL pNdEV TpOC- A al 3 a / n Odor Talis apyaptiats avTov, AnovTat iacw Tapa Tod / A / € A Kupiov tav Tpotépwv ayaptiov, édv wn Supvyncwow éri Lal lal / a A r Tails évToXals TavTals, Kal Cnoovtat TO Dew. [bce dé, dyat, a € 7 ? SN ? a A mpocO@at Talis auaptiats avT@v Kal avaoctpadéow év Tais / an 2) Tas A emvOupiais Tov al@vos TovToV, KaTaKpiwodow EéavToOUS Ets 4 / al lal A Oavatov.| 4. od dé Topevou év Tats évToXais pov, Kal CHOL ms) A. Nes, x A ’ > A \ , [T® Ocew Kai dco av TropevOdowv ev avtais Kal KaTopbw- cawvtat, (yoovtat TO Oed.] 5. tadta pou detEas [Kal Nad7- x. 3 pév] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; wévov AE. 4 exdvTes ONiBovTac] con). Harmer [L,L,]; kati poBodvrar A; se ipsos affiixerunt E. xl. I mac@v] [L,L,E]; mdcas A. 3 meravonowor Kat] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A, Kabaplowow] kabapicovow A. macy] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,] ; avrav A; hoc E. doa 5é...Advarov] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. 4 TP Veg... Sjoovra TP Oeg] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. AP, FATH. 24 370 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8; mm cas] mavra déyes por’ Ta b€ rowrra émidelEw per odlyas nMEpas. [IlapaBonry 6.} I. Mera 10 ypayrat we tas évtoXas Kai TapaBodas TOD / a.78 } a / 3 / \ / TOLMEVOS, TOU ayyéAou THS peTavolas, HAOE Tpos we Kal AéryEL poor’ @Bédrw cou SeiEat dca cor CdevEe TO TVEDWA TO Aytov TO AaAnoay peta cod év pophy THs "ExxAnoias* Exeivo yap TO a ¢c ey al any / bd \ \ > / mTvedpua 0 vios TOD Ocod éotiv. 2. émetdn yap acbevéorepos fo! ’ > TH capKl Hs, ovK €dnAWON cot Ov ayyérov. ObTE ody éveduva- pweOns Sia TOU mvedpatos Kal layvoas TH layVi cov, MoTE / " A, oe > a bf \ 3 “4 / \ dvvacbai oe Kal dyyeXov ieiv, TOTE wev odv EpavEepawOn cot dia lal >’ / ¢ 3 \ le) / e n \ lal THs “Excdnolas 1 oikodoun Tod mUpyou' KaA@s Kal TE“VOS / ¢ ¢ \ / er Lal \ € \ ,’ Le / mTavTa ws vTro TapOévou éwpaxas. viv bé UIrd ayyédou Bré- meus, ta TOD avTOU meV TvEevpaTos’ 3. Sel dE we Tap’ e“od BI / 4 lal ? la] \ \ 97 e \ axpiBéctepov tavta pabeiv. els TodTO yap Kal eddOnv vrro ay? / ’ I > \ bd a 7 Tov évdoEou ayyéXov eis TOV olKéy Gov KaToLKhoaL, Wa duva- A U ” \ / € \ \ / Tos Tavta ldns, pndev Sevharvopevos ws Kal TO TMpoTeEpor. \ ’ / / 3 \ > , > v A 4. Kal amnyayé pe eis thv “Apxadiay, eis dpos TL waaT@des, \ ’ le / > \ \ v lal v \ om» / if Kal €xabicé je ETL TO Akpov Tov Opous, Kal EdeLEE wou Trediov péeya, KUKA@ 5é Tov Tediou pn SwdeKa, AAXnV Kal aAAnV QO / 7 AS 3, SX a > f ¢ b] / 5 \ idéav €YOVTAa Ta Opn. 5. TO TPWTOV HY wedXaV ws acBodN’ TO dé dedtepov >ridov, Botavas un Exov’ TO dé Tpitov axavOdbes Kal TpLBoAwy mAHpEs’ 6. TO d€ Téraptoy Botavas exov nut- Enpous, Ta wey Erravw TOV Botavav yAwpa, Ta Sé Tpds Tats € \ / pilars Enpa’ twes b€ Botavat, Stay 6 HrLos érmiKEeKavKel, Ni VSS , ~ \ \ 4 ” ” / U Enpat éywovto’ 7. To Oé TéumTov opos éxov BoTtavas yAwpPAs, \ Nase: N Xe ” A e/ 4 e \ Kal Tpaxv ov. TO dé ExTOV Opos TYLGpLaY Srov eyeueEv, OV [ED Lal e \ U 7 5 \ / e / b) / piKpov, Ov Sé weyadwv’ eixyov de BoTavas ai cyopai, ov Alay dé jnoav evOarels at Botavat, warroy dé ws pEewapacpévar naav. 8, TO dé EBdopuov dpos eiye BoTavas tNapas, Kal Odov 9. i. 2 Hs] ets A. kal &yyedov] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,]; of dyyedor A; nuntium L,; angelum ejus E. 6 éylvovro] [L,L,E]; A adds 76 6é dpos Tpaxd Mav hv Bordvas exov Enpds. 5.9. ai] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 371 \ v Ha A 3 ‘ A , A \ ,’ / Quik: TO Opos evOnvovy ny, Kal Tay yévos KTNVOV Kal dpvéewy évé- > Noe > “ 5 \ b bd , \ / \ \ poovTo els TO Opos exeivo’ Kal dcov éBocKovTO Ta KTHYN Kal TA ~ e TeTEla, aXrov Kal padrov ai Botavat Tod spovs exeivouv yy \ Nis SY, Ui a A &Oarrov. 7O S€ dydoov dpos mHyaY TAHpEs Hv, Kal Tay yévos / n / / a A A THS KTicEwsS TOU Kupiou éroriGovto éx TaY THYaY TOD dpousS \ Yj v éxeivou. 9. TO dé évvatoy dpos Od\wS Vdwp ovK eiye Kal brov 2 a , ne | wwhss) Cy) Tal , \aze \ 0 épnua@des nv’ ceive O€ ev avT@ Onpia Kal épreta Oavacipa, f > U \ \ f Siapbeipovta avOpwrovs. 1O dé Séxatov bpos eixe Sévdpa lA \a , 7 ay EAS \ \ , fi MéyltoTa, Kal OXOY KATAaCKLOY HV, Kal UTO THY OKérNY TPdBaTa / KATEKELVTO GVATTAVOMEVA Kal wapuK@meva, 10. TO bé évdéKa- v a Nii fe 8 5 > \ \ 66 8 3 a / Tov opos Niav civdevdpov Hy, Kal Ta Sévdpa exelva KaTaKapTra * tal mV, AAdows Kal AAdoLs KapTrois Kexoounméva, iva idev TIS SAND / a b] a a VOSA \ \ Ii avta éTiOuunon hayely éx Tov KapTav avtdy. TO &€ dwdé- bY dé of ts VaR , ’ ne et ye KaTov pos Odov iv AEvKOY, Kal 7 TPOToLs avTOD iNapa HY a x KQL EUTIPETETTATOV IV EAUT@ TO Opos. II. Eis pécov 5& tod mrediov éevEé prow TEeTpav peyarny \ A ’ A e , € Aeveny €x TOD Tediov avaBeBnkviav. 7 5é TétTpa VnroTépa 9S A b) / / vA p>) / fa) 6 \ f nv TOV Opéwy, TeTpayavos, Wate SiVacOat Srov Tov KocpoV A \ Nea e , > / / b} if yopjoat. 2. waraia dé nv n TéTpa ExElvyN, TUANY ExKeKompe- ” _ ¢ la \ > / = € > / vnv éxyovta’ ws Tpdadatos Se edoKer pot elvas n éxKOXAAPLS A ¢ \ \ hé THS TUANS 7 Sé TUAN OUTwS EcTIABeEV UIrép TOV LOY, WoTE A / fal , A pe Oavpater eri TH AauTNSdve THS TUANS. 3. KUKA@ OE TIS ui e f / / € 3 / e > TuUANS eloTnKeLcayv TrapOévot dddEKa. al ovy Técoapes ai Els \ / e n ? l , 254 5 5 SHE Tas yovias éotnkviat évdoEdtepat pos eddKouy evar’ Kal ai ddnat 66 EvdoEo Hoav. eiotnKercay Sé Els Ta TéEooapa pépn A ’ fal b) \ , / THS TUANS, dva wécov avTav ava dvo TapBévor. 4. évdedupe- rn lal (2 ’ ~ wy vat S& Hoav ALVODS YiTOvas Kal TepleCwopévat EvTTpEeTas, &Ew \ ” ” N \ ¢ / / Tovs wpmous éxyovcat Tods SeEvo’s ws péAroOVTAaL HopTioy TL ! ef > F , ek \ 3 \ Baotafew. otws éTowot noav’ Lay yap thapal Hoav Kal Zi \ Wy a lal b / 3 > a mpoOvuot. 5. peta TO idely pe TadTa eOavpaloy ev euauTa, / A A / f OTL peyara Kat évdoEa rpayyata BréT@. Kal mad Sinto- i. g oxérny] L,; add adrod rod\ka A; add arborum L,; add earum arborum E. papuKwpeva] unpuxoweva A. 10 atvdevdpov] atdevdpov A. éauTa@| conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; év arg A; dub. E. ii. 3 avr@y] [LE]; airs A; al. L,. PD cf. James 16 Oy By2 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (Ss. 8. , A al 0é b \ ef = , 5 / pouv émt tais mapbévors, btu Tpupepat odTws ovcat avépeiws us EloTHKELTaY WS péAdOVTAL OroV TOV ovpavov BacTate. 6. Kat Aéyer wor 6 moun’ Ti év ceavt@ diaroyitn Kat dvarroph, a tl \ fal Kal ceavt@® AUTHY éeTLTTGcaL ; baa yap ov divacat VonoaL, , ,’ / \ iol pn) emtxelpel, TUVETOS WY, GAN Epadta Tov Kupuor, iva KaPHs , lal ’ / \ , LA io a , / \ be civecw voe alta. 7. Ta OTicw cov ideiy ov dvvyn, Ta bE lal , \ éumpocbéy cov Prérrews. & ody ideiv ov divaca, Eacor, Kab py orpéBrov ceavtov' a Oe Brérets, Exelvwv KaTaKupieve, fal A / * / \ Kal Tepl TOY owToOV pu) Teplepyatov' TavTa O€ ou ey Snroce, boa éav cot SelEw. EuBretre ody Tots Noerois. c \ III. EiSov && avdpas édndAvOotas vnrovs Kai évdoEous a / - / Kal dpotious TH idéa’ Kal éxadecay THOS Te avdpav. KaKkel- > vou dé of EAnAvOoTeEs UYnrol Hoav avdpes Kai KaXol Kal duva- / Nb Seay. ? \ ea v 5 > 8 a > U a Tol’ Kal é€xéXevoay avtovs oi €E avdpes oixodopety erravw THS , , U s be ral an > ry a b] / / muds TUpyoy Tia. mv dé BopuBos Tév avdpav éxeivwv péyas lal > / , tal \ / eo , na TOV éAnruvGoT@Y oiKodopmely TOY TUPYyoV, WOE KAKELTE TEPLTPE- , , a ' 2 G Ss: bé € a / YOVT@OY KUKN TIS TUANS' 2. al dé TapHEvos ExTHKVIAL KUKA@ a“ - lal , ry / iT) \ / >] THs TUANS EXeyou Tos avdpadce aoTrevdew Tov TUpYoV oiKOdO- a U \ a , petcOa. éxmemetaxercapy O€ Tas yeipas at TapOevor ws pér- an ’ lal Aoveai Tt AauBavew Tapa Tov avdpav. 3. ot de EE dvdpes A ¢ éxéXevov €x BvO0d TLvds AiOous avaBaivey Kal UTayecv els THV a ’ oixooouny Tov TUpyov. avéBnaav Sé riBou Séxa TEeTPaywvoL / e Aaptrpoi, [un] NeAaTopnpevor. 4. ot dé EE dvdpes Exadovv Tas / NS) I > \ \ / U \ f mapOévous Kal éxéXevoay avTas Tovs AiGous TravTas Tos MéA- \ > ‘ <. / fal , y AovTas els THY OLKOOMNY UTayEW TOD TUpyou BacTaew Kat Ul \ a t \ b / al , StatropeverOat Sid THS TUANS, Kal EerLdibovat Tols avdpact a I- > 8 a \ / e \ , Tois péAXOVTLY olKOOOMELY TOY TUpYyoV. 5. ai dé TrapOévos \ 4 lal A tovs déxa ALGous TOs TPwWTOUS TOUS Ex TOD BYG0dD avaBavTas / a évreTiOouv aGdAnXoLs Kal KaTa Eva Aifov éBacralov pod. IV. Kaos 5é éorabncav ouod KiKAXw THs TUANS, OUTAS 9. ii. 5 éml rats wapOévos] eri Tas mapévous A. 6 ob dtvacac] [L,L,E]; ovde A. iil. 1 €xddecayv] [L,L,E]; éxéXevoay A. érdve Ths wUAns] conj. Harmer [L,]; €wdvw rijs wérpas AE: supra petram illam et super portam ipsam L.,. 307) ins. Anger. (ck ics ve03seCar viene om. AL,E ; om. also \eAarounpéva: L,. 5 émerl@ouv] conj. Tischendorf [L.]; érqvvoy A; al. LLE. S. 9. iv) THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. a73 ? U e PS a 8 \ ? \ Cae \ / eBaotavov at doxovoat duvatai eivat Kal vTo Tas yovias rat ¢ lal > lal Tov riGou vrodeduxviat oav: ai O€ Gddat ex THY TAEUpPaY a Hi) € } } / \ iv >? , , \ Tov ALGov vrrodedUKELcay Kal o’Tws éBactakoy TavtTas ToOvS \ A AOous dua SE THS TUANS Suéhepov aTous, xabas exedeVTOn- \ b] 6/5 Lal > 8 / >’ \ / 3 a X cay, Kal érrediSouy Tois avdpacw els Tov TUpyov: éxetvou O€ b 4 \ / / ¢ A ExovTes TOVS AiGous @Kodomovy. 2. 1) oiKodom2) dé TOD TUpyou / \ \ , \ y a eyéveTo éml THY TETPaY THY weyaAny Kal erravw THS TANS. ig / > rf nppocOncay ovy of déxa XiOot éxetvor, | Kal avérAnoav OrAnV \ , Ng pe F > a Lt A > a a TH TéTpaV. Kai éyévovTo éxeivot | Oeuédtos THS OiKOSopNHS TOD , Caw , € , 4 mupyou. 1 d€[métpa Kal n| TUAn Hv Bactafovca OXov TOV \ A mupyov. 3. peta dé Tovs déxa ALMous AAXot avéBnoav ex TOD A yy / , \ & ¢ [? >’ \ BvO0d eixoor mévte AiOou Kai obdTOL NpwocOnocay eis THY 3: \ a , f ¢ \ n / \ oixodouny TOD TUpyou, Bactafomevot VTr6 TOV Trapbévorv KaOes e f \ > Kal ol TpoTepol. peta dé TOVTOVs avéBnoay TpLaKovTa TéVTE* ts / ¢ 4 ’ kal ovToL opoiws npuocOnaay els Tov TUpyov. peta dé TOUTOUS ee. Si érepot avéBnoav AiVot TeccapaKovta: Kal ovTOL TayTes EBAN- \ >} A a I) x ro Onoav eis THY oiKodopry TOV TrUpyou’ | éyévovTO ovY GTOtYoL a lA le] Técoapes €v Tots Oepweriors Tod Tupyou: | 4. Kal éravcavTo 5) an a 3 / Sire) t \ \ (fs) a éx Tov BvOod avaBaivoytes’ émavcarTo 6é Kal of oikodopodv- / d na fal TES piKpOV. Kal wadLy é7réTakay of &E dvdpes TO TANOEL TOD ” ’ lal > / , / ’ \ , \ an OXAOVU EK TOV Opéwy Trapaéepety ALOous Eis THY oiKodopaY TOD 3 a muUpyov. 5. Tapepépovto ovy €x TavTwY TAY opéwy xXpoats v2 / id \ A , A Wd) vA ral TotKiNals AcEAATOMNMEVOL UTTIO TOY avdpav Kal émredidoyTo Tats , , ’ \ U mapbévors’ ai Sé mapOévor Svépepov avTovs did THs TUANS Kal b] / ’ \ ? \ a / Nes, > \ émredioouy eis TY OLKOdOMNnY Tov TrUPYoU. Kal bray eis THY oikodopny éréOnaay of ALOot of TrovKiroL, bpmotoe eryévovTO Nev- Kol, Kal Tas Ypoas Tas ToLKinas HAAaTCOV. 6. Ties dé AiPot 5] / ¢ \ aA >’ aA ’ \ > , \ ’ Ses, emedioovTo UTO TOV avopav eis THY olKOSomNY, Kal OVK éyi- > fal € vovTo AapTrpol, GAN oloe éréOnaav, TolodToL Kal evpéOncav’ > \ 3 e \ tal Oé ’ 8 PS) 7 joe Py \ A ov yap noav v0 Tov TrapVévar émridedopévot, ovdé dia THS iv. 2 ody] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. A; ¢ E. 6éxa] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A (c’ after oi). kal dvém\noav...éxetvot] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,E, cf. L,]; om. A by homeeot, 3 elxoot mévre] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,]; elxoot A; guindecem E. éyévovro...700 mupyou] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homceot. 6 b70 sec.] dd A. 374 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 92 av. t / & ic e / > n ed b TUAns Tapevnveypévol, ovTOL OvY ot AiOoL amrpeTeEis HoaV eV a A r , , \ TH oiKodouy Tov mMupyou. 7. LoovTes dé of EE avdpes TOUS riO Ss a els €v TH OLKOOOMT EKEX JTovs apOn- iOous Tovs ampetreis ev TH oiKodomt ExéXeveay avTovs apO7 he rn / > A ” t e/ aa, vat Kal amaxOnvat [katw] eis Tov idtov TOToV dOev HvéxOnoav. 8. Kal Néyoucs Tois dvdpact Tots Tapeupepovart Tovs AiGous* a \ "Orws vets pur) emrididore els THY oiKodopny AiOous" TiOeTE dé ’ \ \ \ / tf ec / \ a / avtovs Tapa tov Tupyov, wa at maplévor dud THs TUANS mapeveyK@aly avTovs Kal éTiOLdGow els THY oiKodounVY. éav U fi \ fal Lal lal / U \ yap, [pact,] dua Tév YELpav TOV TapHEvwY ToOUTwY pH TapeE- lal a an ’ ’ veyOdar Sia THs TUANS, TAS XpOas avTav addaE~at ov Svvav- ie \ A Ge , > / Tat’ py KomLate ovv, [paciy,] els warn. \ > / “ ¢€ / > ’ € > / > > V. Kat érerécOn 77 jpmépa exeivn 7) olKodoun, OVK amreTe- AécOn SE 6 TUpyos’ Ewerre yap [radu] érrotKodopetcOan’ Kat ’ / ’ \ A > Lal > / \ ead vv A eyéveTo avoyn THS oiKodomHs. €xéhevoay Ce ol EE avdpes TOUS oixodopodytas avaywphoat wixpov [ravtas]| Kai avarravOjvac’ a fal / lal tais dé wapOévos érrétakay aro Tov TUpyou my avaywpnoaL. eddxer Sé por Tas TapOévovs KaTarereipat Tod pudacoew cl A TOV Tupyov. 2. weTa Oe TO avaywphnoa TavTas [Kal avarrav- a r ef Ojvat] Neyo TO Troipéve’ Ti O71, Pnpl, Kipce, od cvveTehéaOn ic ’ \ an , v / fe ’ A 1) olkobopn TOD TUpyou ; Ov’rw, dyci, dvvatat atroTehec Ojvat e€ / 3.N Sy: ¢ , bs] nr \ / \ 3 6 TUpyos, €av p47) EXON 6 KUpLOS avTOD Kal SoKiacy THY OiKo- Souny TavTny, iva éav Twes ALOot GaTrpol evpeOdawy, addaky ’ t A 4 \ \ > la , , al is f avtous’ mpos yp TO éxeivou Oérnpa oikodopeitat 6 TUpyos. v / / , fal , A LES. c 3. "Hderov, prt, KUpte, TOUTOV TOD TUpPYoU yyevat Ti eat 7 oikobopn) avTn, Kal TEpt THS TETPAS Kal TUANS Kal TOV opéwv Kai Tév Tapbéver, Kal Tav MOwy tay éx Tod BvO0d avaBe- / 2 ’ ad U Bnkotov Kal pr) NeXaTOUNMEVOY, GAN oUTw@S aTreNOovTwY Ets Tv oixodouny. 4. Kal Svat’ mp@tov eis Ta Oepwédua déKxa / Sis, 3 ” , 3 / > rAiOor éréOnoay, cita eixoct TévTE, ElTa TpLaKOVTA TéVTE, EiTa / \ \ a t a bd / 5) \ TecoapakoyTa, Kal TEpt TOV ALOwY TOV aTreAnAVOOTOY Els THY >] \ \ / ? / \ > f yy > ¥. oiKodouny Kal Tad npmevev Kal eis TOTOY LdLoyv amroTEOeELpe- ’ Yov" Tepl TAVT@Y TOUTWY avaTravaoy THY ~ruynVY joU, KUPLE, 9. iv. 8 rots sec.] add rére A app.; add hos L,; om. LE. émdldore | emdldwre A. 4 elxooe TevTe] [L,L.]; elxoot A; guindecem E. \ , , Cw ’ r , ! Nene Kat yvwploov ot avta. 5. “Kav, pyoi, Kevootrovoos fur) evpe- A t / bi 8) / \ ¢ / > , Y Ons, TavTa yvwon. MET Or(yas yap nmépas | éXevTOMEOa év- U \ \ Ne \ b] Lg a / t) A Oade, kai Ta AowTra Ores Ta ETTEpYomEva TO TUPYH TOUT, Kal / \ ‘ > A , macas Tas TapaBoXas axpiBas yvoon. 6. Kal pet ddLyasS Lee 4 ” > \ LU Se 4 \ , nuepas | HAGouev eis TOv ToTrOV Ov Kexabixapmer, Kal NéyeL pol’ \ \ / ¢ \ ’ / a "Aye Tpos Tov TUpyov" Oo yap avOevTns TOU TUpyou épye- rn f Tal KaTavonoat avTov. Kal HAOowev Tpos Tov TUpyov’ Kab A \ WN ? \ e ft , Odes ovOeEls HY pos avTOV E py al TrapOévoe poval. 7. Kab > Ap. \ \ ie 3) iS, / ETEpwTGA O TroLuny Tas TapVEvouS Ef apa Trapeyeyover 0 SeaTrd- A / e XS I FON yA TNS TOD TUpyov. ai dé Epnoay péAXELY avTOV EpxecOat KaTa- Lal ’ VOnoaL THY OLKOSOMNY. \ tal VI. Kai idod pera pixpov Pr?7rw Tapatakw Today ’ 5 a > O / ni al >’ \ / J / ¢ Wa a avépav épxouevov’ Kal els TO pécov aynp Tis vynrdOs TA J tf \ / ¢ / \ ead v7 e peye0e, ore Tov Tupyov vmepéyerv. 2. Kal of SE avdpes o4 ’ \ ’ \ b] / > lal \ ’ al els THY olKodouny | émitakavTes, ex Se~idv Kal dpioTepav > ’ la) PeT aUTOD TepleTTaTOUY, Kal TavTes of Els TY OLKOdomnD | > > ’ fy oe! Nae \ / b) A EPYATAMEVOL [LET AUTOV NOAY, KAL ETEPOL TTOANOL KUKAW AUTOV y € al r € a \ , évdoEor. ai dé mapbévor ai Tnpodoat Tov mUpyov Tpoasdpa- fal I. ’ , A povoa KatediAnoay avTov, Kai HpEavto éyyvs avTov TrepiTra- a lo) / a TElY KUKA@ TOD TUpyoUv. 3. KaTEVdEL dé 6 aYnp exeElvos THY bl] a if lal oixodouny axpiBas, @aote avTov Kal” éva riPov Whradav. Kpatay Sé Twa paBdov TH yelp Kata Eva ALOoY THY wKOdOUN- pare p A xeup dv grodoun \ , a pévov éTuTTE. 4. Kal OTay érraTaccer, €yévOYTO aUTOY TIVES ¢ / \ \ \ péeAaves Wael acBorn, Ties 5é Efrwplaxores, TuVées 5€ TYLT WAS / b) éyovtes, Tues 5é KorNOBol, Tivés SE OTE NevKO! OTE pwéraYES, \ \ a MS \ la) A e / / Tues 5€ Tpayels Kal pn cupdwvodyTes Tots Erépois AiOoxs, \ \ I \ 54 *, ® 3 e J, tives 5€ ominous ToS EXOVTES’ AUTAL NOaY al TOLKLNLAL A / A A (~ / >’ \ ’ , Sas TOV NiOwv TAY caTrpaev evpEHévTwr Els THY OiKOSOMHY. 5. EKE- os / nA A Aevoev OV TaVvTas TOVTOUS Ex TOD TUPYyoU peTEvEeXOnVaL Kal A \ \ Uy \ Leta? 3 a f \ TeOnvat Tapa TOV TUpyoV, Kal Etépous evexOnvar NiGoUS Kat euBrAnOjnvar eis Tov torov avtav. 6. | Kal érnpwtncay v. 5 éMevodpeba...nuépas] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. vi. 1 Wore] ws A. 2 émiraéavtes...olxodouiy] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. 3 érumre) L,E; pref. rpis A; def. L,. FAS THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. M4 Go r rf / U h ’ lel / avTov 01 oLKodomodrTes, €x Tivos dpous HéAy evexOnvat ALGouS Vile al ’ ‘\ Ul ’ lal \ ] \ lal , / Kal €uBrAnOjnvac eis TOv TOTOV avTw@y. | Kai ex pEVv TOV OpEwV ] b / ’ lal 3 / / > \ v ovuK éxédevoev evexOjvat, | ex Sé TWOS Trediov eyyVs GVYTOS b) / 7 - \ > / \ / \ ¢ / exédevoev evexOnvat. | 7. Kal wWpvyn TO Tediov, Kal Euvpé- \ Gnoav ridor Aaumpol TeTpAaywvol, TWES SE Kal TTpPOYYyUAOL. ev a s / ’ A / , J ’ ; lA Oot O€ TOTE Hoav AiOoL ev TO TrEdip ExElv@, TaVTEs HvEXON- \ \ Lal , , / € \ A / cav, kal dua THS TUAnS éEBactalovto vO THY TraplEévar. 8. Kai éhatounOncay oi TeTpaywvor iGo. Kali éTéOnoay Eis t tad / ,’ TOV TCTOV TOV Npuwéevwv: of S€ TTpoyyUAOL ovK ETEOHTAY ELS \ , , “ A S > ‘ On ’ , THY OiKObOMNY, OTL OKANPOL NoaVv Els TO AaTOUNOHVaL avToOUS, \ / a ES. Sa. \ \ \ / id kal Bpadéws éyéveto. €TéOnoav dé Tapa Tov TUpyoV, ws r a lal / > \ >] peAXOVT@Y avTOY AaTOMEicOaL Kai TiDerPaL Els THY oiKO- ' / \ A Ss: Sony: Alay yap Napmpot joav. T la) / ¢ ’ ¢ VII. Tatra otv cuvtedécas 6 avnp o évdokos Kai KUpLos dNov TOD TUpYoU TpogEeKadéaaTo TOV ToLMéVva, Kal TapedwKeEV a \ \ / auT@é Tovs AiGovs TavTas Tos Tapa TOY TUpyoy KELmevous, fal lal / lal Tovs aToBeBAnpévous ex THS oOlKOOMNS, Kal eyes AUTO: 2. “Emiperds xaBapicov tovs AOovs TovToOus Kai Oés avTovs b) \ fal ¢ val els TY OlKOdoMNY TOD TUpyoU, Tos SuvapévoUS apuocaL TOLS val \ , rn ’ r Rowtrots’ Tovs dé wn appolovtas piiroy pakpay ato Tov TuUp- lal A / bi ’ \ fal , you. 3. | TavTa KeXevoas TO TroLmeve aTrHEL ATO TOU TrUpyou | weTa TavTov ay éenrAvVOE. at dé TapHévos KUKA@ TOD TUPYOU e ’ al ’ fel V4 lal eloTNKELGAaY THpovcaL avTOV. 4. éyw TO Troméeve: Ids , e ¢ / , > \ > \ rn , Tadty ovToL of ALOoL SUVaVTAaL Els THY OLKOSOMNY TOU TUpYoU atrenbety avrobeboxipmacpévot ; atroxpiOeis por Neyer’ Brérreus, / f > dyci, Tovs NOous TovTous ; Brévra, dy, cvpie. “Eyo), hyo, TO TAElaTOV pépos TOV AiGwy TOVTWY NaTOLNTw Kal Bara > \ > ' AD bee , \ aA A , els TiV OlKOOOMNY, Kal apmodovaL “ETA TOY ROLTOV ALOwV. rf / / / 5. Iles, dni, xvpre, SVvavtat TepixoTévtes TOV aUTOV TOTO -“ ’ \ , =e: Wea r TAnpweca; atroxpibeis Neyer wow “Ocot pixpol evpeOjcovtat 9. vi. 6 Kal érnpwrnoay...rémov aitav] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. éx O€ rwos...€vex@7jvac] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,]; sed e montibus é proximo tussit apportare E; om. A by homceot. Vii. 3 Tadra...d3o Tob mupyou] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homeceot. 4 1s] ins. Harmer [I.,L,E]; om. A. Bad@] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; Badd\w A. , / , els péonv THY oixodouny BAnOncorTat, door dé pelfoves, éEw- / ’ A Tepot TEOHTOVTAL Kal TVYKPAaTHTOVELY avTOVS. 6. TadTa pot v \ Narnoas révyer pow “Aywpev, Kal pweTa nuépas Svo EXOwpev \ es \ / fi \ U 9 \ Kai kabapicwpev Tovs AiGovs TovToUs, Kat Badwuev avtovs , r €is THY olKOSOMHY’ Ta Yap KUKNw TOU TUpyoU TavTa Kaba- A a ' c a ~~! >. \ \ \ ptoOnvar dei, unmote 0 Seomotns eEatriva EXOn Kal TA TeEpi AS , € \ ef \ aif \ e if / Tov TUpyov puTrapa e’pn Kal Tpocoxlicy, Kal ovToL of ALL ’ ’ / > \ 3 \ lal / ’ A ’ \ OUK ATreNEVGOVTAL Els THY OLKOSOMHY TOU TUPYoU, Kayo apes A U \ Nie 2G Ud d0€w civat Tapa TO OeoToTy. 7. Kai peta nuépas Svo 7AG0- \ , : ! fev Trpos TOV TUpyoV, Kal Neyer wor’ Katavonowper Tovs Xi- \ , \ Gous mavtas, Kal idwpev Tods Svvapévous els THY oixodomny a a / / ameneiv. éyw avto’ Kupse, eatavonowmper. , fal VIII. Kai apEapevos mpadtov Tovs wéXavas Katevoodpev xr/6 \ e > a , } n > LQ A \ (Oovs. Kati oloe ex THS olKodomys étéOnaav, ToLodTOL Kal ¢ ¢ L ’ \ an evpéOncav. Kali éKédXevcEV aUTOUS O ToLpnY ex TOD TUpyYoU peTevexOjvat Kal ywpicOjvar. 2. eita KaTevdonce Tos &fpo- ‘ \ a plakotas, kai KaBawv eNaToOu nce TOANOUS EE a’Ta@r, Kal éxé- / s 2 \ \ lal ’ A Aevoe Tas TapOévous Gpat avTovs Kai Barely els THY oiKo- f NES) ’ \ e bé \ bY > \ Sounv. Kal npav avtovs at tapGévor Kai EOnKkav eis THv 9 \ rf / / \ \ \ 3 / OiKosopny TOD TuUpyou pécous. Tovs bé Aoutrovs éxéNeucE rn >» a A \ META TOV peraverv TeOHnvar’ Kal yp Kal oUTOL pédaves evpé- be ‘i Oncav. 3. elTa KaTevdoEeL TOS Tas TYLopaAs ExyoVYTAS Kal eK ‘ A TOUTWY TOANOUS EXaTOUNTE Kal exéNevTE Oia TOV TapOévar > x ] y \ ’ On 5 3 , be , We) oA els THY oiKodouny amrevexOnvar eEwTepot Sé éTéOncay, OTL (2 / CH a, € \ \ \ \ a a Uyleotepor evpeOnaav. oi O€ AowTroi Ova TO TAHOOS TAY TXLC- / b ’ t On 5 8 \ / > \ peatov ovK ndvvnOncav RAaTopnOnvar’ did TavTHY ovY THV ah ? I Sins a > a A 1 5 aitiav amreBAnOncav aro THS oiKOdounS TOU TUpyov. 4. €iTa / \ / € / a KaTevoes Tovs KoNOBos, Kal evpéOncav ToAXol év avTots , \ \ \ / ! r CVs V2 péraves, Tes O€ oXLTMAaS EeyaXas TreTOLNKOTES’ Kal ExédevTE / a \ A 3 > / Kal ToUTouvs TeOnvar pera ToV aTroBEBAnuévwY. Tovs Oé > lal / \ / la TepicaevovtTas avtTwev Kalapicas Kat AaTounoas éxédevceV Vii. 5 THY olKodouty] conj. Gebhardt; ris olxodouijs A. 6 epi] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; mapa A. mpocoxdicn] mpocoxOnon A. viii. 2 AaBdv] [E]; NaPwv A; om. L,L,. 3 dHO0s] [L,L,]; raxos A; dub. E. 378 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [5. 9. viii ’ \ ’ ‘ On e be bé , ‘ wv ’ els THY OLKOOOMNY TEOnVAaL. al dé TapOEVOL avTOS apacat ELS ta) / Ul 6 , i \ uéony THY olKOSounY TOD TUpYyoU HpHocav’ acleverTepot yap (4 / t \ hoav. 5. €lTa KaTevoes Tos Hploets evKOUs, Hutoers OE “ al { ae wédavas’ Kal ToAXol €€ avtadv evpéOnoay pédaves. €xéEVTE , rf + a i) Sé Kal TovTovs apOnvar peta Tav aTroBeBAnpevov. Foi bé / » a Rourrol [AevKol] mavtes [evpéOncay Kai] ipOncav v0 TaV \ € / ¢ , an a mapOévar’ AevKol yap ovtTes npwoaOncay uT avTay [Tay Tap- , > \ > / Ee naigensy Nw. 1 ‘ A Oévor] eis THv olxodopnvt eEdrepor dé éréOnaav, ore vytets ,’ \ a \ evpeOnoay, bate SUvacbat a’Tovs KpaTety Tovs eis TO mETOV b) A ’ rebévtas’ bdws yap €E a’Twy ovdey éxodoBabn. 6, ita / \ \ \ Lal \ ’ / , ) rl KATEVOEL TOUS TKANPOVS Kal Tpayeis, Kal odIyor €€& avTa@V \ an ameBrAnOnoav Sia TO pn SVvVacPat AaTOuHOHVAL’ TKANpOL yap Alav edpéOncav. of 5& Rowrot avTov édaTounOncay [Kat v ¢ \ a , \ ’ / ‘ > A npOnoav vTr0 Tév Taplévwy] Kal els peony THY olKodopnY Tov mupyou npuocOncav’ acbevéotepor yap joav. 7. €iTa KaTevoel TOUS ExoVTAas TOUS oTIAOUS, Kal Ex TOUTWY ENAYLTTOL - éuerXavnaav, Kal areBANOnoay Tpos Tovs AovTrovs. ot 6é al c / mepiaaevovTes NauTrpol Kal vytels evpeOnoav’ Kat ob ToL Nppoo- ¢€ \ lal / 3 \ >, / - 3’ / \ Oncav vTd Tov Tapbévav eis THY olKodopny’ eEdTEpoL dé , al éréOnoav Sia THy ioxupoTnta avTav. IX. Elta 7G catavojoat Tovs NEvKOUS Kal TTPOYyYUAOUS NlOous, Kal Néeyer woe: Ti trovodmev Tepl TOVTwY TOY AOw? ; if > Ti, dnl, eyo ywoonw, Kipie; [Kal réyer po-] Ovdev otv ° > a 3 , érwoels wept avtav; 2. “Eyo, dni, Kvpie, TavTHy THY / ’ ” ,’ \ f > / 3 \ / fr Téxyynv ovK exw, ovdéE AaTOpmos eEiui, ovdSe SvVapLaL voroat. , v Ov Brérrets avtovs, dynci, Alav oTpoyyvAous ovTas; Kal éav , a lal lal Oerynow avtovs TeTpaywvous Tolncal, TOV Sel aw avTe@V > Lol i. r \ ’ ’ Led > ’ / A 3 \ > amoxotnvas’ det dé €& avtav €& avayKns TiVvas Els THY OLKO- 9. viii. 4 acOevéorepor] dcbevéorepa A. 5 evxol] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. A. evpéOnoay kai] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. A. Or perhaps we should keep the text of A, only changing dvres jpudcOnoay into mavtes evptOnoav. 6 oxkAnpovs kat tpaxets] conj. Harmer [L,L,E]; Tpaxets Kal okAnpods A. bro] amo A. aabevécrepor] dcbevéocrepar A app. 7 éuedavncay] éueddvwoav A, bytets] conj. Gebhardt [L,L, integr2]; éxewo. A; om. E. ix. 1 Kal Aéyet wor] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. A. \ a ? ? ee A ? Sounv teOjvar. 3. Et ovv, pymi, xvpe, avayen éotl, ti \ / \ ’ > / > \ ’ \ a\ geavtov Pacavifers Kai ovK ExdéyELS Eis THY OlKOdOMNY ods , eG , ’ Oérews, Kal appofers els avrnv; ée&eréEato €& avtav Tovs / \ , \ U ) , e \ MeiCovas Kal Nautrpovs, Kat éXaTOuNoEVv avToUs’ ai dé Trap- Oévot dpacat Hppocay eis Ta eEwtepa mépn Tis olkodopns. e \ \ e / ” \ ’ / 4. of O€ AoLTrOl of TepicaevcarTes HpOncar, Kal ameTéOnoay A ’ els TO Tediov dev nvéxOncav: ovK aTeBANOncay 6é, “OTL, pyol, relies TH TUpyw ETL pLKpov oiKOdouNOHVaL. TravTa@s 5é Oérer 6 Searotys Too mUpyou TovTovs dppoaOAvat Tovs / AiPous els THY oiKodomnY, OTL Naptrpol Elot Alay. 5. eKAN- Oncay 5é yuvaixes dodexa, evevdéctaTat TO YapaKxTnpl, weXaVA b] / Va \ ” \ y ” evdedupévat, [TepreSwopévar Kat €Ew Tovs wmovs éxovcat,| Kal Tas Tpiyas Aedvpévat. edoKodcay Sé pot ai yuvaixes e by a) rd secth \ ’ \ ¢ \ 3 \ avTat dypiat civar. éxédevoe SE avTAas 0 ToLunY Gpat Tovs / lel A a AiBous Tos aToBePAnpEvous Ex THS OiKOdoMNS, KaL ATrEevEyKElV ’ \ > , » A \ SCs. e No lime: \ avtous eis Ta Opn OOev Kal nvéxyOnoav. 6. ai dé idapal S \ ’ , U v / Nas ¢/ Hpav, Kal amnveyxav tavtas Tovs ALOous, Kal EOnxav OOev eAnpOnoav. Kat peta TO apOnvat Tavras Tovs ALMous Kal / lal / / fal Ul / ¢€ / enkete KetoOas Nov KUKN@ TOD TUpYoU, AéyeL pol O TroLpNY® KuxrA@owpev tov wUpyov, Kal dopey pon TL eNaTT@pMA éoTLY év avT@. Kal exUKNEVOV eyo ET aUTOD idav 6€ 6 } V AUT@. K yo He ) O TOLLNV \ fZ b) a wv A 9 A , ¢. \ > ¢ \ TOV TUpPYoV EUTpETH OVTA TH OLKOOOMH, Alay thapos Hv* 6 yap 7 3 ’ / (2 an TUPYOS OUTS HV @KOCOMNMEVOS, WaTE we LOovTa émLOUpELY THY , \ ’ lal A \ io 7 ji € \ > e \ oiKodopnv avTOv* oVTw yap HY wKOdopNmévos, Wadv éF Eévds rie \ oy» / ¢ \ 3 e A 2! , be ¢ Whe i iOov, kai xv play appoyny év éavt@. édhaiveto O€é 6 AiOos e > A , ’ / / U ’ / WS €k THS TETPAS ExKEKONApLMEVOS* LoVENLUOS yap jor eddKEL eivat. a > a A X. Kayo qrepitatéy pet avtod ihapos juny Tovadta ayala Brétrav. Déyet Sé pot 6 Troiunv: “Traye cal dépe v7 Ni sh / 7 \ , A / doBectov Kai doTpaxov AETTOVY, iva TOVSs TUTOUS TOY AiOwY ix. 4 mUpyy] [L,L,E]; pxpe A. mayTws] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; mavras A. 5 evedéorarat] everdéorara A. Teprefwomevat...exovoar | ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. 7 otrws|([L,L,]; otros A; dub. E. éxkekoAapuevos] conj. Anger [L,L,]; éyxexoNaumévos AE. 380 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. x a , / \ ’ A ») ‘ / , / TOV npHevov Kal Els THY OlKOOopnY BEeBAnLEevwY avaTANpwTw* a \ a r \ , , € ‘ , ‘ del yap Tod TUpyou Ta KUKAw TaVTa OoMada yevérOa. 2. Kal ’ / \ ’ / Nia, \ ’ it ¢ / érroinca Kabas éxédevae, Kal HVEyKa TpOs avTov. “Tarnperet / A 3 \ Ay. 0) bY t be A fot, MNCL, Kal EyYUS TO Epyov TEhEeTOHTETAL. ETANPwWoEV OV \ t fal , A , A a! aN ,’ / Tovs TUTrOUS TOV ALOwWY TAY Els THY OiKOOOMNY aTrEANnAVOOTOD, \ 5] / a cy Ud lal / \ \ Kai €xédhevoe capwOnvar Ta KUKX@ TOU TUpPYoU Kal KaSapa e 4 fa) / yevecOar 3. ai dé tapOévot AaBotvaat capous éEcadpwoar, Kai S lal / AN ) A TavTa Ta KOTpPa npav €K TOU TUpyoU, Kal Eppavay Vowp, Kai \ ’ / a , éyéveTo 0 TOTOS tNapos Kal EevTpETécTaTOS TH TUpyYy. 4. / if / id Aéyes pot 0 Trouunv: Ilavta, dyol, KexaOapiotas: éav ENON O / b] / \ i} ,’ ” CA XOX VA KUplos éemicKeyacOat Tov Tupyov, ovK EXEL Huiv ovdEV pép- lal € \ achat. Taira civov HOcdev UTdyewv" 5. éy@ Oe érehaBopunv > lal A f \ , / b] \ € / \ la) / avtTov THS THpas Kal npEdunv avTov opKlfew Kata Tov Kupsov Ud ‘\ 4 J \ iva [wavta] pou émidvon a EdeaEE prot. Réyet pore Muxpov ” > n \ t 5) / bator / e ¢ éyo axaipeOjvat, Kal Tavta cot émidvow' ExdeEat we WOE Ews ” , naAS l / a e tanya ! épyouat. 6. Nyw avT@’ Kupre, wdvos ov wbe €y@ Ti Togo; ,’ 5 / Ul 5 e s\ / ial \ rf > / Ovx ci, dnol, povos’ at yap tmapOévot avTat peta cod Eicl. ’ A an ’ \ 9 Tlapados ody, dni, adtais we. TpocKareitat avTas 0 TroLmnY \ / > ar / Con a ? y < \ Kat Neyer avtais’ LapatiOewar vuiv TodTov Ews Epyomat’ Kat b) a > \ Niger, / \ A / ee annrbev. 7. éy@ b€ Hunv movos peta Tov Taplévay’ jnoav Nene: , \ \ See ° 2 oO / \ ¢ U dé iNapwrepat, Kal mpos Eué Ev elyov' pwardiota 5é al Téecoapes / a ai évookotTepat avTav. / A id > XI. Aéyovoi poe ai wapOévor: Xnpepov 6 ropnv wb¢ *) 4 / a / , ov épyetat. Ti odv, dnl, toncw eyo; Méypis ove, dacir, y EN Re SW , \ iy EDA \ \ Tepimetvov avTov’ Kai éav EXOn, NaAHoEL pETA cod, Eay O€ pn - a > € a SO v4 ” , a] A EXOn, pevets pel nuadv woe Ews Epyetar. 2. Aéyw avTais: o) \ © ’ , \ \ "Exdé£opuat avtov Ews ore’ éav dé wn EXOn, amrerNevcopar els \ 5 \ Aly eS) , € \ ’ tad / , TOV OlKoOV, Kat Tpwl éravn—w. ai Sé aTroxpiOetcat Néyouct 9. x. I Hpuévwy kal els THY olkodouny] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,]; npuocpévwy ets riv oixodouny kal A; dub. L,E. x. 2 pot] pe A. tehec Ojoerat][L,, cf. L,] E; illeg. in A; TeAevdjoerat app. AS. Tay sec.] om. A. 3 capous] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; odpov A. T@ TUpyy] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,E]; Tov mupyou A; al. L,. 5 wovTa] ins. Harmer [L,L,E]; om. A. a- KatpeOjvat] [L,L,E]; dvarpeOjva A. 6 @nul][L,L,E]; gnoiA. xi. 1 dye g~aclv] con}. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; 6ré pnow EO (sic) A. SAE sae atl THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 381 ahve A , = o) , Soh Peete ’ A por’ “Hyuiy mrapedo@ns' ov dvvaca af’ nuav avaywphoat. A ze A bd ¢€ A / 3. Ilod ovv, dni, weve; Me® nuav, daci, xoiunOnon ws ’ , \ ,’ ¢ > f ¢e / \ ’ \ i? \ A adeA gos, Kai oVY Ws avnp. nNéTEpos yap adedgos €7, Kai TOD NoTrov wéANOMEV META TOD KaTOLKEW" Niav yap cE ayaTapeD. 3 \ \ ’ / >) ’ lel / N e A eyo S€ joyuvouny pet avTay péverv. 4. Kal 7 doxodca 1 by a s v / A AN UA 2 TpOTN avTav elvat npEATO me KaTapirelv Kal TrepiTréKec Oat e \ + ¢ a > / , \ ’ \ at 8€ GdXat Opdcas Exeivyny TepiTAEKOpEeVHY OL, Kal avTat yw , aA \ / , fal , npEavTo me KaTadinrely Kal Teplayely KUKAM TOD TUpyoU Kal ’ fal > \ e \ i; matey eT €m“ov. 5. KaYW WoEL VEWTEPOS eyeyovely Kal ’ , \ ey / ’ ’ a ¢ \ \ ’ , npEaunv Kat avTos trailew weT avTaV. al perv yap éxopevor, eg. 3 A egy, 8 cee aN \ Neo ’ dA [ai 5€ wpyodvTo,| ai dé Hdov' eyo dé ouyny éxov eT avTaoV , A / AU ie \ I ’ A KUKA@ TOD TUpYouU TepLeTaTOUY, Kal iNapos TuNV MET AUTOD. ’ 3 \ 3 ¢ 6. orvpias dé yevouévns 70edov eis TOV oiKov Virayev' al dé ? by A b \ / MW) b) ’ a \ ovK apjnKav, dAXa KaTécyov me. Kal Euetva peT avTOV THY vUKTA, Kal éexolunOny Tapa Tov TUpyov. 7. é>Tpwoay yap at Taplévor Tovs ALvods YiT@Vas EavTaY Yamai, Kal ewe avéxdVvaV > \ / ’ a \ OX e/ ’ y > \ , els TO fécov avT@Y, Kal ovdéY OdXwS ErOloUY Ef un TpOTNU- b] ’ ’ a Yj 4 YOVTO’ Kay® MET aVTa@Y adiarelTTwS TpocnUYomNY, Kal OvK ¥ éXacaov éexeivorv. Kal Exatpov ai TapBévot oUTw mou Tpocev- \ an , A , Youevov. Kal émerva exel weypt THs avplov Ews dpas Seutépas \ a / s lal € A peta Tov Tapbevwv. 8. eita maphy 6 ToL, Kal EyeL Tais Ul mapOévors Mn twa avto UBpw metomxate; “Epodta, daciv, b} , / ’ ae , ’ / ’ ? A / avTov. Réeyw avT@ Kupre, evppavOnv pet avtév pelvas. Ti / 7) / A "ES / / / Coy: t, pynow, EdeiTTVNCas ; elTUnoa, Pnut, KUPLE, pyuaTta x a / »- Kupiov 6rAnv thv vinta. Karas, dyoiv, éraBov ce; Nai, na lal > f dni, xvpee. 9. Nov, dai, ti OédXerus TpeTov axovcoas; K fa) , / , > ’ 3 A gS > A f A adws, dnut, Kuple, at apyns edecEas, EepwT@ ce, KUpLE, iva \ ” > / vA \ Py s K 0 \ Kadas av oe émepwtnow, oTw pot Kai Syroons. Kades t 1 Bovre, dnoiv, ottw cor kal éridvow, Kal ovdéy OWS aTrO- ’ fe) KpU vo amo cod. t A / / XII. LUpdrov, dni, ravtwv, cvpte, TodTO pot d7)Awoov: ¢€ / Ny Je , , b] ‘H / / ids \ € ” TETPA Kal 7 TUAN TLS €oTLV; mTétTpa, Pyociv, avTN Kal xi. 4 mepumdéxeoPacr] conj. Harmer [L,L,]; mepim...cAac A; om. E. avrai] conj. Harmer [L,L,E]; aira A. 6 yevouevns] yevouevos A. 9 ge sec.] cou A. 352 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xii e la) a a / mUAn 6 vios TOD Beod éori. Tlds; nul, Kvpie, n TweTpa , , / maraia éotw, 7 Sé€ TUAn Kan; “Axove, dynoi, Kal cvVEE, s e e lal lal / lel , davvete. 2. 0 pev vios TOV Meod mans THs KTicews AUTO / / S: “/ / > \ / Lal mpoyeveatepos eoTw, wate aiuBovrov avTov yevérbat TH fal ’ fa) lal , € matpt THs KTicews avTod* bia TODTO Kal TadaLos cot. “H / 4 / ,’ Sé mvrAn Sati Kawn, pnw, Kvpie; 3. “Or, dnow, ér n tal / eoydatwov Tov Hpepav THs cuvTErelas havepos éeyéveTo, dia ad ¢ , ToUTO Kal éyéveTo 1) TUAN, iva of médrovTEs awWlecOat Se lel Lo la / avutns els THY Bacirelav eicéXOwot TOD Deod. 4. eides, Hyat, a t ’ Tovs ALOovs Tovs bia THS TANS EANAVOOTAaS | aTrEAndv- / , \ ’ \ A ‘ \ \ \ > Ooras | cls Tv olxodopny Tod Tupyou, Tos Sé pn eloeAndv- LU &. Ostas Tadw aroBeBXnpévous eis Tov idvov Torov; Eiédov, \ lal dnt, xipre. Otto, pyoiv, eis tHv Bacirelav tod Oeod , \ , t > A ‘ \ v r € ’ Lal ovoels eloeNevoeTal, EL pn AABoL TO Ovow“a TOU VOD aUTOU. 5. éav yap els Todw Oednons eiceNOeiy TWA, KaKELVNn 7 TOMS f mepiTeTeryso evn KUKAM Kal play exer TUAHY, HTL duYHOH , \ ld 5 / pI al ’ \ \ r / 2 yy” els THY TONAL exeivny eloedOetv Eb pn Sia THS TANS Hs EXEL; lal / / Ilds yap, dnui, xipee, Svvatae addrAws; Et ovy eis thy modu ov dvvn eicedOciy et por Sta THS TUANS avTHs, oT, dyci, Kai eis THY Bacihelav TOD Oeod adrAwWS eioeh Oe ov duvatat avOpwros ef wn Sia TO OVdémaTos TOD viod avTOD lal b) , ty _19 by fal s / \ 54 \ ToD nyamnpevov UT avTod. 6, Eeldes, pynal, TOY OyAOV TOV lal 2 tal oixodopovvta Tov Tupyov; Hidov, dnut, Kcvpre. °Exelvor, / i vv yy / 3 / C. 7, dyol, mavtes ayyenot évdokol eiat. TovTous ovv TreEpeTeETei- ¢€ , ¢ / id la! r xictat 6 Kupios. 1 5€ wvAn 6 vidos TOD Ocod éctiv’ a’tn pia eloodds éaTt Tpos TOV Kupiov. aAXwS ov ovdels eiveNevoeTaL \ \ rn fo) fo mpos avTov et 1) Sua Tod viod avTOD. 7. Eldes, nai, TOVS EE ” \ \ / . A ” \ / oo \ avépas Kal Tov wécov avt@v évdofov Kai péyav avdpa Tov A \ \ Ld \ mepiTatobvTa Tept Tov Tupyov Kal Todvs ALOovs atrodoKima- a 2 / cavta €x THs oiKodouns; Eidov, dnut, cvpte. 8. “O &vdo€os, / Se N ¢ e\ a toll 5) / > lal est © dyciv, avnp 6 vios Tod Oeod éori, Kaxetvos ot EE ot Evdokot 9. xil. 2 Kricews] KTHoEwWs A. 3 €oxaTwr] éoxarov A. 4 amreAndv- @éras] ins. Harmer [L,E, cf. L,]; om. A by homeeot. Tod viod] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; 70 dyoy A. 5 da THs mvUdns] L,L,E; om. A. 6 képios} [L,L,E]; xdomos A. 7 wept) [L,L,E]; mapa A. v fe 3 p>) \ \ Sh A ’ , y} aryyedot eos deta Kai evovupa cuyxpatobytes avTov. Tov- t tal > / a 3 t ’ Tov, Pnol, TOV ayyéXwv TeV évdcEwv ovdels EiaEeNEeVoETAL \ \ @) \ bu > Pen A NE 2 ’ n \ / mpos Tov Oevy atep avTov" Os dv TO dvowa avTod pn AaBn, / A le) OUK eiaeNevoeTat eis THY Bacirelav TOU Meod. ¢ \ , / / 3 € XIII. ‘O 6€ rvpyos, dnpi, tis éotiv; ‘O ripyos, dycir, e Be 9) , b] / ovtTos 7 Exkdnota éotiv. 2. At b€ trapOévos adtac tives ’ / \a 4 iA , f eto; Adtat, dnotv, aya Tvevpata eiot’ Kal adAdwS aDv- > , ¢ a a Opwrros ov Svvatat evpeOAvas eis thv Bacirelav tod Geod, TAN \ @ ’ \ 2! / \ 4 , A 3 \ si €av gy avtat avtov évdvowor 70 Evdupa adtav’ éav yap TO Uj (/ \ \ 14 ‘ dvoua povoy AaBys, TO Sé Evdu“a Tapa TovTwY pn AdBys, ID\ 3 t : e \ e L / SON mie Ge ovdev Ohednon av’Tat yap ai TwrapOévor Suvapecs ect Tod viod ra an Sey, bs Ney. a \ \ , \ a Tod Ocov. av [ovv] To dvoua hopys, THv 5é Svvapev pr) Hophs lal \ ” ’ a A avTov, els paTny Eon TO Ovowa avTov dhopav. 3. Tors Oe \ 3 ’ , @ ALBous, dyaiv, os eides aTroBEBAnpEVOUS, ODTOL TO meV dvO"a ’ / NS \ e \ aA / I] > py epopecav, Tov Sé imaticpov TaV TrapOévwy ovK évedicayTo. a \ ,’ A Ilotos, hyui, ywatiopos avtéy éoti, KUpie; AUTa Ta ovduata, / 3 A \ la) fa) o PTW, waTLTpMOS ETTLY AVT@YV. OS AV TO dvopsa TOD Vviod TOD rn ral N / 3 }- a 3 , Ocovd hop, Kai TovTwy odether hopeivy Ta ovowata’ Kal yap \ ¢ e Vs / A / / a aUTOS 0 ULOs Ta OvOo“aTa TAY TapOévwY ToUTwWY PhopEl. 4. OTOUS, i > \ fal gdnoi, AiGous eides cis THY olKodopuny | ToD mUpyou eloeXnAv- / tal A A Ooras, éridedopévous Sia THY Yetpov avTav Kal peivaytas eis \ > / ie lel / \ / > THY oiKodouny, | TOUT@Y TeV TapOévwy Tv Svvapw évdedv- A te pévot eici. 5. Oa TodTo Brérreis Tov TUpyov pover.ov \ a er Cal yeyovota [wera] THs TWéTpas. oUTw Kal Of TicTEVoOaYTES TO a ca ’ a Kupio dia Tod viod avtTod Kal évdudvoKdpevoe Ta TvEvpaTa a v > a n NUEN a A / a TavTa, écovTal eis Ev TvEdMA, Kal EV TOua, La ypda Tov a t a / (MaTiov aUTOY. ToOY ToLOVTwWY é TOY PopovYTwWY Ta ovopaTa a / b] \ ¢ lA 3 \ , e cr Tov TapGévwy éotiv 7 KaTotKia eis TOV TUpyoV. 6. Ok ov», 3 f / lal dnt, KUple, aTroBeBAnuévor AiO Svati atreBAHOncav; SiHr-~ xii, 8 a’rod] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; rod @eod A. xiil. 1 7] om. A. 2 déd\dAws] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; aAXos A. apednon] conj. Gebhardt ; aperels A. ov] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. A; e¢ E. 3 bro] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; av’rot A. 4 ToU mUpyou...olkodou7ny] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. 5 mera] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L.]; om. A; al. E. 384 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xiii \ \ al , \ PS) \ A a A bé Oov yap dia THs TUANS, Kal dia TaY YeLpav TaY TapHEVwY > , , ‘ > \ lal / >] ‘ , éréOnaav eis THY OiKOdomNnY TOU Tupyou. *Emedn mavTa oot, a U w a ’ pynot, wére, Kal axpiBas é€eralers, axove tepi Tay aTroBe- 7 e , , \oyw A wer Arnpéevov AL0@v. 7. odToL, [Pnot,] TavTes TO Gvowa TOD VLOD [ol lal \ \ \ , n tov Oeod éraBor, éraBov dé Kat tTHv Sdvamww tTév Tapbévov , U > \ , r ’ , ToUTwY. NaBovTes ovY Ta TYEVMATA TavTa évedvvapwOnca)r, Nae \ A , lo) lal ASS ,’ lal A le) Kal Hoav peta TOV SovAWY TOD D€Eod, Kal Hv aVTOY Ev TVEdMA We rst a Ay ren ” 5 \ \ ’ \ ’ y, \ kal &v copa [kal év évdvpa]’ ta yap avta éppovouy Kat duxatoovyny eipyafovto. 8. peta ody yYpovoy Twa aveTrel- id \ ~ A e *s , e , , cOncav UT0 TeV yuLatKav dy eldes péXava iwaTia évdEdU- / \ v ” > lal \ \ / / Hévov, Tos wpmous éEw Eyovtady Kal Tas Tpiyas NEeAUpEevAS A ’ / / > U 2) p , lal \ 5 / Kal evpoppov. Tavtas idovtes emeOvunoay avTa@y, Kai évedv- gavtTo Thy Ovvauly avToy, TOV dé TapOévwy aTredvcayTo THY ae > > , a fal a Suva. 9. ovTos ovv atreBANOncay a7ro Tov oiKov TOD Ocod ‘\ > ff / e \ \ >’ , A 4 Kal éxeivais TrapedoOnoav. ot d€ un atratnOévtes TO KaAAEL a A U a a lal TOY YUVALK@V TOVT@Y EuELVaY eV TO OiKw TOD Deod, Eyets,. / , onol, TH éeTidvow Tov aToBeBrAnLEVOV. s / fo XIV. Ti ody, dni, Kvpre, €av obTot of dvOpwrrot, ToLodTOL 3 al OVTES, METAVONTwWoL Kal aToBaXwart Tas éTLOUMLas TOY yuVal- fal ' \ > U > \ \ lA QS. KOV TOUTMY, Kal éTavaKawrpwo. emi Tas TapOévous, Kal ev a ' a a ’ A > TH Suvapet avteyv Kat év Tois Epyous avtav TopevOacuv, ovK 3 Lol Lol eloeXeVoovTal Eis TOY olKov Tov Mcov; 2. EKicedrevoovtat, / SUN Ll A a > U WN ee A \ gnoiv, av TovT@Y TOV yuvaLtKoV aTroBddwat Ta Epya, TOV SE , 3 , \ , WD a ” rei te! maplévov avaraBwot thv Svvapiv Kai év Tols Epyous avTa@V A \ ral \ \ A 3 A 3 \ b] f mopev0aar. Sia TODTO yap Kal THS olKOdoMAS dvoyn éyévETO, vA 3\ , @ >’ La > i >’ \ A iva éay meTavonowaty ovToL, aTéMwa eis THY OlKOdOLNnY TOD Ul SN \ \ (Z if, y. ’ 7] mupyov. éav € wn peTavonawat, TOTE GAOL aTTENEVCOYTAL, e ’ I / a Kal ovToL eis TéXOS EKBANONGOVTAL. 3. emt Tov’TOLS Tac > f A / (dé >] a: ’ \ A A nvyapiatnca 76 Kupio, oT éomrayyvicOn él maou Tots 9 ( AN», ish ’ aA NS: / Ni 7 ETLKANOULEVOLS TO GVO"A aUTOD, Kal é€aTréaTELNE TOV ayyEAOV / >) ¢ A \ is >] THS peTavolas Els Nas TOUS au“apTHaavTas Els avTOY, Kal ’ / € A \ a a AVEKALVLOEVY LOY TO TVEdpA, Kal On KaTEhOappévoy nuav 9. xiii. 7 Tod vilod] viod A. 8 a’ray pri.) adras A. xiv. 3 Tov dyyedov] [L,L,E]; rods dyyédXous (sic) A. S. 9.'xv] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 385 \ \ b / bs / a a > f? \ \ e A kal pn éxovtwv édrida tod hv advevéwoe thy Conv nuav. la! / / in / BAG , 4. Nov, pnymt, xvpre, Snr\woor pot, Siati 6 Tipyos yYapat ovK > / > es. Nj 4 \\ @KOOOMNTAaL, ANN eT THY TéTpaV Kal éTl THY TUANY. “Ort, / v s \ ’ / > La) > / ” gnow, appwv ei Kai acvvetos, [érepwrtas]. Avaykny éxo, / , / b] a ¢ +3909 6 ,’ \ , pyul, KUpLE, TAaYTA ETEPWTAY GE, OTL OVS OrAwWS OUdEeY SUVapaL A \ \ / / Noe: [iy ’ A / vonoal’ Ta yap TayTa peyada Kal évooEa éott Kal Svoevonra a bl] Mi 7 / \ v nr econ rn fo) tots avOpwrots. 5. "Axove, dno: TO évoua Tod viod Tod Ocod / > \ \ ] / \ \ , v4 / > Méya €oTl Kal aYWpNTOV, Kal TOV KOTMOoV OdOV BacTaler. Et > a ¢ a (18ers) a a ovv Taca » KTLots Sta Tov viod [Tov cod] Bacravera, Ti Soxeis Tovs KEeKANMEVoUS UT’ adTod Kal TO dvoua hopodyTas lal Cn n fal \ / nr > a > fal Tov viov [Tod @eod] Kal mropevoyévous tais évtorais avtod; , > ’ 6. Prérrets ovv Tolovs Bactafer; Tovs éE OANS Kapdias fo) 4 a 3 a opovvtas TO dvoma avTOv. avTOs ov Depértos avTOts éyéveETo, \ eas > \ , ow 5) > , A of Kat nOéws avTovs BacTtater, OTL ovK éTralayvvovTaL TO bvowa > nr a avTov popeiv. / U lel \ XV. Anracov pow, dni, Kipie, TOv Tapbé ver Ta > / Lal L A ovopata | Kal TOV yuVatKoV TOY Ta pédava iwatLa évdedv- , ” / a / \ be a pévov. “Axove, pynoiv, Tav TapCévwy Ta dvopata | THv A > a tioyupoTépwv, T@V eis Tas ywvias oTabecdy. 2. n bev / if \ 3 mpotn Iliotis, 9 5é€ Sevtépa “Eyxpareva, 1 Sé “Tp itn: Avvapis, » de te Tap'tn Maxpodvupia: ai 5é érepas ava a a 14 pécov TovTwy otabeicas Tav’Ta Eyovor Ta dvopata: “AT- / € / roTns, Axaxia, ‘Ayveta, ‘INaporns, Arn eva, LUvecis, “O W0- n \ a la voa, Ayarn. tadTa Ta ovouata 0 hopav Kal TO dvopa TOD viov Tod Meod duvncetas eis THY Bacireiav Tod Ocod eicen- rn / a lal aA Oeitv. 3. axove, pynoi, Kal Ta ovowaTta TOV yuUVYaLKeY TOY Ta (imatia pédava éyovo@v. Kal é€x TovTwY Técoapes cial / Err ie , 5) / ¢ / > , € Oy duvat@repar’ 1 tpwtn “Amiotia, 7 Sevtépa “Axpacia, 7 6é xiv. 3 dvevéwoe] [L,L,E]; avdvevoe A. 4 érepwras] ins. Harmer [L,L,]; om. AE (E read éru for drt). 5 To Oeod sec.] Oeod A; e7us L, 3 domint E; om. L,. xv. I d7Awodv wor] Sheet g of the Athos Ms, which commences here, is much damaged by worms. The lacunz, as supplied by Hilgenfeld, are designated by brackets, thus" 7. Kal Tov yuvatk@v...7a dvéuara] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. 3 lwaria] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; dvouara A. 386 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xv tpitn “ArrelOeva, 7) S€ tetaptn “Amatn. ai 5& axoddovOor U avtav Kxarodytar Avmn, Ilovnpia, ’Acédyeva, "OEvyonia, A 4 a Wevddos, Adpoctvn, Katadanria, Mioos. tadta ta dvopata 6 hopav tod Deod Sovros tHv Bacireiav pév dYveTat Tod b) \ \ cod, eis adtnv 5é ovK eicerevoetat. 4. Oi rAiOoL SE, dnpi, , aoe a a ¢e / > \ , 4 , KUple, of Ex TOD BuOod nppocpévor Eis THY OiKodopny TiveEs > / e \ ad / e / e > A I eiaiv; Oi pev mpator, dyoiv, ot Séxa of cis Ta Bewéedua TeOeysévor, TpwTN yeved’ ol Sé elxooe TévTE SevTépa yeved > a“ ARCS t , A a a avipev Sikaiwv’ of O€ TpiaKxovta TéevTe TpoPHTa: Tod Meod ’ s e Kat Stdxovos avtod: of b& TeccapaKovta atrocToAoL Kal dvdadcKxaror Tod Knpvypwatos Tov viod Tod Beod. 5. Acari Ss / , e 4 \ , \ / > la ovv, dnui, KUpte, at TapOévor Kat TovTOVs Tovs ALiMouS é7ré- \ fo “~ Swxav eis THY oikodopunv Tod Tupyou, Stevéyxacar dia THS Ul e Ud s a a A / mvaAns; 6. Odroe yap, dnc, mpéto tadtTa Ta TvEevpaTa épopecav, kal ddws am’ aGdAndAwY ovK atécTncaY, OTE TA ° ’ led Tvevpata ato Tov avOpoTav, o’Te of dvOpwrot amo TOY TVEVLATWV, GAA TrapeuEelvay TA TEVpATA aUTOIS MéypL THS , r KOLLNTEwS AUTOYV. Kal ei 1) TADTA TA TVEvpATA PET AUTOV > / ml root ieee A 7 ” / A ’ 5 A éoynkel aay’, ovK av eypnotot yeyovercav TH oiKodomA TOU Trupryou TOUTOU, w XVI. "Ere pot, dnt, cvpce, Snrwcov. Ti, dyoiv, ém- Enreis; Avati, pnt, cvpte, ot NiOot éK' ToD Bu Elohim (God) avéBnoav Kai els THY oixodopuny éTéOncay, mehopnKkoTes TA TvEvpaTa A ea > fal tavta; 2, “Avaykny, dynalv, eliyov Sv vdatos avaByvas, iva CwotrornOaaw' ovK ndvvVaYTO yap ddXrws EioeNOety Eis THY , Lo a > \ \ / > / A “ Bacirelav Tov Ocod, et un THY véxpwow aTréVevTo THS Fw7s % fal A / >. > MN a ce avtav [THs mpotépas]. 3. éXNaBov ovy Kal ovTOL Ol KEKOLMN- peévoe THY hpayida Tod viod Tod Ocod | Kai eiandOov eis THY Bactrelav tod Ocod' | piv yap, dni, popécat Tov avOpwtrov 70 dvoua [Tov viov] Tod Ocod, vexpos éotw* dTav 5é AaBy THY ns) ’ ‘0 \ L NEI BBS rt Ba t \ appayi a, ATOTLUETAL THNV VEKPWOLY KAL AVANALPAVEL TIV 9. xv. 6 otk dv] So Gebhardt supplies the lacuna. yeyovewcay] conj. Anger; yeydvact A. xvi. 2 THs mporépas] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A. 3 Kai elopdOov...Tod Geod] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. Tov viod sec.] ins. Anger [L,L,E]; om. A. * ’ fae > \ u fonv. 4. 7 odpayis ovv TO Udwp Ectiv’ eis TO Vdwp odv , / \ ? f A 3 / 9s KataBaivovar vexpoi, kai avaBaivovet CavtTes. KaKelvors ov s f ¢ \ dd St > / > A ~/ >’ lA exnpvyOn n oppayis attn, Kat éxpyocayto avTi, iva eicéd- fol / Owow eis thy Bacirelay Tov Oeov. 5. Acari, dni, Kvpee, \ e U / ’ b] fal rd 5) A Kat of TeccapaKxovta AiOor pet avToy avéBnoav éKx TOD \ tal / / e BuvOod, 76n eoxnkotes THY ohpayida; “Ors, pyoiv, odo of c / \ A admrocToXot Kal of SidacKadrot ot KnpvEavtes TO dvoua Tod eon A a , > 8 , \ / A ec oan viod Tod Oeod, KcowunOévtes ev Svvdper Kal wicter Tov viod a an / Tov Ocov éexnpvEav Kai Tots TpoKeKolmnpévots, Kal avTot »” ’ a \ Lal A , , éd@xav avtois THv cdpayioa Tov Knpvypatos. 6. KatéBnoav A ’ / ’ ovy eT autor eis TO Udwp, Kal Tad avéBynoav. | adr ovTot A / A Se A a Caves KatéBnoay, [kal wadiv Cavtes avéBnoay]’ éxetvoe dé e , \ , A Nee ot TpoKeKoLmnpevot Vexpol KaTéBnoav, CdvTes Sé avéBnoay.| / 7. dua TovTav ovy efwoTroinOynoay Kal éTéyywoav TO dvopma a rar A A \ A \ / > >] lal Tov vio Tod Meod. dia TovTO Kal cuvavéBnoay peT adTav \ \ A ) Kal cvvnppocOncayv eis THY OiKOdopnY Tov TUpYoU, Kal aXaTO- pntor cvv@KodopnOnoay’® év Sitxavocvyyn yap éxouwnOnoay Kat éy meyary ayveia’ povov bé Thy oppayioa TavTHY ovK Eiyov PEYANT ayverm p 2) pay a) X= ” ba \ \ / > }- v , / éyes ovv Kal THY ToOUTwY éerihucw. “Ey, pnt, Kvpee. fal / lal > fe “ XVII. Nodv otdv, Kvpie, wept Tév opéwy prot SyAwWCOY C4" Xf) / wv Stati adXat Kal adXraL eioly at idéat Kal TrotKirat; "Axove, A / gyct. ta bpn tadta Ta dddexa [dddexa] Prat ciow ai a ¢ \ f > , “2 > t c KaTotkovcat brov Tov Kdcpov. exnpvyOn ovy els Ta’Tas 6 A a lal > vids Tov Mcod dia THV aTrootoAwy. 2. Acari dé Totkida, Kat f U Gdn Kat ddr idéa éotl Ta Spy, dHAwaov pot, KUpLEe. “Axove, / e / \\ e e A v4 \ / dynciv. ai dodexa dural avrat ai KaTolKodaat ONOV TOV KOT MoV ! ” SPY f- (ae) a / \ a ie daHdexa EOvn eici. trotxina dé clot TH Ppovnce: Kal TO vol e be oy \ v /- A la >] \ , e ola ovy eldes Ta Opn TrotKiNa, TOLADTAaL EloL KaL TOVTwY al a A n t Toikinlat TOD voos TaV eOvav Kal 7 hpovnats. Syrdow Sé \ f< BAY ¢ I) \ a Lal 7 / got Kal Evds Exactov THY Tpakw. 3. IIperov, dnut, Kupee, fa! / / A f- 7 \ v > \ TouTO SyAwoor, Stati oUTM Tokiia OvTa Ta Opn, els THY xvi. 6 dXN’ odor... fGvres 52 dvéBnoavy] om. A by homeeot.; L,E omit the words placed within square brackets; L, omits xatéBnoav kal mad faves; the Greek is supplied from Clem. Alex. Str. il. 9, p. 452- xvii. 1 Oadexa sec.] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,]; om. with duvAaé A; om. with épy E. aoe 388 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. _[S. 9. xvii oikodouny oTav éréOncav of AiOoe avTa i ypoa eyévovTo iKo0opn) n OV, pa ypog eyev , (¢ \ e 5 lal an Naptpol, ws Kal of ex Tod BvO0d dvaBeBnKotes RiOoL; / \ 4 € 4. "Ott, dynoi, mavta ta €Ovn Ta vO TOY ovpavoy KaToL- KowvTa akovcav’Ta Kal TLoTEVTaVTA Evi GVOoMaTL eKANOnTAaV lal f aa es lal lal / 3 nw , [rod viod] Tod Oeod. RAaPovtes ody THv opparyida piav ppo- lq lal \ , a vnow écyov Kat &va vodv, Kal pia Tictis avTay éyévEeTo > \ / lal fel Kat [pia] dyarn, Kal Ta Tvevpata TOV TapOEveY peTa TOU la) ¢ 2. \ Le) A ovowatos epdpecay’ Sia TOVTO 7 OlKOdoMn TOU TUpyoU ma t Dall \ ¢ ©. Lies. \ \ \ > Lal xpoa eyéveTo Naumrpa ws o duos. 5. peta bé TO eicedOety > \ b] \ ’ \ \ / al nw \ > , aA avtovs éml TO avTo Kal yevéoOar Ev capa, TWwes EE avToY eh e \ Neo / b] lal if a , €uiavay éavtovs Kat é£eBAnOncay ex Tov yévous TOY SiKalwr, \ / ath / -, A \ \ / Kal Taw éyévovTo olot TpPOTEpOV Haav, UAANoOV O€ Kal yeElpoveEs. a , / / / \ XVIII. lds, dypi, xvpte, éyévovto yeipoves, Oeov éerrey- “i c \ / / \ \ / voxotes; “O pn ywookorv, dnoi, Oeov Kat movnpevopevos ” / / a / > an c \ \ > \ éyes KOAacly Twa THS Tovnplas avTOU: oO be Oeov émuyvors > Le , a ’ Lal ec OUKETL OhetArEL TroVnpEvEeTOat, GAN aryalorrotety. 2. Edy OvY O ’ I ~) a / > lal iY y opeiiwv ayaborrovety TovnpEevNTaL, OV OoKEl TELOVa TroVnpLaV lal \ \ , \ Qn Tovey Tapa TOY py ywaaKovTa TOV Oeov; Oia TOUTO Ot pH ’ [aeeat (3) \ N f tL + ee > éyvox'd'tes Oedv Kal trovnpevomevoe Kexpimévor eiciv ets U € \ \ \ b] / \ ni lal b) lal Oavatov, of d€ Tov Medv éyvaxKotes Kal Ta peyarela avTOU ' \ n \ éwpaKoTes Kal Tovnpevduevo. Sicow@s KoAaTOyncovTaL Kal fel n oP atroVavovuvtat €is TOV aidva. oUTws ovv KaSapicOnceTaL 7 a an ¢ \ lal exkAnoia tod Oceod. 3. ws S€ Eldes Ex TOU TUpyou TOUS iQ eal / \ ) } / o / vad Aidous “np wévouvs Kal Twapadebopévous Tots mvEevmact Tos al a \ 4 a el a movnpots, Kal éxetvor ExBANOncovTal, Kal EcTaL EV TOMA TOV , v4 FS , mae A € 5) ee / Kexabappévav, WoTEp Kal 6 TUpYoS eyéveTo ws €E Evos AiOov \ a > U f yeyovos peta TO KalapicOjvat avTov. ovTws EcTaL Kal 7 3 J a © a \ \ a) On ’ \ \ a) éxxAnaia Tod Ocod peta TO KalapicOjnvat avTnV Kai atro- BrAnOjvat Tovs Tovnpovs Kal VroKxpitas Kai BLacdnuous Kal 9. xvii. 4 évi] conj. Harmer [L,]; éti7@ AL,; om. app. E. TOU viod] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; om. A. appa] Naprrpos A. 5 e&] d&wm A. kal xelpoves] # xelpoves A. xviii. 1 Sedov pri.] conj. Gebhardt [L,]; Xv A; dominum L,; dub. E. 2 6 dpelthwy ayaboroety] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; 6 pda dryay A. 3 %puévous] conj. Gebhardt ;...uévous A ; ezectos L,L,E. éxetvot éxBAnOjnoovra] conj. Harmer [L,]; éxetOev éxBAnOévras AE; al. Ly. S.9.xix]} THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 389 if \ , } / Supvyous Kal Tovnpevopévous TrotKiNats Tovnpiats. 4. peTa \ { ’ iol ” ¢ b] 7 lal AA A TO TOUTOUS aToBANOAVaL EcTaLn exKANTia TOD Ocod ev cama, , / i? A f pia hpovnats, eis vos, ula wiotis, wia ayawn. Kal TOTE O e\ nr fal ’ , rf vios TOD Oeod ayadXaceTat Kai evppavOncetat ev avTois > \ A aTretAngws Tov Nady avTod Kafapov. Meyaros, dni, Kvpre, \ > / , yy »” / , fal De 2 kat évdogws mavra éye. 5. ett, [pnpi,| Kvpte, THY odpéwy WEEN e / i} fe \ / \ \ / / évos ExadoTov OnAwoor poe THY SVVamLY Kal Tas Tpakes, iva La) ii Lal 3 \ \ A b) , f \ Taca uyn TeTroOvia ert TOY Kupiov axovoaca do€acn 7d , \ \ \ » 8 v ’ la ” A , péya Kal Oavpactov Kat évdoEov dvoya avtod. “Axove, dnct, a > / \ , \ al ft b) A TOV OpéwV THY TOLKLNLaY Kal TOY dwWdEeKa OVOP. b al fi f A /. e XIX. ‘Ex Tod rporov dpovs Tov péNavos o1 TWicTEVoavTES re ey oe) Saas r \ , > \ , ToLovTOL eiow* atrootaTas Kal Prachypwot eis Tov Kupuov fal , rn A Kal Tpodotat THY SovrAwY TOD Deov. TovToOLs dé pweTavoLa OvK ” , \ »” \ \ la! x } / > éott, Oavatos dé éott, Kal did TovTO Kal pédXavés Eiot’ Kab \ \ / , An ” / >] ’ \ A UA yap TO yévos avT@v dvopwov éotw. 2. ex dé Tod SeuvTépov A e a dpous TOU Widov of TLoTEVoaYTES TOLOVTOL EloLY* ViroKpLTal \ / I \ e Ss a / Kal dudacKaror Tovnpias. Kal ovToL ovv Tols mpoTépots Opotol Ect, un ExovTEsS KapTrOY SixaLocvyns’ ws yap TO dpos A iA \ (299 e A aQUT@V aKapToV, OUTW Kal of avOpwrros ot ToLOUTOL Ovowa peEV +” 3 \ \ A / / ? \ ? \ > ’ an éyovow, dro bé€ THS TiaTews KEVOL cial, Kai OvbEls Ev avTOLS / Ss A KapTos GdnOetas. TovToWs ovy meTavoLa KeiTaL, éav Tayd e \ ep A petavonowaww* éav dé Bpadvywot, peta TaV TpoTépwy éaTat ec , >) A / / t Ud / y 6 Oavaros avTév. 3. Acati, dnl, Kipve, ToUTOLS peTavora , rn , ? t €oTt, TOls Sé€ mpoTépols OVK EoTL; Tapa TL yap ai avTai al , > A ’ , \ aA if y , mpakers avtev eict. Ara TovTo, dyot, TovTos peTavora KetTal, OTL ovK éBracdnuncav tov Kupioy avt@yv ovoé eyévovTo mpodoTar TH SovAWY TOV Deod, dia Sé THY errLOvULaV a , id / \ PANwA ts \ \ TOD Anpmatos VirexpiOncay Kai edidakev Exactos [Kata] Tas b] / fal 3 J a ce U ’ X\ , émOupias TOV avOpeTaV TOY auapTAaVOYTMWY. ANA TicoVEL A tal \ dicnv twa’ Keitat 86 avtois petavora Sia TO pH yevécOar , \ / avtovs Bracdyuous unde mpoddtas. xvill. 5 éxdorov] L,L,E; add xipe A. xix. 2 yod] conj. Anger [L,]; ipmrod AE; arido L,. 3 mporépots] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; wpérous A. ai a’ral] conj. Anger in mg. [L,L,E]; kal atra A. kara] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A; L,E omit the preceding word xao7os, cf. James iii. 18. cf. S. Mark iv. 18 sq S. Mark x.
23.  S. Mark x. 24- 390 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xx , ‘ r Uj fal / fal XX. “Ex 6€ tod dpous rob Tpitov Tod éxovtos axavOas ie a kal TpiBdrovs Ol MiaTEVoayTES ToLOUTOL eiowW" of peV ’ e \ / lal > / c mrovalot, of Sé mpaypwatelats TodAals ewmrepuppéevol. ob e / e ral pev tpiBorol elow of mrovovol, ai d€ akavOaL ot év Tais rf I / mTpayuatelats Tals TouKidats éeuTredpuppevot. 2. ovTos [ovy, Ley al \ } /, > he ,’ ol év ToAXals Kal ToLkinals TpaymaTElats Ewmrepuppevot, ov] a“ lal fal lal > ’ a KoAN@VTAaL TOls SoVAOLS TOD Oeod, GAN arroTANaVevTat TVLYO- fal b) a e / pevot UTO TOV Tpakewy avTa@V* ol Sé TAOVCLOL SUTKOAWS KOA- A lal fal lal lf / > lal Aadvrat Tots SovAoLs TOD Ocod, HoBovpevos wy Te aitrabadowv aT QavUT@V. Of TOLOUTOL OvY AYCKOAWC EICEAEYCONTAI E€IC THN ’ a a f \ f a] \ BaciAelan TOY Oeof. 3. Waomep yap év TpLPodroLs yupvols Troct fal 7 ral / ’ mepimatety SUaKONOY ETL, OUTW Kat TOLS TOLOUTOLS AYCKOAON ECTIN €IC THN BACIAEIAN TOY Ocof EiceAGEIN. 4. GANG TOVTOLS TACL / Y > AW al / >] peTavola éaTl, Taxivyn Oé, WW O Tots TMpoTEepols Ypovols OvK rf lal ¢ / \ 5 elpyacavTo, vov avabpapwaty Tals 7 pépars Kal ayabov TL TroLn- > , , : awa. | édyv ov weTavonawot Kat ayabor TL ToMmowat, | &y- tal lal r , rf covrat TOOcd' eav bé eripeivoct Tals Tpakecv avTov, Tapaco- an Hf > Oncovrat tats yuvarélv éxeivats, aitives avtovs Oavatwécovcw. nr f aA XXI. ’Ex && rod tetdprov dpovs Tod éyovTos Botavas , \ \ ] / A al / \ \ \ rf TOANGS, TA wev eTTAVw TOY BoTavav yAwPA, Ta Se TpOs Tails e/ / \ \ \ ’ \ lo ¢€ / / € pifas Enpa, ties 5€ Kal amo Tod nriov Enpaivopevat, of / la) / >) 5 e x; U e \ \ "A TLTTEVTAVTES TOLODTOL EiaW’ of pev Sipuyor, of dé TOY Kvpiov x b] \ \ f- > \ \ / \ NSE X éyovtes éml Ta yeidn, ert THY Kapdiav dé pun ExovTes. 2. Oia rf \ } ’ A ‘ > \ / Nea TovTo Ta Oepwédia avtayv Enpa eats Kat Svvaply pn ExovTa, kal Ta pnuata avTa@v pova Cada, Ta OE Epya avTaY veKpa fal Vj A Ua €oTwv. ol ToLodToL OvTE COow ovTE TEOYHKATLY. OpoLoL ovV lal , rs e / i elot Tots Supuyous* Kat yap of Sivyos ovte yNwpol eiow ” Te A \ a ov fA) f vd \ ote Enpol’ ovTe yap Saou ovTe TEOVHKaTW. 3. waTEP yap , rn e U ivf > lal > / ivf ‘ e avrév at Boravat tALov ioodoat €EnpavOncay, otTw Kal ot 9. xx. 1 elow pri.] L,L,; add rwés & avrav AE. 2 odv...€umepuppévot ov] ins. Gebhardt [L,L,, cf. E]; om. A. 4 Tats nuépats] pref. év A. éav otv...moumjowor] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; xat A. yuvaélvy] conj. Anger [L,L,E]; mpateow A. xxi. 1 xAwpd, Enpa] conj. Anger in mg. (cf. c. i. 6); xXAwpas, Enpas A; dub. L,L,E. 2 ove (Gow obre]ins. Anger [L,L,E]; om. A. xAwpol, Enpol] L.,L,E; Enpol, xAwpol A. f r ’ \ Lal dhpvxo, Stay Oripiv axovowot, Sia thy Setdiav avTav ] a \ \ ” 3 / a / eldwAodaTpovct Kal TO dvoua émaicxivovtat Tod Kupiou b] a e A > LA A BA f auT@V. 4. ol ToLodTo ovy ovTE | Sao. ovTe | TeOvnKacw. > \ \ e 2\ \ t , A u aNNA Kat ovTOL, €av Tay pEeTavonowar, | dvvavTar Croat éay Sé wn petavonowaw, | }5n tapadesopévot eicl Tats yuvarél A J \ 2: lal Tals atropepoméevars THY Cony avTov. rn / fa XXII. *Ex 6€ tod dpous tod téurrov Tob éyovtos Bota- / e , A vas XAwpAs Kal Tpayéos byTOS Of TITTEVGAVTES TOLOUTOL EicL’ \ / ry 6 tal be Mi 10 a>) i < ral ’ , TiaTor pev, Svtpabeis Sé Kat avOaders Kal éavtois apécKovTes, XO\ ef OéXovtes TavTa ywooKev, Kal ovdéevy OrAwWS YLVwOKOUCL. \ \ b] , > lel , 3 / oe) > A me 2. dia THY avOddeav avToyv Ta’TnY amréoTn am avTav 7 fs AN ) A ’ 3 \ 3 , / > A avveots Kal ciondOev eis avTovs adpocvyn pwpa. érratvoidar / 5é EauTovs ws civecw éyovtas, Kal Oérovaw eOedodibacKandot Yj , s \ id eivat, adpoves ovTes. 3. Sia TavTHY ody THY UrnroppoavYnv ¢ la) ToNXol exevoOnoay vrvpovvTes EavTovs’ péeya yap Satpov" cov ¢ éot wv 'n avOader'a “Kal 7 Kev TemolOnois"’ éx TovUTwY ovv mMoAXot ameBANnOncay, Tues S8 peTevonoay Kal érictevoay Nuts , e \ a] ” = , Naas kal vmétakav éavt ods Tot's éyovor avy ecu, yvovtTes THY éavTov adpocvynyv. 4. Kal Tois Nowtrois Sé Tots ToLovTOLS a / ‘ an KeiTaL peTaVvola’ ovK éyévovTo yap TovNpol, WaAXov dé “pwwpol > / a kal aovvetot. ovToL ody édy' petavonowot, EnoovTar TH a, 2A \ \ , , \ a Oca dav Se pu) peTavonowot, KaTOLKNTOVEL META TOV yuvat- A Aa Ve ] , K@V TOV TrovnpEevopévwn eis avToUs. XXIII. Oc d€ é« rod dpous tod" Exrov trod éyovtos as , A A oXLoMWaAS peyadas Kal puiKpas Kal év Tais cyicpais Botavas / a pe“apacpévas TicTEvoavTes TOLOUTOL Elowy' 2. of pwev Tas \ XN \ ” e / > e b} > , oXITpAS TAS MiKpasS EYOVTES, OVTOL ElalY OL KAT ANANAwY €YOVTES, Kal ATO TOY KaTANANGY EavTOY pewapacpéevot eicly A > > , / €v TH WioTel’ GNAA peTevo'naav' €x TOVTwWY TrOANOL. Kal ot xxl. 4 {Gow otre] ins. Anger [L,L,E]; om. A by homeeot. OvvavTat... peravojcwow] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A by homceot. xxli. 3 datudv- iv éor'wv] The brackets "* represent the lacunze in A. The restoration of the text is Hilgenfeld’s, unless the contrary is stated. 4 bwpol] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; according to Gebhardt movnp... is legible in A. xxiil. 2 meuapacpuévor] meuwpayévor A. 392 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xxiii Nourrol Sé peravoncovoly, Tay axovowsi pov Tas évTONas* \ , na + be e i 2, \ / puikpal yap avT@y elolv al KaTaAaNLAL, Kal TAX pEeTAVON- f govow. 3. of Sé weyadas éyovTes oxo MAS, OUTOL Tapapovol a an lal / al ela Tals KaTaNaNals avTeV Kal pynoikakol yivovTat wnVLaV- s a / Tes GAN AOS. oOdTOL OY amd TOD TUpyou arreppidynoay a lal ) fa) fal 3 Kal atresoxidabnoav THs oikodopys avTov. ol ToLovTOL ovY € \ Ae / ¢e A c , SucKkdArws Encovrar. 4. €f 6 eds Kai 0 Kuptos nudy o trav- A / > a \ Tov Kuplevov Kal éxav Taons THS KTITEwS AVTOV THV lal a / \ ¢ é£ovclay ov pvnoixaxel Tois eEomodoyoupevols Tas apaptias a \ * \ av'tév', add trews yivetat, avOpwros Plaptos wv Kai NY f ¢€ a 3 fa} f a ¢ 8 / , W- aAnpns amaptiav avOpdr@ wynoiKaKel ws Ovvapevos aTrohe- Aa / ¢ An ¢ f lal cat caoat avTov; 5. Aéyw NE viw'iv, o' ayyedos THs e/ Ud ” \ v4 > 0 ‘al ees | petavolas, bao TavTnyv exeTe THY alperw, aTolecFe avTHy St ¢ a \ / kal petavoncate, Kal 6 Kupios tacetas vpa@v Ta Tpotep'a \ 3 A rn dpaptipata', éav Kabapionte éavtovs amo TovTOV Tov dat- PRUNES ANN , / 97a Us , poviou’ et dé ux, mapadoOncecOe avT@ eis Oavarov. a / v XXIV. "Ex &€ tod éBSopo'v dpous, ev @ BorTavar' ls ” ’ [a] xyrwpal “Kal’ thapai, kal brov TO dpos evOnvodv, Kai may a a >’ n yévos KTNVaY Kal Ta TeTEWWa TOD oVpavod EévéwovTO Tas t b t ay m™ \ tr =e ec Ba <i, Bor avas év TovT@ To! dpe, Kal at “BoT'avat as évépovTo lal b) lal DN. e Ud r f > ‘ parrov evOarels eyivovtTo, ol MiaTEVTaYTES TOLOUTOL ELL 2. wdvtote amdol “Kat a'kaKot “Kat paxdptoe €yivovTo, pndev kat adAnrwv eyovTes, GANA TavTOTE ayaddiwOpEvot émt tots SovAots ToD Oeod Kal évdedupévoe “TO! Tvedua “TO &ytov TovTav TOY Ta'p0évar Kal TavTOTE oTAaYXVOV EXOVTES érl mavta avOpwmov, Kal ek TOY KOT@V aUTOY TayTi av- / bd if ’ Ol \ 1 / rs 5S > Oper éxopnyncay avoveidictws Kai adtaTaKTws. 3. "0 ovv c BT a A Kupwos iSov thy amAéTHTAa avTOY Kal Tacav vyTLOTHTA érAnOuvev avtovs év Tois KOTTOLS TOY YELPOV AVT@V Kal I] 4 3 AN 3 / , ’ A / A Cates, éyapitacey avtovs év Tacn mpakes avTav. 4. éyw O€ Vpuiv fe > es A Tols TOLOVTOLS OVO eyo 6 AryyeNos THS weTavolas’ SvapeivaTe a / , A TowovToL, Kal ovK é€arerbOnoeTar “TO o répwa vuwv Ews 9. xxiv. 3 vymidryta] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,, and cf. c. xxix. 1]; qmdryra As dub. E. S. 9, xxvi] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 393 IA > 7 \ e le) Lf , \ Ss e A ai@vos. edokiwace yap vas 0 Kupios kat évéyparev vmas >] \ ’ \ \) C fe \ (JA \ / id lal eis Tov aptOwoy Tov nuéTEpov, Kal OAOY TO oTéppa vUaV A a le A aX; A KATOLKNCEL ETA TOD Viod TOU Ocov" Ex yap Tod TvEvpaTOS ’ wae sy , avTov éda/Bere. la) a?) XXV. “Ex dé Tod dpovs Tod oyddou, oF Hoav ai Toddal A an / / Aa mnyal, Kal Taca n KTioLts TOV Kupiov érroti€eto éx TAY THYya?, G ' rn ats ‘s Say. \ , Ol TioTEVoaVTES TOLOUTOL Elo’ 2. aTroaTOAOL Kal didac- 7 \ iy \ e Kadot of KnpvEavtes eis ONOV TOV KOTpOV Kal ol dLdaEaVTES A \ c A \ , a / NX \ WA cEe“vas Kal ayvas Tov Aoyov Tod Kupiov, kal pndev bdrAws / > > / , ] \ / b voodioduevor eis émiOupiay tmovnpav, adda TavToTe év / \ \ I Sixatocvvyn Kal adnOeia mopevOévtes, KaOws Kai TapédaBov A A / > e \ TO TVEULA TO AyLOY. TOV TOLOVTwY OUY 7 Tdpodos META TOV , th > / AYYEA@V EOTLV. > A / XXVI. *Ex 6€é Tod dpous Tod évatov Tod épnuwdovs, TOD i A e \ \ / b , APE, \ 5 @ Uf \ Ta' epteta Kal Onpia év avT@ EyovTos Ta SiapOeipovta Tovs ’ A / e avOpwrrous, ot TiaTEevoaVTES TOLOUTOL EloLY’ 2, OL meV TOUS omiXous éxovTes Siakovol eiot KaKas SvaKkovncavTes Kal ly A \ J A , e A Stapmacavres ynpav Kal oppavey thy fanv, Kal éavTois a 52 A TepiToinodpevor ex THS Staxovias Hs EaBov Svaxovijo' ar SEN be b] 7 A ] Ales: / > IE \ ’ 7 €av ovy eryetvwot TH avTH émOupia, atéPavov, Kal ovdeuia a € a avtois Amis Cons’ édv dé érictpéypwot Kal ayvas TEdELo- x he 3 la) / A e \ cwot THv Stakoviay avtov, dvyncovtas Enoat. 3. of 8é b) LA = <3 t ie he \ NGi9 , eWwplakoTes, OVTOL Of ApynodpeEvol elo Kal wy errLoTpérarTeEs A ’ éml TOV KUpLoy éavT@V, AANA yepowUeEvTES Kal yevdpeEvoL a / A A épnuwdders, 7) KoAA@pevoer Tois SovrAoLs Tov Ocod dAra > , \ e A povalovtes, amoAAVOVoL Tas EavToY ruyads. 4. WS yap ” > A \ aA ’ if , apTrenos év ppayye Tiwi Katarerpbecioa apercias TUyYavouvca lA eae \ A lel b) lal \ A / katapletpetas Kal U7ro TOY Botaver épnuodTat, Kal TO Ypov@ ’ / / \ > / wv / 3 Teen A 8 , aypia yivetat, Kab ovKéte evypnotdés éot't’ TH Seomorn A 7 a 2 EavTns, OUT@ Kal of ToLoDTOL dvOpwrTrol EavTOUS aTeyVwKacL, a 4 Kal yivovTat dypnoto. TO KUpi@ EavT@v aypiwbevTes. 5. TOv- 3 , \ \ “4 id nA To“S ovY peTavola yivetat, édv pn ex Kapdias evpeOdow xxiv. 4 mvevparos] conj. Anger in mg. [L,L,E]; omépyaros A. XXVi. 2 duakovjoa] supp. Gebhardt. 394 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xxvi , , Pe EAD de > OL € On ,’ , , 18 npvnévor' éay dé €x Kapdlas evpeOh ipynpévos Tus, ovK olda A \ lal ’ 3 ef dSuvatat Ejoat. 6. Kal TOUTO OVK Els TavTas Tas nMEpas Neyo, iva Tis apynoadpevos peTavotav AaB‘ abv l éyo, iva Tis apynodp be n° dodvvarov yap , an ‘ / lal ’ wn ‘ / € a. €ote awOnvat Tov pédXoVTA Viv apveicbat Tov Kupiov éavTod , Wil aes) a ' > , a A , GAN éxelvots Tois Tada npvnpévols SoKel KetcOaL peTavoLa. 7 A \ el Tis OvY médrEL pETAVOELY, TaXLVOS yevérOw Tply TOY TUPYoV , n 5 3 \ / € \ lal “ f atroteneoOjvat’ ef Sé un, VTO THY yuvatKaV KaTapOapnoeTat , - els Oavatov. 7. Kai oi KoNoPoi, odTOL SoOALOL eiot Kal KaTAAA- ¢ e Ao’ Kat Ta Onpia a ides es TO Gpos OvTOL cia. BoTrep yap a fal a ’ Ta Onpia Siapbelper TO EavTav i@ Tov avOpwrrov Kai aTroAvEL, > / \ ’ ovTw Kal TOY ToLOVTaY avOporTav Ta pnuata Ota 'pOeiper ’ tov avOpwrov Kal admoddvet. 8. ovTOL ody KoAOBOL Eiow ard na ] A lal « Ane THs wictews avTav Sia thy TpaEw hv Exovow év EavTois \ \ / \ ’ / a e \ Ld fal Ties dé peTevonoay Kal éowOncay. Kal oi NoLTrol ot ToLodDTOL lal \ ovtes SUvavTat owOAvat, éavy peTavoncwaoty’ éav dé un pmETa- a lal iS / VONTWOL, ATO TOV YUVAaLKaY ExElvorv, OY THY SVVapLY ExoUCLY, - atroPavobvrat. lo) a / XXVII. °?Ex dé tod dpovs Tod Sexarou, ob joav Sévdpa , / I= e / fa > e oxerratovta mpoBat a! Tia, of TicTEVTaYTES TOLOUTOL ELoLV 3 / / C7 e / 3 \ ” e Lal 2. émicKotrot pirogkevor, oitives nd€ws Eis TOUS OlKOVS EAUT@V r ¢ L \ y a no € / a qravtTote vTede-avTo Tovs SovAOUs TOD Ocod atep VToKpicEews \ \ / [ot Sé éricxomror| mavtoTe Tovs VaTEpHpévouS KaL TAS XNPAS a > , ¢ a Th Siakovia éavt@y abdiarei@Tws eoKéTTacay Kal ayes ° U U e > , f dvectpabnoay TavTote. 3. oto. ovv [mavtes] ocKeTTacOn- Xi a / ! e Cp a covtat UTO TOU Kupiouv SuaTravTos. of ovv TadTa épyacapevot ” {2 ’ \ “ lal \ + ¢€ hi =f lel A a évdokot eioe Tapa TS Oe@, Kai On 6 TOTTOS avTaY pEeTA THY BI) i ’ ig 2 N ’ / ig I a aYYEN@Y EoTIY, EaY ETTLLELYWOLY EWS TENOUS HELTOUPYOUYTES fal / T® Kupi. \ ral a / XXVIII. "Ex &€ Tod dpous Tod Eévdexatov, od Hoav \ Y a dévdpa KapTav TANpPN, Aros Kat GrdoLG KapTrOIS KEKOTUN- lal / ? e / Méva, OL TiTTEVTaVTES TOLODTOL ElaLW' 2. of TaovTESs UTEP 9. xxvi. 7 5pos] L,L,; pref. 6’ (=évarov) app. A; def. E. XXVll. 2 ézic- komo piddéevor] conj. Harmer [LE]; éwickora kai pirdgevar A; alit vero hi lapides (hos lapides) L,, probably a corruption of alenorum hospitales. S, 9. xxviii] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 305 Pale wih, a ria lo) fo) av \ , ” b] Tov ovonaTos [Tov viod Tov Ocod], of Kai mpoOUpmas Erabov && J lal if \ / \ b) Lal ddyS THs Kapdias Kal TapédwKav Tas ~ruyas avTav. 3. Acati 3 Ms ’ , \ x / \ ” \ ‘i ovv, pnp, KUpLe, TavTa pev Ta Sévdpa KapToOUs ExeL, TiVEs SE > SA \ b) / / ? ” Alive, ¢/ €€ avtav Kaptro. eveidéotepol eioww; “Axove, dyciv’ dcot \ y \ \ wv ~ / ’ \ A a \ mote éradov Sia 7d dvoma, évdokot elow wapa TO Oc@, Kal / / e c / > a ¢/ ” \ \ TavT@V ToVTwY al auapTias adnpéOncay, dre érabov dia TO ow a ca fal lal / \ e \ b) lal fa Ovou“a TOV viod Tov Beov. Swati dé of Kaprol av’Toy TroLKi- 5 pews \ ¢€ / v i ’ hoe elaiv, Tives Sé€ UVTEpeyovTes, aKove. 4. bo01, dyoiv, ér 3 / ’ yA b} , \ 3 ’ , > > efovciay ayOévtes éEntacOncay Kal ovK npynoavTo, aXX ” / @ lal b] / / > \ aA évradoy tpoOvpws, ovToL wardov évdoEdrepol ciate Tapa TO en , ¢ Pekss hme t a \ \ Kupio’ tov’twy 6 Kaptos éotiv 6 UTEepéxov. daot Sé detdol \ > lel BJ / \ / = A / Kat év Sictayu@ éyévovto Kai édXoyicavTo év Tals Kapdiats >’ a > / 2 ¢ ! QUT@VY TOTEpOY apyncovTaL 1) Gpworoyncovet, Kal émabor, 7 e \ > / >] / e/ b , > \ \ / TOUT@Y Ol KapTrol EXaTTOUS Eiciv, OTL avEBn él THY Kapdiav AVAGy: A Re pana \ ¢ / 7 A avTav 7 Bovd a’Tn* Tovnpa yap 1 BovAn avrn, tva SodXos Ud By > / / i ¢ a e A KUpiov iovovy apynontar. 5. BAré€teTe ovY vpels Of TadTa ll la ¢ \ e/ / b] A Bovrevopevot, pntote 7 Bourn altn Stapelvy év tais Kap- A A A e a e Siais vay, Kal atro0avnte TO Oe@. pets S€ of TacyorTes rn /- évexev TOU ovopatos Sof afew" ofetreTe TOV Oedy, bTt aElous ¢ an ¢ / ¢ e \ ~ le) Nig oe. / \ vas nynoato 6 Beds iva TodTo TO bvowa Bacralnte, Kat a e A e ¢€ / >’ 06 6 ia ’ A = y Taga, vuov at auaptias iabdcuv. 6. “ovKody paxa'piteTe e , ’ \ tal 4 / / Se ¢ an €avTOUS* GANG SoKeElTe Epyov méya TeTrolnKéval, Edy TIS UMOV \ CAA ¢ / / \ ’ A dua Tov Oedv aby. Swnv vutv o Kupios yapiferar, cal ov voet- ¢ el , \ \ Tre" al yap apaptiat yuav KateBapyaar, Kai ei un TemdvOaTe 4 nw? f K , 8 \ A e , e A fA) , évexev TOD dvopwaTtos [Kupiou], dua tds auaptias tudv Tebvn- aA A fa) Cia VA a f Kette “aV' TO Ocw. 7. TadTa vyiv éyw Tols Sictafovar \ > / a ¢ / ¢ a ¢ / bya Tepl apyncews 7) OporoynoEews. Oporoyeite OTe Kupuov éxere, / 3 / pntrote apvovpevor tra paso nono.’ eis SecpwrTnpiov. 8. € A / ld ’ 7 ta €0vn Tors SovAous avT@V Kodafovaw, éay TIS apYnonTaL \ , e A , 8 a , ¢€ K / ec aw a ry 7 TOV KUPLOV EAUTOV, TL OOKELTE TTOLNTEL O uplos UKLLY, OS EN EL XXVili. 3 evecdéorepor] conj. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; aydécrepor A. 5 dzro- Odvnre] conj. Gebhardt in mg. [LE]; drodavfjcbe A; dub. L,. T@ Oeq] pref. év A. TovTo] conj. Gebhardt [L,]; rovrov A; cjus L,E. 6 ovKobv paxaptfere] supp. Gebhardt. dv] supp. Gebhardt. 396 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xxviii , \ b) / ” \ \ / ’ \ 5s mavtwv Thy e€ovciay; apate Tas BovNas TavTas amo TMV fal fe n / \ / a a Kapotav vuov, iva Siatravtos Enonte TO Oca. > lal n a lal XXIX. “Ex 8€ tod dpovs Tod SwédexaTov Tod EevKOD e , a F529 5 c , / yee oi miaTEvoayTEs TOLODTOL EloLY’ ws VHTLa Bpédy ciciv, ols oS , , > / aN \ ay ae rv 4 , ovoeuia Kakia avaBaiver ért Thy Kapdiay, ove ‘eyo cap Th €oTt Tovnpia, GANA TavToTE év vHTLOTHTL Siéwewav. 2. of TOLOVTOL OVY AOLGTAKTWS KaTOLKOvGLY ev TH Bacideia TOD Oc’ od, btu ev ovdevi TpaypaTe Eulavay Tas EvTOXAS TOD Beod, > \ \ / Lf / \ € J lal A GANG peTa VNTLOTHTOS Suéwewvayv Tacas Tas nuépas THS Cons > a > a Cee 3) / s 5 a / avTav év TH avTn hpovnce. 3. baot ovv Siapeveite, Hyot, \ ” s \ / / \ bd a Ul Kal écec0e ws Ta Bpépy, Kaxiav wn éyovtes, [kal] TavTwv A l ae ice alsOe: l \ \ L Tay Tpoeipnuevoy éevdokotepot é cece’ tavta yap Ta Bpéhy »” / by \ Led al \ a ’ ,’ lal U évdoea €oTt Tapa TO Ocw Kai TPOTAa Tap avT@. pakapLot > ¢ al ¢/ a wv Sig3) Ac. fal \ / BJ / ovy vets, door av dpnte ad éEavtov THY Tovnpiay, évdvanabe dé THY axkakiay' Tpe@TOL TavTwv EnoecOe TO DEW eTa y p ” BOcd. 4. \ / aa \ \ A gerd , ’ Lads TO OVVYTEAETAL aVTOV Tas TapaBoXas THY Opéwy héeywW aVT@ r la) lal , lo) Kupue, viv pot SyAwoov tept tav ALOav Hpuévav €x TOD / \ ’ \ 3 \ la ’ \ fal / n qedlou Kal és THY OlKOdomnY TEDELLEeVOY aVTL TOV ALQwY TOV nppéevov “ex! ToD TuUpyou, Kal TOV oTpoyyVAwWY TAY TEHEVTwY rn U els TV OLKOOOMNY, Kal TOV ETL OTPOYYUAwY OVTOV. XXX. “Axove, dnol, cal wept TovT@Y TavTav. ot ALOoE Ls! Ob) Lon oe yA > / \ 0 / 2 \ > p>) A of €x Tov “Tedi'ov npyévot Kal TEeOEmmévot Eis THY OLKOdOMIHY fal U ’ \ A ’ / Leet eys 3) StA a Tov Tupyou avTl THY aTroBEBANLEVwY, al pifat ELat TOU OpouS Tov AEvKOU TOUTOV. 2. émEl OVY OL TLaTEVTaVYTES EK TOU U Spous TovTov mavTes axakol evpéOnoay, éxédevoev 6 KUpLOS a A lal a / fal TOD TUpyou ToUTOUS &K THY PL[@V TOV dpous TovTOV BAnOHvaL > \ > \ A , A NU wary, 2\ Dive, els THY OiKOsOMNY TOU TUPYoU' Eyvw yap OTL, éav aTréwow ’ \ > \ lal i Le / Lal fal els THY oiKodouny [Tod TUpyou] of ALBoL ovTOL, Stapmevovce rn 7 . . Aaptrpoi, Kat ovoels avT@V péedAavncet. 3. quodsi de ceteris montibus adiecisset, necesse habuisset rursus visitare eam turrem atque purgare. hi autem omnes candidi inventi 9. xxviii. 8 ¥uwy] conj. Gebhardt [L,L,E]; quay A. XXX. 2 ToUToU pri. conj. Harmer [L,L,E]; rot Nevxot A. Tov pigev] ins. Hilgenfeld [L,L,E]; om. A. 3 guodst| The lost Greek ending is supplied from L,. inventi| con}. Gebhardt [=L,]; zavenes L, Mss; al. A. 5. 9 xxxi] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 397 sunt, qui crediderunt et qui credituri sunt; ex eodem enim genere sunt. felix hoc genus, quia innocuum est. 4. audi nunc et de illis rotundis lapidibus et splendidis. hi omnes de hoc candido monte sunt. audi autem quare rotundi sunt reperti. divitiae suae eos pusillum obscuraverunt a veritate atque obfuscaverunt; a Deo vero numquam reces- serunt, nec ullum verbum malum processit de ore eorum, sed omnis aequitas et virtus veritatis. 5. horum ergo mentem cum vidisset Dominus, +posse eos veritati favere,t bonos quoque permanere, iussit opes eorum circumcidi, non enim in totum eorum tolli, ut possint aliquid boni facere de eo quod eis relictum est, et vivent Deo, quoniam ex bono genere sunt. ideo ergo pusillum circumcisi sunt et positi sunt in structuram turris huius. XXXI. Ceteri vero, qui adhuc rotundi remanserunt neque aptati sunt in eam structuram, quia nondum acceper- unt sigillum, repositi sunt suo loco; valde enim rotundi reperti sunt. 2, oportet autem circumcidi hoc saeculum ab illis et vanitates opum suarum, et tunc convenient in Dei regnum. necesse est enim eos intrare in dei regnum ; hoc enim genus innocuum benedixit Dominus. ex hoc ergo genere non intercidet quisquam. etenim licet quis eorum temptatus a nequissimo diabolo aliquid deliquerit, cito recurret ad dominum suum. 3. felices vos iudico omnes, ego nuntius paenitentiae, quicumque estis innocentes sicut infantes, quoniam pars vestra bona est et honorata apud Deum. 4. dico autem omnibus vobis, quicumque sigillum hoc accepistis, simplicitatem habere neque offensarum memores esse neque in malitia vestra permanere aut in memoria offensarum amaritudinis, in unum quemque spiritum fieri et has malas scissuras permediare ac tollere XXX. 5 Posse... favere] E (quod possent...quia beati erant e natura ipsorum), L, (quod boni nati essent et possint), and the vv. ll. in L, fosses for posse, favent for favere seem to suggest fosse securitatem (or severitatem) agentes as the true reading. 398 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. §[S. 9. xxxi a vobis, ut dominus pecorum gaudeat de his. 5. gaudebit autem, si omnia invenerit sana. sin autem aliqua ex his dissipata invengrit, vae erit pastoribus. 6. quodsi ipsi pastores dissipati reperti fuerint, quid respondebunt [pro] pecoribus his? numquid dicunt a pecore se vexatos? non credetur illis. incredibilis enim res est, pastorem pati posse a pecore; et magis punictur propter mendacium suum. et ego sum pastor, et validissime oportet me de vobis reddere rationem. XXXII. Remediate ergo vos dum adhuc turris aedifi- catur. 2. Dominus habitat in viris amantibus pacem; ei enimvero pax cara est; a litigiosis vero et perditis malitiae longe abest. reddite igitur ei spiritum integrum, sicut accepistis, 3. si enim dederis fulloni vestimentum novum integrum, idque integrum iterum vis recipere, fullo autem scissum tibi illud reddet, recipies? nonne statim scandescis et eum convicio persequeris, dicens: Vestimentum integrum tibi dedi; quare scidisti illud et inutile redegisti? et propter scissuram, quam in eo fecisti, in usu esse non potest. nonne haec omnia verba dices fulloni ergo et de scissura quam in vestimento tuo fecerit? 4. si sic igitur tu doles de vesti- mento tuo, et quereris quod non illud integrum recipias, quid putas Dominum tibi facturum, qui spiritum integrum tibi dedit, et tu eum totum inutilem redegisti, ita ut in nullo usu esse possit domino suo? inutilis enim esse coepit usus eius, cum sit corruptus a te. nonne igitur dominus spiritus eius propter hoc factum tuum [morte te] adficiet? 5. Plane, inquam, omnes eos, quoscumque invenerit in memoria offensarum permanere, adficiet. Clementiam, inquit, eius calcare nolite, sed potius honorificate eum, 9. xxxi. 6 fro] ins. Gebhardt (from ps-Cypr. de Aleat. 2); om. L, Mss. xxxli. 2 e¢] conj. Gebhardt [cf. L,E]; e¢ L, Mss. 4 dominus spiritus] conj. Gebhardt [=E]; the mss vary between dominum spiritus, dominus spiritum, dominum spiritum and dominum suum spiritui ; dominus L,. morte te} ins. Gebhardt; om, L, Mss; ¢tradet te morti L,; te interficere debebat E. quod tam patiens est ad delicta vestra, et non est sicut vos. agite enim paenitentiam utilem vobis. XXXIII. Haec omnia quae supra scripta sunt, ego pastor nuntius paenitentiae ostendi et locutus sum Dei servis. si credideritis ergo et audieritis verba mea et ambulaveritis in his et correxeritis itinera vestra, vivere poteritis. sin autem permanseritis in malitia et memoria offensarum, nullus ex huiusmodi vivet Deo. haec omnia a me dicenda dicta sunt vobis. 2. ait mihi ipse pastor: Omnia a me interrogasti? et dixi: Ita, domine. Quare ergo non interrogasti me de forma lapidum in structura repositorum, quod explevimus formas? et dixi: Oblitus sum, domine. 3. Audi nunc, inquit, de illis. hi sunt qui nunc mandata mea audierunt et ex totis praecordiis egerunt paenitentiam. cumque vidisset Dominus bonam atque puram esse paenitentiam eorum et posse eos in ea per- manere, iussit priora peccata eorum deleri. hae enim formae peccata erant eorum, et exaequata sunt, ne apparerent. SIMILITUDO DECIMA. I. Postquam perscripseram librum hunc, venit nuntius ille, qui me tradiderat huic pastori, in domum in qua eram, et consedit supra lectum, et adstitit ad dexteram hic pastor. deinde vocavit me et haec mihi dixit: 2. Tradidi te, inquit, et domum tuam huic pastori, ut ab eo protegi possis. Ita, inquam, domine. Si vis ergo protegi, inquit, ab omni vexatione et ab omni saevitia, successum autem habere in omni opere bono atque verbo, et omnem virtutem aequita- tis, in mandatis huius ingredere, quae dedi tibi, et poteris dominari omni nequitiae. 3. custodienti enim tibi man- data huius subiecta erit omnis cupiditas et dulcedo saeculi huius, successus vero in omni bono negotio te sequetur. maturitatem huius et modestiam suscipe in te, et dic 400 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 10. i omnibus in magno honore esse eum et dignitate apud Dominum, et magnae potestatis eum praesidem esse et potentem in officio suo. huic soli per totum orbem paeni- tentiae potestas tributa est. potensne tibi videtur esse ? sed vos maturitatem huius et verecundiam quam in vos habet dispicitis. II. Dico ei: Interroga ipsum, domine, ex quo in domo mea est, an aliquid extra ordinem fecerim, in quo eum offenderim. 2. Et ego, inquit, scio nihil extra ordinem fecisse te neque esse facturum. et ideo haec loquor tecum, ut perseveres. bene enim de te hic apud me existimavit. tu autem ceteris haec verba dices, ut et illi qui egerunt aut acturi sunt paenitentiam, eadem quae tu sentiant, et hic apud me his bene interpretetur, et ego apud Dominum. 3. Et ego, inquam, domine, omni homini indico magnalia Domini; spero autem omnes qui jam antea peccaverunt, si haec audiant, quod libenter acturi sunt paenitentiam, vitam recuperantes. 4. Permane ergo, inquit, in hoc ministerio et consumma illud. quicumque autem mandata huius efficiunt, habebunt vitam, et hic apud Dominum magnum honorem. quicumque vero huius mandata non servant, fugiunt a sua vita et faciunt adversus illum, nec mandata eius secuntur, sed morti se tradunt, et unusquis- que eorum reus fit sanguinis sui. tibi autem dico ut servias mandatis his, et remedium peccatorum habebis. III. Misi autem tibi has virgines, ut habitent tecum; vidi enim eas affabiles tibi esse. habes ergo eas adiutrices, quo magis possis huius mandata servare; non potest enim fieri ut sine his virginibus haec mandata serventur. video autem eas libenter esse tecum. sed ego praecipiam eis ut omnino a domo tua non discedant. 2. tu tantum con- 10. ii. 4 factunt] So Ms Dd. Iv. 11 in Camb. Univ. Libr.; om. cet. Mss. tllum] Here L, Mss om. some words (as hic autem apud deum habet honorem suum. guicumgue ergo faciunt adversus illum) by homeeot.; cf. LE. munda domum tuam; in munda enim domo libenter ha- bitabunt. mundae enim sunt atque castae et industriae, et omnes habentes gratiam apud Dominum. _ igitur si habue- rint domum tuam puram, tecum permanebunt; sin autem pusillum aliquid inquinationis acciderit, protinus a domo tua recedent. hae enim virgines nullam omnino diligunt inquinationem. 3. dico ei: Spero me, domine, placiturum eis, ita ut in domo mea libenter habitent semper. et sicut hic, cui me tradidisti, nihil de me queritur, ita neque illae querentur. 4. ait ad pastorem illum: Video, inquit, servum Dei velle vivere, et custoditurum haec mandata, et virgines has habitatione munda conlocaturum. 5. haec cum dixisset, iterum pastori illi me tradidit, et vocavit eas virgines et dixit ad eas: Quoniam video vos libenter in domo huius habitare, conmendo eum vobis et domum eius, ut a domo eius non recedatis omnino. illae vero haec verba libenter audierunt. IV. Ait deinde mihi: Viriliter in ministerio hoc con- versare, omni homini indica magnalia Domini, et habebis gratiam in hoc ministerio. quicumque ergo in his mandatis ambulaverit, vivet et felix erit in vita sua; quicumque vero neglexerit, non vivet et erit infelix in vita sua. 2. dic omnibus ut non cessent, quicumque recte facere possunt, bona opera exercere; utile est illis. dico autem, omnem hominem de incommodis eripi oportere. et is enim qui eget et in cotidiana vita patitur incommoda, in magno tormento est ac necessitate. 3. qui igitur huiusmodi ani- mam eripit de necessitate, magnum gaudium sibi adquirit. is enim, qui huiusmodi vexatur incommodo, pari tormento cruciatur atque torquet se qui in vincula est. multi enim propter huiusmodi calamitates, cum eas sufferre non possunt, mortem sibi adducunt. qui novit igitur calamita- tem huiusmodi hominis et non eripit eum, magnum pecca- tum admittit et reus fit sanguinis eius. 4. facite igitur 402 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. _[S. 10. iv opera bona, quicumque accepistis a Domino, ne, dum tardatis facere, consummetur structura turris. propter vos enim intermissum est opus aedificationis eius. nisi festine- tis igitur facere recte, consummabitur turris, et exclude- mini. 5. postquam vero locutus est mecum, surrexit de lecto, et adprehenso pastore et virginibus abiit, dicens autem mihi, remissurum se pastorem illum et virgines in domum meam. TRANSLATION OF THE Soe PHERD OF HERMAS. 26—2 ae SHEPRERD OF HERMAS.


# The Shepherd of Hermas

# Vision 1

2.  As soon as she had spoken these words the heavens were shut ; and I was given over to horror and grief. Then I said within myself, ‘If this sin is recorded against me, how can I be saved? Or how shall I propitiate Elohim (God) for my sins which are full-blown? Or with what words shall I entreat the Yahuah (Lord) that He may be propitious unto me?’ While I was advising and discussing these matters in my heart, I see before me a great white chair of snow-white wool; and there came an aged lady in glistening raiment, having a book in her hands, and she sat down alone, and she saluted me, ‘Good morrow, Hermas.’ Then I, grieved and weeping, said, ‘Good morrow, lady.’ And she said to me, ‘Why so gloomy, Hermas, thou that art patient and good-tempered, and art always smiling? Why so downcast in thy looks, and far from cheerful?’ And I said to her, ‘Because of an excellent lady’s saying that I had sinned against her.’ Then she said, ‘Far be this thing from the servant of Elohim (God)! Nevertheless the thought did enter into thy heart concerning her. Now to the servants of Elohim (God) such a purpose bringeth sin. For it is an evil and mad purpose to overtake a devout spirit that hath been already approved, that it should desire an evil deed, and especially if it be Hermas the temperate, who abstaineth from every evil desire, and is full of all simplicity and of great guilelessness.
3.  ‘Yet it is not for this that Elohim (God) is wroth with thee, but that thou mayest convert thy family, that hath done wrong against the Yahuah (Lord) and against you their parents. But out of fondness for thy children thou didst not admonish thy family, but didst suffer it to become fearfully corrupt. Therefore the Yahuah (Lord) is wroth with thee. But He will heal all thy past sins, which have been committed in thy family ; for by reason of their sins and iniquities thou hast been corrupted by the affairs of this world. But the great mercy of the Yahuah (Lord) had pity on thee and thy Meas a] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 407 family, and will strengthen thee, and establish thee in His glory. Only be not thou careless, but take courage, and strengthen thy family. For as the smith hammering his work conquers the task which he wills, so also doth righteous discourse repeated daily conquer all evil. Cease not therefore to reprove thy children; for I know that if they shall repent with all their heart, they shall be written in the books of life with the saints.’ After these words of hers had ceased, she saith unto me, ‘Wilt thou listen to me as I read?’ Then say I, ‘Yes, lady.’ She, saith to me, ‘Be attentive, and hear the glories of Elohim (God).’ I listened | with attention and with wonder to that which I had no power to remember ; for all the words were terrible, such as man cannot bear. The last words however I remembered, for they were suitable for us and gentle. ‘Behold, the Elohim (God) of Hosts, Who by His invisible and mighty power and by His great wisdom created the world, and by His glorious purpose clothed His creation with comeliness, and by His strong word fixed the heaven, and founded the earth upon the waters, and by His own wisdom and providence formed His holy Church, which also He blessed—behold, He removeth the heavens and the mountains and the hills and the seas, and all things are made level for His elect, that He may fulfil to them the promise which He promised with great glory and rejoicing, if so be that they shall keep the ordi- nances of Elohim (God), which they received, with great faith.’
4.  When then she finished reading and arose from her chair, there came four young men, and they took away the chair, and departed towards the East. ‘Then she calleth me unto her, and she touched my breast, and saith to me, ‘Did my reading please thee?’ And I say unto her, ‘Lady, these last words please me, but the former were difficult and hard.’ Then she spake to me, saying, ‘These last words are for the righteous, but the former are for the heathen and the rebellious.’ While she yet spake with me, two men appeared, and took her by the arms, and they departed, whither the chair also had gone, towards the East. And she smiled as she departed and, as she was going, she saith to me, ‘ Play the man, Hermas.’

# Vision 2

1.  Iwas on the way to Cume, at the same season as last year, and I called to mind my last year’s vision as I walked; and again a Spirit taketh me, and carrieth me away to the same place as last year. When then I arrived at the place, I fell upon my knees, and began to pray to 408 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (V2 the Yahuah (Lord), and to glorify His name, for that he counted me worthy, and made known unto me my former sins. But after I had risen up from prayer, I behold before me the aged lady, whom also I had seen last year, walking and reading a little book. And she saith to me, ‘Canst thou report these things to the elect of Elohim (God)?’ I say unto her, ‘ Lady, I cannot recollect so much; but give me the little book, that I may copy it. ‘Take it,’ saith she, ‘and be sure and return it to me.’ I took it, and retiring to a certain spot in the country I copied it letter for letter: for I could not make out the syllables. When then I had finished the letters of the book, suddenly the book was snatched out of my hand; but by whom I did not see.
2.  Now after fifteen days, when I had fasted and entreated the Yahuah (Lord) earnestly, the knowledge of the writing was revealed tome. And this is what was written :— ‘Thy seed, Hermas, have sinned against Elohim (God), and have blasphemed the Yahuah (Lord), and have betrayed their parents through great wickedness, yea, they have got the name of betrayers of parents, and yet they did not profit by their betrayal; and they still further added to their sins wanton deeds and reckless wickedness; and so the measure of their transgressions was filled up. But make these words known to all thy children, and to thy wife who shall be as thy sister; for she too refraineth not from using her tongue, wherewith she doeth evil. But, when she hears these words, she will refrain, and will find mercy. After that thou hast made known unto them all these words, which the Master commanded me that they should be revealed unto thee, then all their sins which they sinned aforetime are forgiven to them; yea, and to all the saints that have sinned unto this day, if they repent with their whole heart, and remove double-mindedness from their heart. For the Master sware by His own glory, as concerning His elect; that if, now that this day has been set as a limit, sin shall hereafter be committed, they shall not find salvation; for repentance for the righteous hath an end; the days of repentance are accomplished for all the saints; whereas for the Gentiles there is repentance until the last day. Thou shalt therefore say unto the rulers of the Church, that they direct their paths in righteousness, that they may receive in full the promises with abundant glory. Ye therefore that work righteousness be stedfast, and be not double-minded, that ye may have admission with the holy angels. Blessed are ye, as many as endure patiently the great tribula- tion that cometh, and as many as shall not deny their life. For the Yahuah (Lord) sware concerning His Son, that those who denied their Lord should be rejected from their life, even they that are now about to deny Him in the coming days; but to those who denied Him aforetime, to them mercy was given of His great lovingkindness.
3.  ‘But do thou, Hermas, no longer bear a grudge against thy children, neither suffer thy sister to have her way, so that they may be purified from their former sins. For they shall be chastised with a righteous chastisement, unless thou bear a grudge against them thyself. The bearing of a grudge worketh death. But thou, Hermas, hast had great tribulations of thine own, by reason of the transgressions of thy family, because thou hadst no care for them. For thou wast neglectful of them, and wast mixed up with thine evil transactions. But herein is thy salvation, in that thou didst not depart from the living Elohim (God), and in thy simplicity and thy great continence. These have saved thee, if thou abidest therein; and they save all who do such things, and walk in guilelessness and simplicity. ‘These men prevail over all wickedness, and continue unto life eternal. Blessed are all they that work righteous- ness. They shall never be destroyed. But thou shalt say to Maximus, “ Behold tribulation cometh (upon thee), if thou think fit to deny a second time. Zhe Yahuah (Lord) is nigh unto them that turn unto Him, as it is written in Eldad and Modat, who prophesied to the people in the wilderness.’’’
4.  Now, brethren, a revelation was made unto me in my sleep by a youth of exceeding fair form, who said to me, ‘Whom thinkest thou the aged woman, from whom thou receivedst the book, to be?’ I say, ‘The Sibyl’ ‘Thou art wrong,’ saith he, ‘she is not.’ ‘Who then is she?’ Isay. ‘The Church,’ saith he. I said unto him, ‘Wherefore then is she aged?’ ‘Because,’ saith he, ‘she was created before all things ; therefore is she aged; and for her sake the world was framed.’ And afterwards I saw a vision in my house. The aged woman came, and asked me, if I had already given the book to the elders. I said that I had not given it. ‘Thou hast done well,’ she said, ‘for I have words to add. When then I shall have finished all the words, it shall be made known by thy means to all the elect. Thou shalt therefore write two little books, and shalt send one to Clement, and one to Grapte. So Clement shall send to the foreign cities, for this is his duty; while Grapte shall instruct the widows and the orphans. But thou shalt read (the book) to this city along with the elders that preside over the Church. 410 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V.. Goan

# Vision 3

2.  ‘What did they suffer?’ say I. ‘Listen,’ saith she. ‘Stripes, imprisonments, great tribulations, crosses, wild beasts, for the Name’s sake. Therefore to them belongs the right side of the Holiness—to them, and to all who shall suffer for the Name. But for the rest is the left side. Howbeit, to both, to them that sit on the right, and to them that sit on the left, are the same gifts, and the same promises, only they sit on the right and have a certain glory. Thou indeed art very desirous to sit on the right with them, but thy shortcomings are many; yet thou shalt be purified from thy shortcomings; yea, and all that are not double- minded shall be purified from all their sins unto this day.’ When she had said this, she wished to depart; but, falling at her feet, I entreated her by the Yahuah (Lord) that she would show me the vision which she promised. Then she again took me by the hand, and raiseth me, and seateth me on the couch at the left hand, while she herself sat on the right. And lifting up a certain glistening rod, she saith to me, ‘Seest thou a great thing?’ I say to her, ‘Lady, I see nothing.’ She saith to me, ‘Look thou; dost thou not see in front of thee a great tower being builded upon the waters, of glistening square stones?’ Now the tower was being builded foursquare by the six young men that came with her. And countless other men were bringing stones, some of them from the deep, and others from the land, and were handing them to the six young men. And they took them and builded. The stones that were dragged from the deep they placed in every case, just as they were, into the building, for they had been shaped, and they fitted in their joining with the other stones; and they adhered so closely one with another that their joining could not possibly be detected; and the building of the tower appeared as if it were built of one stone. But of the other stones which were brought from the dry land, some they threw away, and some they put into the building; and others they broke in pieces, and threw to a distance from the tower. Now many other stones were lying round the tower, and they did not use them for the building ; for some of them were mildewed, and others had cracks in them, and others were too short, and others were white and round, and did not fit into the building. And I saw other stones thrown to a distance from the tower, and coming to the way, and yet not staying in the way, but rolling to where there was no way; and others falling into the fire and burning there; and others falling near the waters, and yet not able to 412 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. ii roll into the water, although they desired to roll and to come to the water.
3.  When she had shown me these things, she wished to hurry away. I say to her, ‘ Lady, what advantage is it to me to have seen these things, and yet not to know what the things mean?’ She answered and said unto me, ‘Thou art an over-curious fellow, in desiring to know all that concerns the tower.’ ‘Yea, lady,’ I said, ‘that I may announce it to my brethren, and that they [may be the more gladdened and] when they hear [these things] may know the Yahuah (Lord) in great glory.’ Then said she, ‘ Many shall hear; but when they hear, some of them shall be glad, and others shall weep. Yet even these latter, if they hear and repent, shall likewise be glad. Hear thou therefore the parables of the tower ; for I will reveal all things unto thee. And trouble me no more about revelation; for these revelations have an end, seeing that they have been completed. Nevertheless thou wilt not cease asking for revelations; for thou art shameless. ‘The tower, which thou seest building, is myself, the Church, which was seen of thee both now and aforetime. Ask, therefore, what thou willest concerning the tower, and I will reveal it unto thee, that thou mayest rejoice with the saints.’ I say unto her, ‘ Lady, since thou didst hold me worthy once for all, that thou shouldest reveal all things to me, reveal them.’ Then she saith to me, ‘ Whatsoever is possible to be revealed to thee, shall be revealed. Only let thy heart be with Elohim (God), and doubt not in thy mind about that which thou seest.’ I asked her, ‘Wherefore is the tower builded upon waters, lady?’ ‘I told thee so before,’ said she, ‘and indeed thou dost enquire diligently. So by thy enquiry thou discoverest the truth. Hear then why the tower is builded upon waters; it is because your life is saved and shall be saved by water. But the tower has been founded by the word of the Almighty and Glorious Name, and is strengthened by the unseen power of the Master.’
4.  I answered and said unto her, ‘Lady, this thing is great and marvellous. But the six young men that build, who are they, lady ?’ ‘ These are the holy angels of Gop, that were created first of all, unto whom the Yahuah (Lord) delivered all His creation to increase and to build it, and to be masters of all creation. By their hands therefore the building of the tower will be accomplished.’ ‘And who are the others who are bringing the stones?’ ‘They also are holy angels of Elohim (God) ; but these six are superior to them. The building of the tower then shall be accom- plished, and all alike shall rejoice in heart (asthey stand) round the tower, Vv. 3. vj THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 413 and shall glorify Elohim (God) that the building of the tower was accomplished.’ I enquired of her, saying, ‘ Lady, I could wish to know concerning the end of the stones, and their power, of what kind it is.’ She answered and said unto me, ‘It is not that thou of all men art especially worthy that it should be revealed to thee; for there are others before thee, and better than thou art, unto whom these visions ought to have been revealed. But that the name of Elohim (God) may be glorified, it hath been revealed to thee, and shall be revealed, for the sake of the doubtful- minded, who question in their hearts whether these things are so or not. Tell them that all these things are true, and that there is nothing beside the truth, but that all are stedfast, and valid, and established on a firm foundation.
5.  ‘Hear now concerning the stones that go to the building. The stones that are squared and white, and that fit together in their joints, these are the apostles and bishops and teachers and deacons, who walked after the holiness of Elohim (God), and exercised their office of bishop and teacher and deacon in purity and sanctity for the elect of Elohim (God), some of them already fallen on sleep, and others still living. And because they always agreed with one another, they both had peace among themselves and listened one to another. Therefore their joinings fit together in the building of the tower.’ ‘But they that are dragged from the deep, and placed in the building, and that fit together in their joinings with the other stones that are already builded in, who are they?’ ‘These are they that suffered for the name of the Yahuah (Lord).’ ‘But the other stones that are brought from the dry land, I would fain know who these are, lady.’ She said, ‘Those that go to the building, and yet are not hewn, these the Yahuah (Lord) hath approved because they walked in the uprightness of the Yahuah (Lord), and rightly performed His commandments.’ ‘But they that are brought and placed in the building, who are they?’ ‘They are young in the faith, and faithful; but they are warned by the angels to do good, because wickedness was found in them.’ ‘But those whom they rejected and threw away, who are they?’ ‘These have sinned, and desire to repent, therefore they were not cast to a great distance from the tower, because they will be useful for the building, if they repent. They then that shall repent, if they repent, will be strong in the faith, if they repent now while the tower is building. But if the building shall be finished, they have no more any place, but shall be castaways. ‘This privilege only they have, that they lie near the tower. 414 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. vi
6.  ‘But wouldst thou know about them that are broken in pieces, and cast away far from the tower? These are the sons of lawless- ness. They received the faith in hypocrisy, and no wickedness was absent from them. ‘Therefore they have not salvation, for they are not useful for building by reason of their wickednesses. ‘Therefore they were broken up and thrown far away by reason of the wrath of the Yahuah (Lord), for they excited Him to wrath. But the rest whom thou hast seen lying in great numbers, not going to the building, of these they that are mildewed are they that knew the truth, but did not abide in it, nor cleave to the saints. Therefore they are useless.’ ‘But they that have the cracks, who are they?’ ‘These are they that have discord in their hearts against one another, and are not at peace among themselves; who have an appearance of peace, but when they depart from one another, their wickednesses abide in their hearts. These are the cracks which the stones have. But they that are broken off short, these have believed, and have their greater part in righteousness, but have some parts of lawlessness; therefore they are too short, and are not perfect.’ ‘But the white and round stones, which did not fit into the building, who are they, lady?’ She answered and said to me, ‘How long art thou foolish and stupid, and enquirest everything, and under- standest nothing? These are they that have faith, but have also riches of this world. When tribulation cometh, they deny their Lord by reason of their riches and their business affairs.’ And I answered and said unto her, ‘When then, lady, will they be useful for the building?’ ‘When,’ she replied, ‘their wealth, which leadeth their souls astray, shall be cut away, then will they be useful for Elohim (God). For just as the round stone, unless it be cut away, and lose some portion of itself, cannot become square, so also they that are rich in this world, unless their riches be cut away, cannot become useful to the Yahuah (Lord). Learn first from thyself. When thou hadst riches, thou wast useless; but now thou art useful and profitable unto life. Be ye useful unto Elohim (God), for thou thyself also art taken from the same stones.
7.  ‘But the other stones which thou sawest cast far away from the tower and falling into the way and rolling out of the way into the regions where there is no way, these are they that have believed, but by reason of their double heart they abandon their true way. Thus thinking that they can find a better way, they go astray and are sore distressed, as they walk about in the regions where there is no way. But they that fall into the fire and are burned, these are they that finally rebelled from the living Elohim (God), and it no more entered into their hearts to repent by reason of the lusts of their wantonness and of the wickednesses which they wrought. But the others, which fall near the waters and yet cannot roll into the water, wouldest thou know who are they? These are they that heard the word, and would be baptized unto the name of the Yahuah (Lord). Then, when they call to their remembrance the purity of the truth, they change their minds, and go back again after their evil desires.’ So she finished the explanation of the tower. Still importunate, I asked her further, whether for all these stones that were rejected and would not fit into the building of the tower there was repentance, and they had a place in this tower. ‘They can repent,’ she said, ‘but they cannot be fitted into this tower. Yet they shall be fitted into another place much more humble, but not until they have undergone torments, and have fulfilled the days of their sins. And they shall be changed for this reason, because they participated in the Righteous Word; and then shall it befal them to be relieved from their torments, if the evil deeds, that they have done, come into their heart; but if these come not into their heart, they are not saved by reason of the hardness of their hearts.’
8.  When then I ceased asking her concerning all these things, she saith to me; ‘Wouldest thou see something else?’ Being very desirous of beholding, I was greatly rejoiced that I should see it. She looked upon me, and smiled, and she saith to me, ‘Seest thou seven women round the tower?’ ‘I see them, lady,’ say I. ‘This tower is supported by them by commandment of the Yahuah (Lord). Hear now their employments. The first of them, the woman with the strong hands, is called Faith ; through her are saved the elect of Elohim (God). And the second, that is girded about and looketh like a man, is called Continence; she is the daughter of Faith. Whosoever then shall follow her, becometh happy in his life, for he shall refrain from all evil deeds, believing that, if he refrain from every evil desire, he shall inherit eternal life.’ ‘And the others, lady, who be they?’ ‘They are daughters one of the other. The name of the one is Simplicity, of the next, Knowledge, of the next, Guilelessness, of the next, Reverence, of the next, Love. When then thou shalt do all the works of their mother, thou canst live.’ ‘I would fain know, lady,’ I say, ‘what power each of them possesseth.’ ‘ Listen then,’ saith she, ‘to the powers which they have. Their powers are mastered each by the other, and they follow each other, in the order in which they were born. 416 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. viil From Faith is born Continence, from Continence Simplicity, from Simplicity Guilelessness, from Guilelessness Reverence, from Reverence Knowledge, from Knowledge Love. ‘Their works then are pure and reverent and divine. Whosoever therefore shall serve these women, and shall have strength to master their works, shall have his dwelling in the tower with the saints of Elohim (God).’ Then I asked her concerning the seasons, whether the consummation is even now. But she cried aloud, saying, ‘ Foolish man, seest thou not that the tower is still a-building ? Whensoever therefore the tower shall be finished building, the end cometh ; but it shall be built up quickly. Ask me no more questions: this reminder is sufficient for you and for the saints, and is the renewal of your spirits. But it was not revealed to thyself alone, but in order that thou mightest show these things unto all. After three days—for thou must understand first, and I charge thee, Hermas, first with these words, which I am about to speak to thee—(I charge thee to) tell all these things into the ears of the saints, that hearing them and doing them they may be purified from their wickednesses, and thyself also with them. g. ‘Hear me, my children. I brought you up in much simplicity and guilelessness and reverence, through the mercy of the Yahuah (Lord), Who instilled righteousness into you, that ye might be justified and sanctified from all wickedness and all crookedness. But ye will not to cease from your wickedness. Now then hear me and be at peace among your- selves, and have regard one to another, and assist one another, and do not partake of the creatures of Elohim (God) alone in abundance, but share them also with those that are in want. For some men through their much eating bring weakness on the flesh, and injure their flesh: whereas the flesh of those who have nought to eat is injured by their not having sufficient nourishment, and their body is ruined. This exclusiveness therefore is hurtful to you that have and do not share with them that are In want. Look ye to the judgment that cometh. Ye then that have more than enough, seek out them that are hungry, while the tower is still unfinished; for after the tower is finished, ye will desire to do good, and will find no place for it. Look ye therefore, ye that exult in your wealth, lest they that are in want shall moan, and their moaning shall go up unto the Yahuah (Lord), and ye with your [abundance of] good things be shut outside the door of the tower. Now therefore I say unto you that are rulers of the Church, and that occupy the chief seats; be not ye like unto the sorcerers. The sorcerers indeed carry their We Sian] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 417 drugs in boxes, but ye carry your drug and your poison in your heart. Ye are case-hardened, and ye will not cleanse your hearts and mix your wisdom together in a clean heart, that ye may obtain mercy from the Great King. Look ye therefore, children, lest these divisions of yours deprive you of your life. How is it that ye wish to instruct the elect of the Yahuah (Lord), while ye yourselves have no instruction? Instruct one another therefore, and have peace among yourselves, that I also may stand gladsome before the Father, and give an account concerning you all to your Lord.’
10.  When then she ceased speaking with me, the six young men, who were building, came, and took her away to the tower, and other four lifted the couch, and took it also away to the tower. I saw not the face of these, for they were turned away. And, as she went, I asked her to reveal to me concerning the three forms, in which she had appeared to me. She answered and said to me; ‘As concerning these things thou must ask another, that they may be revealed to thee.’ Now she was seen of me, brethren, in my first vision of last year, as a very aged woman and seated on a chair. In the second vision her face was youthful, but her flesh and her hair were aged, and she spake to me standing ; and she was more gladsome than before. But in the third vision she was altogether youthful and of exceeding great beauty, and her hair alone was aged; and she was gladsome exceedingly and seated on acouch. Touching these things I was very greatly anxious to learn this revelation. And I see the aged woman in a vision of the night, saying to me, ‘Every enquiry needs humility. Fast there- fore, and thou shalt receive what thou askest from the Yahuah (Lord).’ So I fasted one day; and that very night there appeared unto me a young man, and he saith to me, ‘Seeing that thou askest me revelations offhand with entreaty, take heed lest by thy much asking thou injure thy flesh. Sufficient for thee are these revelations. Canst thou see mightier revelations than those thou hast seen?’ I say unto him in reply, ‘Sir, this one thing alone I ask, concerning the three forms of the aged woman, that a complete revelation may be vouchsafed me.’ He saith to me in answer, ‘ How long are ye without understanding? It is your double-mindedness that maketh you of no understanding, and because your heart is not set towards the Yahuah (Lord).’ I answered and said unto him again, ‘From thee, Sir, we shall learn the matters more accurately.’
11.  ‘Listen,’ saith he, ‘concerning the three forms, of which thou enquirest. In the first vision wherefore did she appear to thee an aged AP, FATH. 27 418 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 3. xi woman and seated on a chair? Because your spirit was aged, and already decayed, and had no power by reason of your infirmities and acts of double-mindedness. For as aged people, having no longer hope of renewing their youth, expect nothing else but to fall asleep, so ye also, being weakened with the affairs of this world, gave yourselves over to repining, and cast not your cares on the Yahuah (Lord); but your spirit was broken, and ye were aged by your sorrows.’ ‘ Wherefore then she was seated on a chair, I would fain know, Sir.’ ‘Because every weak person sits on a chair by reason of his weakness, that the weakness of his body may be supported. So thou hast the symbolism of the first vision.
12.  ‘But in the second vision thou sawest her standing, and with her countenance more youthful and more gladsome than before; but her flesh and her hair aged. Listen to this parable also,’ saith he. ‘Imagine an old man, who has now lost all hope of himself by reason of his weakness and his poverty, and expecteth nothing else save the last day of his life. Suddenly an inheritance is left him. He heareth the news, riseth up and full of joy clothes himself with strength, and no longer lieth down, but standeth up, and his spirit, which was now broken by reason of his former circumstances, is renewed again, and he no longer sitteth, but taketh courage; so also was it with you, when ye heard the revelation which the Yahuah (Lord) revealed unto you. For He had compassion on you, and renewed your spirits, and ye laid aside your maladies, and strength came to you, and ye were made powerful in the faith, and the Yahuah (Lord) rejoiced to see you put on your strength. And there- fore He showed you the building of the tower; yea, and other things also shall He show you, if with your whole heart ye be at peace among yourselves.
13.  ‘But in the third vision ye saw her younger and fair and glad- some, and her form fair. For just as when to some mourner cometh some piece of good tidings, immediately he forgetteth his former sorrows, and admitteth nothing but the tidings which he hath heard, and is strengthened thenceforth unto that which is good, and his spirit is renewed by reason of the joy which he hath received ; so also ye have received a renewal of your spirits by seeing these good things. And whereas thou sawest her seated on a couch, the position is a firm one; for the couch has four feet and standeth firmly; for the world too is upheld by means of four elements. They then that have fully repented shail be young again, and founded firmly, seeing that they have re- pented with their whole heart. There thou hast the revelation entire and complete. Thou shalt ask nothing more as touching revelation; but if anything be lacking still, it shall be revealed unto thee.’

# Vision 4

1.  The fourth vision which I saw, brethren, twenty days after the former vision which came unto me, for a type of the impending tribula- tion. I was going into the country by the Campanian Way. From the high road, it is about ten stades; and the place is easy for travelling. While then I am walking alone, I entreat the Yahuah (Lord) that He will accom- plish the revelations and the visions which He showed me through His holy Church, that He may strengthen me and may give repentance to His servants which have stumbled, that His great and glorious Name may be glorified, for that He held me worthy that He should show me His marvels. And as I gave glory and thanksgiving to Him, there answered me as it were the sound of a voice, ‘ Be not of doubtful mind, Hermas.’ I began to question in myself and to say, ‘ How can I be of doubtful mind, seeing that I am so firmly founded by the Yahuah (Lord), and have seen glorious things?’ And I went on a little, brethren, and behold, I see a cloud of dust rising as it were to heaven, and I began to say within myself, ‘Can it be that cattle are coming, and raising a cloud of dust?’ for it was just about a stade from me. As the cloud of dust waxed greater and greater, I suspected that it was something supernatural. Then the sun shone out a little, and behold, I see a huge beast like some sea-monster, and from its mouth fiery locusts issued forth. And the beast was about a hundred feet in length, and its head was as it were of pottery. And I began to weep, and to entreat the Yahuah (Lord) that He would rescue me from it. And I remembered the word which I had heard, ‘Be not of doubtful mind, Hermas.’ Having therefore, brethren, put on the faith of the Yahuah (Lord) and called to mind the mighty works that He had taught me, I took courage and gave myself up to the beast. Now the beast was coming on with such a rush, that it might have ruined a city. I come near it, and, huge monster as it was, it stretcheth itself on the ground, and merely put forth its tongue, and stirred not at all until I had passed by it. And the beast had on its head four colours; black, then fire and blood colour, then gold, then white. 27—2 420 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [V. 4. il
2.  Now after I had passed the beast, and had gone forward about thirty feet, behold, there meeteth me a virgin arrayed as if she were going forth from a bride-chamber, all in white and with white san- dals, veiled up to her forehead, and her head-covering consisted of a turban, and her hair was white. I knew from the former visions that it was the Church, and I became more cheerful. She saluteth me, saying, ‘Good morrow, my good man’; and I saluted her in turn, ‘Lady, good morrow.’ She answered and said unto me, ‘ Did nothing meet thee?’ I say unto her, ‘ Lady, such a huge beast, that could have destroyed whole peoples: but, by the power of the Yahuah (Lord) and by His great mercy, I escaped it.’ ‘Thou didst escape it well,’ saith she, ‘because thou didst cast thy care upon Elohim (God), and didst open thy heart to the Yahuah (Lord), believing that thou canst be saved by nothing else but by His great and glorious Name. ‘Therefore the Yahuah (Lord) sent His angel, which is over the beasts, whose name is Segri, and shut its mouth, that it might not hurt thee. Thou hast escaped a great tribulation by reason of thy faith, and because, though thou sawest so huge a beast, thou didst not doubt in thy mind. Go therefore, and declare to the elect of the Yahuah (Lord) His mighty works, and tell them that this beast is a type of the great tribulation which is to come. If therefore ye prepare yourselves beforehand, and repent (and turn) unto the Yahuah (Lord) with your whole heart, ye shall be able to escape it, if your heart be made pure and without blemish, and if for the remaining days of your life ye serve the Yahuah (Lord) blamelessly. Cast your cares upon the Yahuah (Lord) and He will set them straight. ‘Trust ye in the Yahuah (Lord), ye men of doubtful mind, for He can do all things, yea, He both turneth away His wrath from you, and again He sendeth forth His plagues upon you that are of doubtful mind. Woe to them that hear these words and are disobedient; it were better for them that they had not been born.’
3.  I asked her concerning the four colours, which the beast had upon its head. Then she answered me and said, ‘Again thou art curious about such matters.’ ‘Yes, lady,’ said I, ‘ make known unto me what these things are.’ ‘Listen,’ said she ; ‘the black is this world in which ye dwell; and the fire and blood colour showeth that this world must perish by blood and fire; and the golden part are ye that have escaped from this world. For as the gold is tested by the fire and is made useful, so ye also [that dwell in it] are being tested in yourselves. Ye then that abide and pass through the fire will be purified by it. For as the gold loses its dross, so ye also shall cast away all sorrow and Vv. 5] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 421 tribulation, and shall be purified, and shall be useful for the building of the tower. But the white portion is the coming age, in which the elect of Elohim (God) shall dwell; because the elect of Elohim (God) shall be without spot and pure unto life eternal. Wherefore cease not thou to speak in the ears of the saints. Ye have now the symbolism also of the tribulation which is coming in power. But if ye be willing, it shall be nought. Remember ye the things that are written beforehand.’ With these words she departed, and I saw not in what direction she departed ; for a noise was made; and I turned back in fear, thinking that the beast was coming.

# Vision 5 (Revelation)

1.  As I prayed in the house, and sat on the couch, there entered a man glorious in his visage, in the garb of a shepherd, with a white skin wrapped about him, and with a wallet on his shoulders and a staff in his hand. And he saluted me, and I saluted him in return. And he imme- diately sat down by my side, and he saith unto me, ‘I was sent by the most holy angel, that I might dwell with thee the remaining days of thy life.’ I thought he came to tempt me, and I say unto him, ‘ Why, who art thou? For I know,’ say I, ‘unto whom I was delivered.’ He saith to me, ‘Dost thou not recognise me?’ ‘No,’I say. ‘I,’ saith he, ‘am the shepherd, unto whom thou wast delivered.’ While he was still speak- ing, his form was changed, and I recognised him as being the same, to whom I was delivered; and straightway I was confounded, and fear seized me, and I was altogether overwhelmed with distress that I had answered him so wickedly and senselessly. But he answered and said unto me, ‘Be not confounded, but strengthen thyself in my commandments which I am about tocommand thee. For I was sent,’ saith he, ‘that I might show thee again all the things which thou didst see before, merely the heads which are convenient for you. First of all, write down my command- ments and my parables ; and the other matters thou shalt write down as I shall show them to thee. The reason why,’ saith he, ‘I command thee to write down first the commandments and parables is, that thou mayest read them off-hand, and mayest be able to keep them.’ So I wrote down the commandments and parables, as he commanded me. If then, when ye hear them, ye keep them and walk in them, and do them with a pure heart, ye shall receive from the Yahuah (Lord) all things that He promised you; but if, when ye hear them, ye do not repent, but still add to your sins, ye shall receive from the Yahuah (Lord) the opposite. All these the shepherd, the angel of repentance, commanded me so to write. 422 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 1

# Mandate 1

1.  ‘First of all, believe that Elohim (God) is One, even He Who created all things and set them in order, and brought all things from non-existence into being, Who comprehendeth all things, being alone incomprehensible. Believe Him therefore, and fear Him, and in this fear be continent. Keep these things, and thou shalt cast off all wickedness from thyself, and shalt clothe thyself with every excellence of righteousness, and shalt live unto Elohim (God), if thou keep this commandment.’

# Mandate 2

1.  He saith to me; ‘Keep simplicity and be guileless, and thou shalt be as little children, that know not the wickedness which destroyeth the life of men. First of all, speak evil of no man, neither take pleasure in listening to a slanderer. Otherwise thou that hearest too shalt be responsible for the sin of him that speaketh the evil, if thou believest the » slander, which thou hearest; for in believing it thou thyself also wilt have a grudge against thy brother. So then shalt thou be responsible for the sin of him that speaketh the evil. Slander is evil; it is a restless demon, never at peace, but always having its home among factions. Refrain from it therefore, and thou shalt have success at all times with all men. But clothe thyself in reverence, wherein is no evil stumbling- block, but all things are smooth and gladsome. Work that which is good, and of thy labours, which Elohim (God) giveth thee, give to all that are in want freely, not questioning to whom thou shalt give, and to whom thou shalt not give. Give to all; for to all Elohim (God) desireth that there should be given of His own bounties. They then that receive shall render an account to Elohim (God) why they received it, and to what end; for they that receive in distress shall not be judged, but they that receive by false pretence shall pay the penalty. He then that giveth is guiltless; for as he received from the Yahuah (Lord) the ministration to perform it, he hath performed it in sincerity, by making no distinction to whom to give or not to give. This ministration then, when sincerely performed, becomes glorious in the sight of Elohim (God). He therefore that ministereth thus sincerely shall live unto Elohim (God). Therefore keep this commandment, as I have told thee, that thine own repentance and that of thy house- hold may be found to be sincere, and [thy] heart pure and undefiled.’

# Mandate 3

1.  Again he saith to me; ‘Love truth, and let nothing but truth proceed out of thy mouth, that the Spirit which Elohim (God) made to dwell in this flesh, may be found true in the sight of all men; and thus shall the Yahuah (Lord), Who dwelleth in thee, be glorified; for the Yahuah (Lord) is true in every word, and with Him there is no falsehood. They therefore that speak lies set the Yahuah (Lord) at nought, and become robbers of the Yahuah (Lord), for they do not deliver up to Him the deposit which they received. For they received of Him a spirit free from lies. This if they shall return a lying spirit, they have defiled the commandment of the Yahuah (Lord) and have be- come robbers.’ When then I heard these things, I wept bitterly. But seeing me weep he saith, ‘Why weepest thou?’ ‘Because, Sir,’ say I, ‘I know not if I can be saved.’ ‘Why so?’ saith he. ‘Because, Sir,’ I say, ‘never in my life spake I a true word, but I always lived deceitfully with all men and dressed up my falsehood as truth before all men; and no man ever contradicted me, but confidence was placed in my word. How then, Sir,’ say I, ‘can I live, seeing that I have done these things?’ ‘Your supposition,’ he saith, ‘is right and true, for it behoved thee as a servant of Elohim (God) to walk in truth, and no complicity with evil should abide with the Spirit of truth, nor bring grief to the Spirit which is holy and true.’ ‘Never, Sir,’ say I, ‘heard I clearly words such as these.’ ‘Now then,’ saith he, ‘thou hearest. Guard them, that the former falsehoods also which thou spakest in thy business affairs may themselves become credible, now that these are found true; for they too can become trustworthy. If thou keep these things, and from henceforward speak nothing but truth, thou shalt be able to secure life for thyself. And whosoever shall hear this command, and abstain from falsehood, that most pernicious habit, shall live unto Elohim (God).’

# Mandate 4

1.  ‘I charge thee,’saith he, ‘to keep purity, and let not a thought enter into thy heart concerning another’s wife, or concerning fornication, or concerning any such like evil deeds; for in so doing thou committest a great sin. But remember thine own wife always, and thou shalt never go wrong. For should this desire enter into thine heart, thou wilt go wrong, and should any other as evil as this, thou committest sin. For this desire in a servant of Elohim (God) is a great sin; and if any man doeth this evil deed, he worketh out death for himself. Look to it 424 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 4. i therefore. Abstain from this desire; for, where holiness dwelleth, there lawlessness ought not to enter into the heart of a righteous man.’ I say to him, ‘Sir, permit me to ask thee a few more questions.’ ‘Say on,’ saith he. ‘Sir,’ say I, ‘if a man who has a wife that is faithful in the Yahuah (Lord) de- tect her in adultery, doth the husband sin in living with her?’ ‘Solongas he is ignorant,’ saith he, ‘he sinneth not; but if the husband know of her sin, and the wife repent not, but continue in her fornication, and her husband live with her, he makes himself responsible for her sin and an accomplice in her adultery.’ ‘What then, Sir,’ say I, ‘shall the husband do, if the wife continue in this case?’ ‘Let him divorce her,’ saith he, ‘and let the husband abide alone: but if after divorcing his wife he shall marry another, he likewise committeth adultery.’ ‘If then, Sir,’ say I, ‘after the wife is divorced, she repent and desire to return to her own husband, shall she not be received?’ ‘Certainly,’ saith he, ‘if the husband receiveth her not, he sinneth and bringeth great sin upon himself; nay, one who hath sinned and repented must be received, yet not often; for there is but one repentance for the servants of Elohim (God). For the sake of her repentance therefore the husband ought not to marry. ‘This is the manner of acting enjoined on husband and wife. Not only,’ saith he, ‘is it adultery, if a man pollute his flesh, but whosoever doeth things like unto the heathen committeth adultery. If therefore in such deeds as these likewise a man continue and repent not, keep away from him, and live not with him. Otherwise, thou also art a partaker of his sin. For this cause ye were enjoined to remain single, whether husband or wife; for in such cases repentance is possible. I,’ said he, ‘am not giving an excuse that this matter should be concluded thus, but to the end that the sinner should sin no more. But as concerning his former sin, there is One Who is able to give healing; it is He Who hath authority over all things.’
2.  Jasked him again, saying, ‘Seeing that the Yahuah (Lord) held me worthy that thou shouldest always dwell with me, suffer me still to say a few words, since I understand nothing, and my heart has been made dense by my former deeds. Make me to understand, for I am very foolish, and I apprehend absolutely nothing.’ He answered and said unto me, ‘I,’ saith he, ‘preside over repentance, and I give understanding to all who repent. Nay, thinkest thou not,’ saith he, ‘that this very act of repentance is understanding? To repent is great understanding,’ saith he. ‘For the man that hath sinned understandeth that he hath done evil before the Yahuah (Lord), and the deed which he hath done entereth into his heart, and he repenteth, and doeth no more evil, but doeth good lavishly, and humbleth his own soul and putteth it to torture because it sinned. Thou seest then that repentance is great understanding.’ ‘It is on this account therefore, Sir,’ say I, ‘that I enquire everything accurately of thee; first, because I am a sinner; secondly, because I know not what deeds I must do that I may live, for my sins are many and various.’ ‘Thou shalt live,’ saith he, ‘if thou keep my commandments and walk in them; and whosoever shall hear these commandments and keep them, shall live unto Elohim (God).’
3.  ‘I will still proceed, Sir,’ say I, ‘to ask a further question.’ ‘Speak on,’ saith he. ‘I have heard, Sir,’ say I, ‘from certain teachers, that there is no other repentance, save that which took place when we went down into the water and obtained remission of our former sins.’ He saith to me; ‘Thou hast well heard; for so itis. For he that hath received remission of sins ought no longer to sin, but to dwell in purity. But, since thou enquirest all things accurately, I will declare unto thee this also, so as to give no excuse to those who shall hereafter believe, or those who have already believed, on the Yahuah (Lord). For they that have already believed, or shall hereafter believe, have not repentance for sins, but have only remission of their former sins. To those then that were called before these days the Yahuah (Lord) has appointed repentance. For the Yahuah (Lord), being a discerner of hearts and foreknowing all things, perceived the weakness of men and the manifold wiles of the devil, how that he will be doing some mischief to the servants of Elohim (God), and will deal wickedly with them. The Yahuah (Lord) then, being very compassionate, had pity on His handiwork, and appointed this (opportunity of) repentance, and to me was given the authority over this repentance. But I say unto you,’ saith he, ‘if after this great and holy calling any one, being tempted of the devil, shall commit sin, he hath only one (opportunity of) repentance. But if he sin off-hand and repent, repentance is unprofitable for such a man; for he shall live with difficulty.’ I say unto him, ‘I was quickened into life again, when I heard these things from thee so precisely. For I know that, if I shall add no more to my sins, I shall be saved.’ ‘Thou shalt be saved,’ he saith, ‘thou and all, as many as shall do these things.’
4.  I asked him again, saying, ‘Sir, since once thou dost bear with me, declare unto me this further matter also.’ ‘Say on,’ saith he. ‘Ifa wife, Sir,’ say I, ‘or, it may be, a husband fall asleep, and one of them marry, doth the one that marrieth sin?’ ‘He sinneth not,’ saith he, ‘but if he remain single, he investeth himself with more exceeding honour 426 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 4. iv and with great glory before the Yahuah (Lord); yet even if he should marry, he sinneth not. Preserve purity and holiness therefore, and thou shalt live unto Elohim (God). All these things, which I speak and shall hereafter speak unto thee, guard from this time forward, from the day when thou wast committed unto me, and I will dwell in thy house. But for thy former transgressions there shall be remission, if thou keepest my com- mandments. Yea, and all shall have remission, if they keep these my commandments, and walk in this purity.’

# Mandate 5

1.  ‘Be thou long-suffering and understanding,’ he saith, ‘and thou shalt have the mastery over all evil deeds, and shalt work all righteous- ness. For if thou art long-suffering, the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) that abideth in thee shall be pure, not being darkened by another evil spirit, but dwelling in a large room shall rejoice and be glad with the vessel in which he dwell- eth, and shall serve Elohim (God) with much cheerfulness, having prosperity in ~ himself. But if any angry temper approach, forthwith the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), being delicate, is straitened, not having [the] place clear, and seeketh to retire from the place; for he is being choked by the evil spirit, and has no room to minister unto the Yahuah (Lord), as he desireth, being polluted by angry temper. For the Yahuah (Lord) dwelleth in long-suffering, but the devil in angry temper. Thus that both the spirits then should be dwelling together is inconvenient and evil for that man in whom they dwell. For if you take a little wormwood, and pour it into a jar of honey, is not the whole of the honey spoiled, and all that honey ruined by a very small quantity of wormwood? For it destroyeth the sweetness of the honey, and it no longer hath the same attraction for the owner, because it is rendered bitter and hath lost its use. But if the wormwood be not put into the honey, the honey is found sweet and becomes useful to its owner. Thou seest [then] that long-suffering is very sweet, beyond the sweetness of honey, and is useful to the Yahuah (Lord), and He dwelleth in it. But angry temper is bitter and useless. If then angry temper be mixed with long-suffering, long-suffering is polluted and the man’s intercession is no longer useful to Elohim (God).’ ‘I would fain know, Sir,’ say I, ‘the working of angry temper, that I may guard myself from it.’ ‘Yea, verily,’ saith he, ‘if thou guard not thyself from it—thou and thy family—thou hast lost allthy hope. But guard thyself from it; for I am with thee. Yea, and all men shall hold aloof from it, as many as have repented with their whole heart. For I will be with them and will preserve them ; for they all were justified by the most holy angel.
2.  ‘Hear now,’ saith he, ‘the working of angry temper, how evil it is, and how it subverteth the servants of Elohim (God) by its own working, and how it leadeth them astray from righteousness. But it doth not lead astray them that are full in the faith, nor can it work upon them, because the power of the Yahuah (Lord) is with them; but them that are empty and double-minded it leadeth astray. For when it seeth such men in prosperity it insinuates itself into the heart of the man, and for no cause whatever the man or the woman is embittered on account of worldly matters, either about meats, or some triviality, or about some friend, or about giving or receiving, or about follies of this kind. For all these things are foolish and vain and senseless and inexpedient for the servants of Elohim (God). But long-suffering is great and strong, and has a mighty and vigorous power, and is prosperous in great enlargement, gladsome, exultant, free from care, glorifying the Yahuah (Lord) at every season, having no bitterness in itself, remaining always gentle and tranquil. This long-suffering therefore dwelleth with those whose faith is perfect. But angry temper is in the first place foolish, fickle and senseless ; then from foolishness is engendered bitterness, and from bitterness wrath, and from wrath anger, and from anger spite; then spite being composed of all these evil elements becometh a great sinand incurable. For when all these spirits dwell in one vessel, where the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) also dwelleth, that vessel cannot contain them, but overfloweth. The delicate spirit therefore, as not being accustomed to dwell with an evil spirit nor with harshness, departeth from a man of that kind, and seeketh to dwell with gentleness and tranquillity. Then, when it hath removed from that man, in whom it dwells, that man becometh emptied of the righteous spirit, and henceforward, being filled with the evil spirits, he is unstable in all his actions, being dragged about hither and thither by the evil spirits, and is altogether blinded and bereft of his good intent. Thus then it happeneth to all persons of angry temper. Refrain therefore from angry temper, the most evil of evil spirits. But clothe thyself in long-suffering, and resist angry temper and bitterness, and thou shalt be found in company with the holiness which is beloved of the Yahuah (Lord). See then that thou never neglect this commandment; for if thou master this commandment, thou shalt be able likewise to keep the remaining commandments, which I am about to give thee. Be strong in them and 428 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 5. ii endowed with power; and let all be endowed with power, as many as desire to walk in them.’

# Mandate 6

1.  ‘I charged thee,’ saith he, ‘in my first commandment to guard faith and fear and temperance.’ ‘Yes, Sir,’ say I. ‘ But now,’ saith he, ‘I wish to show thee their powers also, that thou mayest understand what is the power and effect of each one of them. For their effects are twofold. Now they are prescribed alike to the righteous and the un- righteous. Do thou therefore trust righteousness, but trust not un- righteousness ; for the way of righteousness is straight, but the way of unrighteousness is crooked. But walk thou in the straight [and level] path, and leave the crooked one alone. For the crooked way has no tracks, but only pathlessness and many stumbling-stones, and is rough and thorny. So it is therefore harmful to those who walk in it. But those who walk in the straight way walk on the level and without stumbling: for it is neither rough nor thorny. Thou seest then that it is more expedient to walk in this way.’ ‘I am pleased, Sir,’ say I, ‘to walk in this way.’ ‘Thou shalt walk,’ he saith, ‘yea, and whosoever shall turn unto the Yahuah (Lord) with his whole heart shall walk in it.
2.  ‘Hear now,’ saith he, ‘concerning faith. ‘There are two angels with a man, one of righteousness and one of wickedness.’ ‘ How then, Sir,’ say I, ‘shall I know their workings, seeing that both angels dwell with me?’ ‘Hear,’ saith he, ‘and understand their workings. The angel of righteousness is delicate and bashful and gentle and tranquil. When then this one enters into thy heart, forthwith he speaketh with thee of righteousness, of purity, of holiness, and of contentment, of every righteous deed and of every glorious virtue. When all these things enter into thy heart, know that the angel of righteousness is with thee. [These then are the works of the angel of righteousness.] Trust him therefore and his works. Now see the works of the angel of wicked- ness also. First of all, he is quick-tempered and bitter and senseless, and his works are evil, overthrowing the servants of Elohim (God). Whenever then he entereth into thy heart, know him by his works.’ ‘How I shall discern him, Sir,’ I reply, ‘I know not.’ ‘ Listen,’ saith he. ‘When a fit of angry temper or bitterness comes upon thee, know that he is in thee. Then the desire of much business and the costliness of many viands and drinking bouts and of many drunken fits and of various M. 7] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 429 luxuries which are unseemly, and the desire of women, and avarice, and haughtiness and boastfulness, and whatsoever things are akin and like to these—when then these things enter into thy heart, know that the angel of wickedness is with thee. Do thou therefore, recognising his works, stand aloof from him, and trust him in nothing, for his works are evil and inexpedient for the servants of Elohim (God). Here then thou hast the workings of both the angels. Understand them, and trust the angel of righteousness. But from the angel of wickedness stand aloof, for his teaching is evil in every matter; for though one be a man of faith, and the desire of this angel enter into his heart, that man, or that woman, must commit some sin. And if again a man or a woman be exceedingly wicked, and the works of the angel of righteousness come into that man’s heart, he must of necessity do something good. Thou seest then,’ saith he, ‘that it is good to follow the angel of righteousness, and to bid farewell to the angel of wickedness. This commandment declareth what concerneth faith, that thou mayest trust the works of the angel of righteousness, and doing them mayest live unto Elohim (God). But believe that the works of the angel of wickedness are difficult ; so by not doing them thou shalt live unto Elohim (God).’

# Mandate 7

1.  ‘Fear the Yahuah (Lord),’ saith he, ‘and keep His commandments. So keeping the commandments of Elohim (God) thou shalt be powerful in every deed, and thy doing shall be incomparable. For whilst thou fearest the Yahuah (Lord), thou shalt do all things well. But this is the fear wherewith thou oughtest to be afraid, and thou shalt be saved. But fear not the devil ; for, if thou fear the Yahuah (Lord), thou shalt be master over the devil, for there is no power in him. [For] in whom is no power, neither is there fear of him; but in whom power is glorious, of him is fear like- wise. For every one that hath power hath fear, whereas he that hath no power is despised of all. But fear thou the works of the devil, for they are evil. While then thou fearest the Yahuah (Lord), thou wilt fear the works of the devil, and wilt not do them, but abstain from them. Fear therefore is of two kinds. If thou desire to do evil, fear the Yahuah (Lord), and thou shalt not do it. If again thou desire to do good, fear the Yahuah (Lord) and thou shalt do it. Therefore the fear of the Yahuah (Lord) is powerful and great and glorious. Fear the Yahuah (Lord) then, and thou shalt live unto Him; yea, and as many of them that keep His command- ments as shall fear Him, shall live unto Elohim (God).’ ‘Wherefore, Sir,’ say I, 430 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 7 ‘didst thou say concerning those that keep His commandments, ‘‘ They shall live unto Elohim (God)”?’ ‘Because,’ saith he, ‘every creature feareth the Yahuah (Lord), but not every one keepeth His commandments. Those then that fear Him and keep His commandments, they have life unto Elohim (God) ; but they that keep not His commandments have no life in them.’

# Mandate 8

1.  ‘I told thee,’ saith he, ‘that the creatures of Elohim (God) are twofold; for temperance also is twofold. For in some things it is right to be temperate, but in other things it is not nght.’ ‘Make known unto me, Sir,’ say I, ‘in what things it is right to be temperate, and in what things it is not right.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he. ‘Be temperate as to what is evil, and do it not; but be not temperate as to what is good, but do it. For if thou be temperate as to what is good, so as not to do it, thou committest a great sin; but if thou be temperate as to what is evil, so as not to do it, thou doest great righteousness. Be temperate therefore in abstaining from all wickedness, and do that which is good.’ ‘What kinds of wickedness, Sir,’ say I, ‘are they from which we must be temperate and abstain?’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘from adultery and fornica- tion, from the lawlessness of drunkenness, from wicked luxury, from many viands and the costliness of riches, and vaunting and haughtiness and pride, and from falsehood and evil-speaking and hypocrisy, malice and all blasphemy. ‘These works are the most wicked of all in the life of men. From these works therefore the servant of Elohim (God) must be temperate and abstain; for he that is not temperate so as to abstain from these cannot live unto Elohim (God). Listen then to what follows upon these.’ ‘Why, are there still other evil deeds, Sir?’ say I. ‘ Aye,’ saith he, ‘there are many, from which the servant of Elohim (God) must be temperate ‘and abstain; theft, falsehood, deprivation, false witness, avarice, evil desire, deceit, vain-glory, boastfulness, and whatsoever things are like ‘unto these. Thinkest thou not that these things are wrong, yea, very wrong,’ [saith he,] ‘for the servants of Elohim (God)? In all these things he that serveth Elohim (God) must exercise temperance. Be thou temperate, therefore, and refrain from all these things, that thou mayest live unto Elohim (God), and be enrolled among those who exercise self-restraint in them. These then are the things from which thou shouldest restrain thyself. Now hear,’ saith he, ‘the things, in which thou shouldest not exercise self- restraint, but do them. Exercise no self-restraint in that which is good, but do it.’ ‘Sir,’ say I, ‘show me the power of the good also, that I M. 9] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 431 may walk in them and serve them, that doing them it may be possible for me to be saved.’ ‘Hear,’ saith he, ‘the works of the good likewise, which thou must do, and towards which thou must exercise no self- restraint. First of all, there is faith, fear of the Yahuah (Lord), love, concord, words of righteousness, truth, patience ; nothing is better than these in the life of men. If a man keep these, and exercise not self-restraint from them, he becomes blessed in his life. Hear now what follow upon these; to minister to widows, to visit the orphans and the needy, to ransom the servants of Elohim (God) from their afflictions, to be hospitable (for in hospitality benevolence from time to time has a place), to resist no man, to be tranquil, to show yourself more submissive than all men, to reverence the aged, to practise righteousness, to observe brotherly feeling, to endure injury, to be long-suffering, to bear no grudge, to exhort those who are sick at soul, not to cast away those that have stumbled from the faith, but to convert them and to put courage into them, to reprove sinners, not to oppress debtors and indigent persons, and whatsoever actions are like these. Do these things,’ saith he, ‘seem to thee to be good?’ ‘Why, what, Sir,’ say I, ‘can be better than these?’ ‘Then walk in them,’ saith he, ‘and abstain not from them, and thou shalt live unto Elohim (God). Keep this commandment therefore. If thou do good and abstain not from it, thou shalt live unto Elohim (God) ; yea, and all shall live unto Elohim (God) who act so. And again if thou do not evil, and abstain from it, thou shalt live unto Elohim (God); yea, and all shall live unto Elohim (God), who shall keep these commandments, and walk in them.’

# Mandate 9

1.  He saith to me; ‘Remove from thyself a doubtful mind and doubt not at all whether to ask of Elohim (God), saying within thyself, “ How can I ask a thing of the Yahuah (Lord) and receive it, seeing that I have committed so many sins against Him?” Reason not thus, but turn to the Yahuah (Lord) with thy whole heart, and ask of Him nothing wavering, and thou shalt know His exceeding compassion, that He will surely not abandon thee, but will fulfil the petition of thy soul. For Elohim (God) is not as men who bear a grudge, but Himself is without malice and hath compassion on His creatures. Do thou therefore cleanse thy heart from all the vanities of this life, and from the things mentioned before ; and ask of the Yahuah (Lord), and thou shalt receive all things, and shalt lack nothing of all thy petitions, if thou ask of the Yahuah (Lord) nothing wavering. But if thou waver 432 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 9 in thy heart, thou shalt surely receive none of thy petitions. For they that waver towards Elohim (God), these are the doubtful-minded, and they never obtain any of their petitions. But they that are complete in the faith make all their petitions trusting in the Yahuah (Lord), and they receive, because they ask without wavering, nothing doubting; for every doubtful-minded man, if he’ repent not, shall hardly be saved. Cleanse therefore thy heart from doubtful-mindedness, and put on faith, for it is strong, and trust Elohim (God) that thou wilt receive all thy petitions which thou askest ; and if after asking anything of the Yahuah (Lord), thou receive thy petition some- what tardily, be not of doubtful mind because thou didst not receive the petition of thy soul at once. For assuredly it is by reason of some temptation or some transgression, of which thou art ignorant, that thou receivest thy petition so tardily. Do thou therefore cease not to make thy soul’s petition, and thou shalt receive it. But if thou grow weary, and doubt as thou askest, blame thyself and not Him that giveth unto thee. See to this doubtful-mindedness; for it is evil and senseless, and uprooteth many from the faith, yea, even very faithful and strong men. — For indeed this doubtful-mindedness is a daughter of the devil, and work- eth great wickedness against the servants of Elohim (God). ‘Therefore despise doubtful-mindedness and gain the mastery over it in everything, clothing thyself with faith which is strong and powerful. For faith promiseth all things, accomplisheth all things ; but doubtful-mindedness, as having no confidence in itself, fails in all the works which it doeth. ‘Thou seest then,’ saith he, ‘that faith is from above from the Yahuah (Lord), and hath great power ; but doubtful-mindedness is an earthly spirit from the devil, and hath no power. Do thou therefore serve that faith which hath power, and hold aloof from the doubtful-mindedness which hath no power; and thou shalt live unto Elohim (God); yea, and all those shall live unto Elohim (God) who are so minded.’

# Mandate 10

1.  ‘Put away sorrow from thyself,’ saith he, ‘for she is the sister of doubtful-mindedness and of angry temper.’ ‘How, Sir,’ say I, ‘is she the sister of these? For angry temper seems to me to be one thing, doubtful-mindedness another, sorrow another.’ ‘Thou art a foolish fellow,’ saith he, ‘[and] perceivest not that sorrow is more evil than all the spirits, and is most fatal to the servants of Elohim (God), and beyond all the spirits destroys a man, and crushes out the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), and yet again saves it.’ ‘I, Sir,’ say I, ‘am without understanding, and I understand not these parables. For how it can crush out and again save, I do not comprehend,’ ‘Listen,’ saith he. ‘Those who have never investigated concerning the truth, nor enquired concerning the deity, but have merely believed, and have been mixed up in business affairs and riches and heathen friendships, and many other affairs of this world—as many, I say, as devote themselves to these things, comprehend not the parables of the deity; for they are darkened by these actions, and are corrupted and become barren. As good vineyards, when they are treated with neglect, are made barren by the thorns and weeds of various kinds, so men who after they have believed fall into these many occupations which were mentioned before, lose their under- standing and comprehend nothing at all concerning righteousness ; for if they hear concerning the deity and truth, their mind is absorbed in their occupations, and they perceive nothing at all. But they that have the fear of Elohim (God), and investigate concerning deity and truth, and direct their heart towards the Yahuah (Lord), perceive and understand everything that is said to them more quickly, because they have the fear of the Yahuah (Lord) in themselves ; for where the Yahuah (Lord) dwelleth, there too is great under- standing. Cleave therefore unto the Yahuah (Lord), and thou shalt understand and perceive all things.
2.  ‘Hear now, senseless man,’ saith he, ‘how sorrow crusheth out the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), and again saveth it. When the man of doubtful mind sets his hand to any action, and fails in it owing to his doubtful- mindedness, grief at this entereth into the man, and grieveth the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), and crusheth it out. Then again when angry temper cleaveth to a man concerning any matter, and he is much embittered, again sorrow entereth into the heart of the man that was ill-tempered, and he is grieved at the deed which he hath done, and repenteth that he did evil. This sadness therefore seemeth to bring salvation, because he repented at having done the evil. So both the operations sadden the Spirit ; first, the doubtful mind saddens the Spirit, because it succeeded not in its business, and the angry temper again, because it did what was evil. Thus both are saddening to the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), the doubtful mind and the angry temper. Put away therefore from thyself sadness, and afflict not the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) that dwelleth in thee, lest haply He intercede with Elohim (God) [against thee], and depart from thee. For the Spirit of Elohim (God), that was given unto this flesh, endureth not sadness neither constraint.
3.  ‘Therefore clothe thyself in cheerfulness, which hath favour with Elohim (God) always, and is acceptable to Him, and rejoice in it. For every 434 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 10. iii cheerful man worketh good, and thinketh good, and despiseth sadness ; but the sad man is always committing sin. In the first place he com- mitteth sin, because he grieveth the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), which was given to the man being a cheerful spirit; and in the second place, by grieving the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) he doeth lawlessness, in that he doth not intercede with neither confess unto Elohim (God). For the intercession of a sad man hath never at any time power to ascend to the altar of Elohim (God).’ ‘ Wherefore,’ say I, ‘doth not the intercession of him that is saddened ascend to the altar?’ ‘Because,’ saith he, ‘sadness is seated at his heart. Thus sadness mingled with the intercession doth not suffer the inter- cession to ascend pure to the altar. For as vinegar when mingled with wine in the same (vessel) hath not the same pleasant taste, so likewise sadness mingled with the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) hath not the same intercession. Therefore cleanse thyself from this wicked sadness, and thou shalt live unto Elohim (God); yea, and all they shall live unto Elohim (God), who shall cast away sadness from themselves and clothe themselves in all cheerfulness.’

# Mandate 11

1.  He shewed me men seated on a couch, and another man seated on a chair. And he saith to me, ‘Seest thou those that are seated on the couch?’ ‘I see them, Sir,’ say I. ‘These,’ saith he, ‘are faithful, but he that sitteth on the chair is a false prophet who destroyeth the mind of the servants of Elohim (God)—I mean, of the doubtful-minded, not of the faithful. These doubtful-minded ones then come to him as to a sooth- sayer and enquire of him what shall befall them. And he, the false prophet, having no power of a divine Spirit in himself, speaketh with them according to their enquiries [and according to the lusts of their wickedness], and filleth their souls as they themselves wish. For being empty himself he giveth empty answers to empty enquirers; for what- ever enquiry may be made of him, he answereth according to the emptiness of the man. But he speaketh also some true words; for the devil filleth him with his own spirit, if so be he shall be able to break down some of the righteous. So many therefore as are strong in the faith of the Yahuah (Lord), clothed with the truth, cleave not to such spirits, but hold aloof from them; but as many as are doubters and frequently change their minds, practise soothsaying like the Gentiles, and bring upon themselves greater sin by their idolatries. For he that consulteth a false prophet on any matter is an idolater and emptied of the truth, and senseless. For no Spirit given of Elohim (God) needeth to be consulted ; but, M. 11] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 435 having the power of deity, speaketh all things of itself, because it is from above, even from the power of the divine Spirit. But the spirit which is consulted, and speaketh according to the desires of men, is earthly and fickle, having no power; and it speaketh not at all, unless it be consulted.’ ‘ How then, Sir,’ say I, ‘shall a man know who of them is a prophet, and who a false prophet?’ ‘ Hear,’ saith he, ‘concerning both the prophets; and, as I shall tell thee, so shalt thou test the prophet and the false prophet. By his life test the man that hath the divine Spirit. In the first place, he that hath the [divine] Spirit, which is from above, is gentle and tranquil and humble-minded, and abstaineth from all wickedness and vain desire of this present world, and holdeth himself inferior to all men, and giveth no answer to any man when enquired of, nor speaketh in solitude (for neither doth the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) speak when a man wisheth Him to speak); but the man speaketh then when Elohim (God) wisheth him to speak. When then the man who hath the divine Spirit cometh into an assembly of righteous men, who have faith in a divine Spirit, and intercession is made to Elohim (God) by the gathering of those men, then the angel of the prophetic spirit, who is attached to him, filleth the man, and the man, being filled with the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), speaketh to the multitude, according as the Yahuah (Lord) willeth. In this way then the Spirit of the deity shall be manifest. This then is the greatness of the power as touching the Spirit of the deity of the Yahuah (Lord). Hear now,’ saith he, ‘concerning the earthly and vain spirit, which hath no power but is foolish. In the first place, that man who seemeth to have a spirit exalteth himself, and desireth to have a chief place, and straight- way he is impudent and shameless and talkative and conversant in many luxuries and in many other deceits, and receiveth money for his prophesying, and if he receiveth not, he prophesieth not. Now can a divine Spirit receive money and prophesy? It is not possible for a prophet of Elohim (God) to do this, but the spirit of such prophets is earthly. In the next place, it never approacheth an assembly of righteous men; but avoideth them, and cleaveth to the doubtful-minded and empty, and prophesieth to them in corners, and deceiveth them, speaking all things in emptiness to gratify their desires; for they too are empty whom it answereth. For the empty vessel placed together with the empty is not broken, but they agree one with the other. But when he comes into an assembly full of righteous men who have a Spirit of deity, and intercession is made from them, that man is emptied, and the earthly spirit fleeth from him in fear, and that man is struck dumb and is 238—2 436 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [M. 11 altogether broken in pieces, being unable to utter a word. For, if you pack wine or oil into a closet, and place an empty vessel among them, and again desire to unpack the closet, the vessel which you placed there empty, empty in like manner you will find it. Thus also the empty prophets, whenever they come unto the spirits of righteous men, are found just such as they came. I have given thee the life of both kinds of prophets. Therefore test, by his life and his works, the man who says that he is moved by the Spirit. But do thou trust the Spirit that cometh from Elohim (God), and hath power ; but in the earthly and empty spirit put no trust at all; for in it there is no power, for it cometh from the devil. Listen [then] to the parable which I shall tell thee. Take a stone, and throw it up to heaven—see if thou canst reach it ; or again, take a squirt of water, and squirt it up to heaven—see if thou canst bore through the heaven.’ ‘How, Sir,’ say I, ‘can these things be? For both these things which thou hast mentioned are beyond our power.’ ‘Well then,’ saith he, ‘just as these things are beyond our power, so likewise the earthly spirits have no power and are feeble. Now take the power which cometh from above. The hail is a very small grain, and yet, when it falleth on a man’s head, what pain it causeth! Or again, take a drop which falls on the ground from the tiles, and bores through the stone. Thou seest then that the smallest things from above falling on the earth have great power. So likewise the divine Spirit coming from above is powerful. This Spirit therefore trust, but from the other hold aloof.’

# Mandate 12

1.  He saith to me; ‘Remove from thyself all evil desire, and clothe thyself in the desire which is good and holy; for clothed with this desire thou shalt hate the evil desire, and shalt bridle and direct it as thou wilt. For the evil desire is wild, and only tamed with difficulty ; for it is terrible, and by its wildness is very costly to men; more especially if a servant of Elohim (God) get entangled in it, and have no under- standing, he is put to fearful costs by it. But it is costly to such men as are not clothed in the good desire, but are mixed up with this life. These men then it hands over to death.’ ‘Of what sort, Sir,’ say I, ‘are the works of the evil desire, which hand over men to death? Make ' them known to me, that I may hold aloof from them.’ ‘ Listen,’ [saith | he,] ‘through what works the evil desire bringeth death to the servants . of Elohim (God). \
2.  ‘Before all is desire for the wife or husband of another, and for extravagance of wealth, and for many needless dainties, and for drinks and other luxuries, many and foolish. For every luxury is foolish and vain for the servants of Elohim (God). These desires then are evil, and bring death to the servants of Elohim (God). For this evil desire is a daughter of the devil. Ye must, therefore, abstain from the evil desires, that so abstaining ye may live unto Elohim (God). But as many as are mastered by them, and resist them not, are done to death utterly ; for these desires are deadly. But do thou clothe thyself in the desire of nghteousness, and, having armed thyself with the fear of the Yahuah (Lord), resist them. For the fear of Elohim (God) dwelleth in the good desire. If the evil desire shall see thee armed with the fear of Elohim (God) and resisting itself, it shall flee far from thee, and shall no more be seen of thee, being in fear of thine arms. Do thou therefore, when thou art crowned for thy victory over it, come to the desire of righteousness, and deliver to her the victor’s prize which thou hast received, and serve her, according as she herself desfreth. If thou serve the good desire, and art subject to her, thou shalt have power to master the evil desire, and to subject her, according as thou wilt.’
3.  ‘I would fain know, Sir,’ say I, ‘in what ways I ought to serve the good desire.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘practise righteousness and virtue, truth and the fear of the Yahuah (Lord), faith and gentleness, and as many good deeds as are like these. Practising these thou shalt be well-pleasing as a servant of Elohim (God), and shalt live unto Him; yea, and every one who shall serve the good desire shall live unto Elohim (God).’ So he completed the twelve commandments, and he saith to me; ‘Thou hast these commandments ; walk in them, and exhort thy hearers that their repentance may become pure for the rest of the days of their life. This ministration, which I give thee, fulfil thou with all diligence to the end, and thou shalt effect much. For thou shalt find favour among those who are about to repent, and they shall obey thy words. For I will be with thee, and will compel them to obey thee.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, these commandments are great and beautiful and glorious, and are able 70 gladden the heart of the man who is able to observe them. But I know not whether these commandments can be kept by a man, for they are very hard.’ He answered and said unto me; ‘If thou set it before thyself that they can be kept, thou wilt easily keep them, and they will not be hard; but if it once enter into thy heart that they cannot be kept by a man, thou wilt not keep them. But now I say unto thee; if thou keep them not, but neglect them, 438 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (M. 12. iii thou shalt not have salvation, neither thy children nor thy household, since thou hast already pronounced judgment against thyself that these commandments cannot be kept by a man,’
4.  And these things he said to me very angrily, so that I was confounded, and feared him exceedingly ; for his form was changed, so that a man could not endure his anger. And when he saw that I was altogether disturbed and confounded, he began to speak more kindly {and cheerfully] to me, and he saith; ‘Foolish fellow, void of under- standing and of doubtful mind, perceivest thou not the glory of Elohim (God), how great and mighty and marvellous it is, how that He created the world for man’s sake, and subjected all His creation to man, and gave all authority to him, that he should be master over all things under the heaven? If then,’ [he saith,] ‘man is lord of all the creatures of Elohim (God) and mastereth all things, cannot he also master these commandments ? Aye,’ saith he, ‘the man that hath the Yahuah (Lord) in his heart can master [all things and] all these commandments. But they that have the Yahuah (Lord) on their lips, while their heart is hardened, and are far from the Yahuah (Lord), to them these commandments are hard and inaccessible. Therefore do ye, who are empty and fickle in the faith, set your Lord in your heart, and ye shall perceive that nothing is easier than these commandments, nor sweeter, nor more gentle. Be ye converted, ye that walk after the commandments of the devil, (the commandments which are so) difficult and bitter and wild and riotous; and fear not the devil, for there is no power in him against you. For I will be with you, I, the angel of repentance, who have the mastery over him. The devil hath fear alone, but his fear hath no force. Fear him not therefore; and he will flee from you.’
5.  I say to him, ‘Sir, listen to a few words from me.’ ‘Say what thou wilt,’ saith he. ‘Man, Sir,’ I say, ‘is eager to keep the com- mandments of Elohim (God), and there is no one that asketh not of the Yahuah (Lord), that he may be strengthened in His commandments, and be subject to them ; but the devil is hard and overmastereth them.’ ‘He cannot,’ saith he, ‘ overmaster the servants of Elohim (God), who set their hope on Him with their whole heart. The devil can wrestle with them, but he cannot overthrow them. If then ye resist him, he will be vanquished, and will flee from you disgraced. But as many,’ saith he, ‘as are utterly empty, fear the devil as if he had power. When a man has filled amply sufficient jars with good wine, and among these jars a few are quite empty, he comes to the jars, and does not examine the full oa THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 439 ones, for he knows that they are full; but he examineth the empty ones, fearing lest they have turned sour. For empty jars soon turn sour, and the taste of the wine is spoilt. So also the devil cometh to all the servants of Elohim (God) tempting them. As many then as are complete in the faith, oppose him mightily, and he departeth from them, not having a place where he can find an entrance. So he cometh next to the empty ones, and finding a place goeth into them, and further he doeth what he willeth in them, and they become submissive slaves to him.
6.  ‘But I, the angel of repentance, say unto you; Fear not the devil; for I was sent,’ saith he, ‘to be with you who repent with your whole heart, and to strengthen you in the faith. Believe, therefore, on Elohim (God), ye who by reason of your sins have despaired of your life, and are adding to your sins, and weighing down your life; for if ye turn unto the Yahuah (Lord) with your whole heart, and work righteousness the remaining days of your life, and serve Him rightly according to His will, He will give healing to your former sins, and ye shall have power to master the works of the devil. But of the threatening of the devil fear not at all; for he is unstrung, like the sinews of adead man. Hear me therefore, and fear Him, Who is adle to do all things, fo save and to destroy, and observe these commandments, and ye shall live unto Elohim (God).’ I say to him, ‘Sir, now am I strengthened in all the ordinances of the Yahuah (Lord), because thou art with me; and I know that thou wilt crush all the power of the devil, and we shall be masters over him, and shall prevail over all his works. And I hope, Sir, that I am now able to keep these commandments which thou hast commanded, the Yahuah (Lord) enabling me.’ ‘Thou shalt keep them,’ saith he, ‘if thy heart be found pure with the Yahuah (Lord); yea, and all shall keep them, as many as shall purify their hearts from the vain desires of this world, and shall live unto Elohim (God).’

# Similitude 1

1.  He saith to me; ‘ Ye know that ye, who are the servants of Elohim (God), are dwelling in a foreign land; for your city is far from this city. If then ye know your city, in which ye shall dwell, why do ye here prepare fields and expensive displays and buildings and dwelling-chambers which are superfluous? He, therefore, that prepareth these things for this city does not purpose to return to his own city. O foolish and double-minded and miserable man, perceivest thou not that all these things are foreign, and are under the power of another? For the lord 440 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 1 of this city shall say, “I do not wish thee to dwell in my city; go forth from this city, for thou dost not conform to my laws.” Thou, therefore, who hast fields and dwellings and many other possessions, when thou art cast out by him, what wilt thou do with thy field and thy house and all the other things that thou preparedst for thyself? For the lord of this country saith to thee justly, “‘ Either conform to my laws, or depart from my country.” What then shalt thou do, who art under law in thine own city? For the sake of thy fields and the rest of thy posses- sions wilt thou altogether repudiate thy law, and walk according to the law of this city? Take heed, lest it be inexpedient to repudiate thy law ; for if thou shouldest desire to return again to thy city, thou shalt surely not be received [because thou didst repudiate the law of thy city], and shalt be shut out from it. Take heed therefore; as dwelling in a strange land prepare nothing more for thyself but a competency which is sufficient for thee, and make ready that, whensoever the master of this city may desire to cast thee out for thine opposition to his law, thou mayest go forth from his city and depart into thine own city, and use thine own law joyfully, free from all insult. Take heed there- fore, ye that serve Elohim (God) and have Him in your heart: work the works of Elohim (God) being mindful of His commandments and of the promises which He made, and believe Him that He will perform them, if His com- mandments be kept. Therefore, instead of fields buy ye souls that are in trouble, as each is able, and visit widows and orphans, and neglect them not; and spend your riches and all your displays, which ye received from Elohim (God), on fields and houses of this kind. For to this end the Master enriched you, that ye might perform these ministrations for Him. It is much better to purchase fields [and possessions] and houses of this kind, which thou wilt find in thine own city, when thou visitest it. This lavish expenditure is beautiful and joyous, not bringing sadness or fear, but bringing joy. The expenditure of the heathen then practise not ye; for it is not convenient for you the servants of Elohim (God). But practise your own expenditure, in which ye can rejoice; and do not corrupt, neither touch that which is another man’s, nor lust after it; for it is wicked to lust after other men’s possessions. But perform thine own task, and thou shalt be saved.’

# Similitude 2

1.  As I walked in the field, and noticed an elm and a vine, and was distinguishing them and their fruits, the shepherd appeareth to me and S. 2] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. A441 saith; ‘What art thou meditating within thyself?’ ‘I am thinking, [Sir,]’ say I, ‘about the elm and the vine, that they are excellently suited the one to the other.’ ‘These two trees,’ saith he, ‘are appointed for a type to the servants of Elohim (God).’ ‘I would fain know, [Sir,]’ say I, ‘the type contained in these trees, of which thou speakest.’ ‘Seest thou,’ saith he, ‘the elm and the vine?’ ‘I see them, Sir,’ say I. ‘This vine,’ saith he, ‘beareth fruit, but the elm is an unfruitful stock. Yet this vine, except it climb up the elm, cannot bear much fruit when it is spread on the ground ; and such fruit as it beareth is rotten, because it is not suspended upon the elm. When then the vine is attached to the elm, it beareth fruit both from itself and from the elm. Thou seest then that the elm also beareth [much] fruit, not less than the vine, but rather more.’ ‘How more, Sir?’ say I. ‘Because,’ saith he, ‘the vine, when hanging upon the elm, bears its fruit in abundance, and in good condition ; but, when spread on the ground, it beareth little fruit, and that rotten. This parable therefore is applicable to the servants of Elohim (God), to poor and to rich alike.’ ‘How, Sir?’ say I; ‘instruct me.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘the rich man hath much wealth, but in the things of the Yahuah (Lord) he is poor, being distracted about his riches, and his confession and interces- sion with the Yahuah (Lord) is very scanty; and even that which he giveth is small and weak and hath not power above. When then the rich man goeth up to the poor, and assisteth him in his needs, believing that for what he doth to the poor man he shall be able to obtain a reward with Elohim (God)—because the poor man is rich in intercession [and confession], and his intercession hath great power with Elohim (God)—the rich man then supplieth all things to the poor man without wavering. But the poor man being supplied by the rich maketh intercession for him, thanking Elohim (God) for him that gave to him. And the other is still more zealous to assist the poor man, that he may be continuous in his life: for he ‘knoweth that the intercession of the poor man is acceptable and rich before Elohim (God). They both then accomplish their work; the poor man maketh intercession, wherein he is rich [which he received of the Yahuah (Lord)]; this he rendereth again to the Yahuah (Lord) Who supplieth him with it. The rich man too in like manner furnisheth to the poor man, nothing doubting, the riches which he received from the Yahuah (Lord). And this work is great and acceptable with Elohim (God), because (the rich man) hath under- standing concerning his riches, and worketh for the poor man from the bounties of the Yahuah (Lord), and accomplisheth the ministration of the Yahuah (Lord) rightly. In the sight of men then the elm seemeth not to bear fruit, 442 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 2 and they know not, neither perceive, that if there cometh a drought, the elm having water nurtureth the vine, and the vine having a constant supply of water beareth fruit twofold, both for itself and for the elm. So likewise the poor, by interceding with the Yahuah (Lord) for the rich, establish their riches, and again the rich, supplying their needs to the poor, establish their souls. So then both are made partners in the righteous work. He then that doeth these things shall not be abandoned of Elohim (God), but shall be written in the books of the living. Blessed are the rich, who understand also that they are enriched from the Yahuah (Lord). For they that have this mind shall be able to do some good work.’

# Similitude 3

1.  He showed me many trees which had no leaves, but they seemed to me to be, as it were, withered ; for they were all alike. And he saith to me; ‘Seest thou these trees?’ ‘I see them, Sir,’ I say, ‘they are all alike, and are withered.’ He answered and said to me; ‘These trees that thou seest are they that dwell in this world.’ ‘Wherefore then, Sir,’ say I, ‘are they as if they were withered, and alike?’ ‘ Because,’ ° saith he, ‘neither the righteous are distinguishable, nor the sinners in this world, but they are alike. For this world is winter to the righteous, and they are not distinguishable, as they dwell with the sinners. For as in the winter the trees, having shed their leaves, are alike, and are not distinguishable, which are withered, and which alive, so also in this world neither the just nor the sinners are distinguishable, but they are all alike.’

# Similitude 4

1.  He showed me many trees again, some of them sprouting, and others withered, and he saith to me; ‘Seest thou,’ saith he, ‘these trees?’ ‘I see them, Sir,’ say I, ‘some of them sprouting, and others withered.’ ‘These trees,’ saith he, ‘that are sprouting are the righteous, who shall dwell in the world to come; for the world to come is summer to the righteous, but winter to the sinners. When then the mercy of the Yahuah (Lord) shall shine forth, then they that serve Elohim (God) shall be made manifest ; yea, and all men shall be made manifest. For as in summer the fruits of each several tree are made manifest, and are recognised of what sort they are, so also the fruits of the righteous shall be manifest, and all [even the very smallest] shall be known to be flourishing in that world. But the Gentiles and the sinners, just as thou sawest the trees which were withered, even such shall they be found, withered and unfruitful in that world, and shall be burnt up as fuel, and shall be manifest, because their practice in their life hath been evil. For the sinners shall be burned, because they sinned and repented not; and the Gentiles shall be burned, because they knew not Him that created them. Do thou therefore bear fruit, that in that summer thy fruit may be known. But abstain from overmuch business, and thou shalt never fall into any sin. For they that busy themselves overmuch, sin much also, being distracted about their business, and in no wise serving their own Yahuah (Lord). How then,’ saith he, ‘can such a man ask anything of the Yahuah (Lord) and receive it, seeing that he serveth not the Yahuah (Lord)? [For] they that serve Him, these shall receive their petitions, but they that serve not the Yahuah (Lord), these shall receive nothing. But if any one work one single action, he is able also to serve the Yahuah (Lord); for his mind shall not be corrupted from (following) the Yahuah (Lord), but he shall serve Him, because he keepeth his mind pure. If therefore thou doest these things, thou shalt be able to bear fruit unto the world to come; yea, and whosoever shall do these things, shall bear fruit.’

# Similitude 5

1.  As I was fasting and seated on a certain mountain, and giving thanks to the Yahuah (Lord) for all that He had done unto me, I see the shep- herd seated by me and saying; ‘Why hast thou come hither in the early morn?’ ‘Because, Sir,’ say I, ‘I am keeping a station.’ ‘What,’ saith he, ‘is a station?’ ‘I am fasting, Sir,” say I. ‘And what,’ saith he, ‘is this fast [that ye are fasting]?’ ‘As I was accustomed, Sir,’ say I, ‘so I fast.’ ‘Ye know not,’ saith he, ‘how to fast unto the Yahuah (Lord), neither is this a fast, this unprofitable fast which ye make unto Him.’ ‘Wherefore, Sir,’ say I, ‘sayest thou this?’ ‘I tell thee,’ saith he, ‘that this is not a fast, wherein ye think to fast; but I will teach thee what is a complete fast and acceptable to the Yahuah (Lord). Listen,’ saith he; ‘Elohim (God) desireth not such a vain fast; for by so fasting unto Elohim (God) thou shalt do nothing for righteousness. But fast thou [unto Elohim (God)] such a fast as this; do no wickedness in thy life, and serve the Yahuah (Lord) with a pure heart; observe His commandments and walk in His ordinances, and let no evil desire rise up in thy heart; but believe Elohim (God). ‘Then, if thou shalt do these things, and fear Him, and control thyself from every evil deed, thou shalt live unto Elohim (God); and if thou do these things, thou shalt accomplish a great fast, and one acceptable to Elohim (God). 444 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 5. ii
2.  ‘Hear the parable which I shall tell thee relating to fasting. A certain man had an estate, and many slaves, and a portion of his estate he planted as a vineyard; and choosing out a certain slave who was trusty and well-pleasing (and) held in honour, he called him to him and saith unto him; “Take this vineyard [which I have planted], and fence it [till I come], but do nothing else to the vineyard. Now keep this my commandment, and thou shalt be free in my house.” ‘Then the master of the servant went away to travel abroad. When then he had gone away, the servant took and fenced the vineyard ; and having finished the fencing of the vineyard, he noticed that the vineyard was full of weeds. So he reasoned within himself, saying, “ This command of my lord I have carried out. I will next dig this vineyard, and it shall be neater when it is digged ; and when it hath no weeds it will yield more fruit, because not choked by the weeds.” He took and digged the vine- yard, and all the weeds that were in the vineyard he plucked up. And that vineyard became very neat and flourishing, when it had no weeds to choke it. After a time the master of the servant [and of the estate] came, and he went into the vineyard. And seeing the vineyard fenced’ neatly, and digged as well, and [all] the weeds plucked up, and the vines flourishing, he rejoiced [exceedingly] at what his servant had done. So he called his beloved son, who was his heir, and the friends who were his advisers, and told them what he had commanded his servant, and how much he had found done. And they rejoiced with the servant at the testimony which his master had borne to him. And he saith to them; “I promised this servant his freedom, if he should keep the commandment which I commanded him; but he kept my command- ment and did a good work besides to my vineyard, and pleased me greatly. For this work therefore which he has done, I desire to make him joint-heir with my son, because, when the good thought struck him, he did not neglect it, but fulfilled it.’ In this purpose the son of the master agreed with him, that the servant should be made joint-heir with the son. After some few days, his master made a feast, and sent to him many dainties from the feast. But when the servant received [the dainties sent to him by the master], he took what was sufficient for him, and distributed the rest to his fellow-servants. And his fellow-servants, when they received the dainties, rejoiced, and began to pray for him, that he might find greater favour with the master, because he had treated them so handsomely. All these things which had taken place his master heard, and again rejoiced greatly at his deed. So the master called together again his friends and his son, and announced to them the deed that he had done with regard to his dainties which he had received ; and they still more approved of his resolve, that his servant should be made joint-heir with his son.’
3.  I say, ‘Sir, I understand not these parables, neither can I apprehend them, unless thou explain them for me.’ ‘I will explain everything to thee,’ saith he; ‘and will show thee whatsoever things I shall speak with thee. Keep the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord), and thou shalt be well-pleasing to Elohim (God), and shalt be enrolled among the number of them that keep His commandments. But if thou do any good thing outside the commandment of Elohim (God), thou shalt win for thyself more exceeding glory, and shalt be more glorious in the sight of Elohim (God) than thou wouldest otherwise have been. If then, while thou keepest the commandments of Elohim (God), thou add these services likewise, thou shalt rejoice, if thou observe them according to my commandment.’ I say to him, ‘Sir, whatsoever thou commandest me, I will keep it; for I know that thou art with me.’ ‘I will be with thee,’ saith he, ‘ because thou hast so great zeal for doing good; yea, and I will be with all,’ saith he, ‘whosoever have such zeal as this. This fasting,’ saith he, ‘if the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord) are kept, is very good. This then is the way, that thou shalt keep this fast [which thou art about to observe]. First of all, keep thyself from every evil word and every evil desire, and purify thy heart from all the vanities of this world. If thou keep these things, this fast shall be perfect for thee. And thus shalt thou do. Having fulfilled what is written, on that day on which thou fastest thou shalt taste nothing but bread and water; and from thy meats, which thou wouldest have eaten, thou shalt reckon up the amount of that day’s expenditure, which thou wouldest have incurred, and shalt give it to a widow, or an orphan, or to one in want, and so shalt thou humble thy soul, that he that hath received from thy humiliation may satisfy his own soul, and may pray for thee to the Yahuah (Lord). If then thou shalt so accomplish this fast, as I have commanded thee, thy sacrifice shall be acceptable in the sight of Elohim (God), and this fasting shall be recorded; and the service so performed is beautiful and joyous and acceptable to the Yahuah (Lord). These things thou shalt so observe, thou and thy children and thy whole household ; and, observing them, thou shalt be blessed ; yea, and all those, who shall hear and observe them, shall be blessed, and whatsoever things they shall ask of the Yahuah (Lord), they shall receive.’
4.  I entreated him earnestly, that he would show me the parable 446 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 5. iv of the estate, and of the master, and of the vineyard, and of the servant that fenced the vineyard, [and of the fence,] and of the weeds which were plucked up out of the vineyard, and of the son, and of the friends, the advisers. For I understood that all these things are a parable. But he answered and said unto me; ‘Thou art exceedingly importunate in enquiries. Thou oughtest not,’ [saith he,] ‘to make any enquiry at all; for if it be right that a thing be explained unto thee, it shall be explained.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, whatsoever things thou showest unto me and dost not explain, I shall have seen them in vain, and without understanding what they are. In like manner also, if thou speak parables to me and interpret them not, I shall have heard a thing in vain from thee.’ But he again answered, and said unto me; ‘Whosoever,’ saith he, ‘is a servant of Elohim (God), and hath his own Yahuah (Lord) in his heart, asketh under- standing of Him, and receiveth it, and interpreteth every parable, and the words of the Yahuah (Lord) which are spoken in parables are made known unto him. But as many as are sluggish and idle in intercession, these hesitate to ask of the Yahuah (Lord). But the Yahuah (Lord) is abundant in com- passion, and giveth to them that ask of Him without ceasing. But thou who hast been strengthened by the holy angel, and hast received from him such (powers of) intercession and art not idle, wherefore dost thou not ask understanding of the Yahuah (Lord), and obtain it from Him ?’ I say to him, ‘Sir, I that have thee with me have (but) need to ask thee and enquire of thee ; for thou showest me all things, and speakest with me; but if I had seen or heard them apart from thee I should have asked of the Yahuah (Lord), that they might be shown to me.’
5.  ‘I told thee just now,’ saith he, ‘that thou art unscrupulous and importunate, in enquiring for the interpretations of the parables. But since thou art so obstinate, I will interpret to thee the parable of the estate and all the accompaniments thereof, that thou mayest make them known unto all. Hear now,’ saith he, ‘and understand them. The estate is this world, and the lord of the estate is He that created all things, and set them in order, and endowed them with power; and the servant is the Son of Elohim (God), and the vines are this people whom He Himself planted ; and the fences are the [holy] angels of the Yahuah (Lord) who keep together His people; and the weeds, which are plucked up from the vineyard, are the transgressions of the servants of Elohim (God); and the dainties which He sent to him from the feast are the commandments which He gave to His people through His Son; and the friends and advisers are the holy angels which were first created; and the absence of the master is the time which remaineth over until His coming.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, great and marvellous are all things and all things are glorious; was it likely then,’ say I, ‘that I could have apprehended them?’ ‘Nay, nor can any other man, though he be full of understanding, apprehend them.’ ‘Yet again, Sir,’ say I, ‘explain to me what I am about to enquire of thee.’ ‘Say on,’ he saith, ‘if thou desirest anything.’ ‘ Wherefore, [Sir,]’ say I, ‘is the Son of Elohim (God) repre- sented in the parable in the guise of a servant?’
6.  ‘Listen,’ said he; ‘the Son of Elohim (God) is not represented in the guise of a servant, but is represented in great power and lordship.’ ‘How, Sir?’ say I; ‘I comprehend not.’ ‘Because,’ saith he, ‘Elohim (God) planted the vineyard, that is, He created the people, and delivered them over to His Son. And the Son placed the angels in charge of them, to watch over them ; and the Son Himself cleansed their sins, by labouring much and enduring many toils; for no one can dig without toil or labour. Having Himself then cleansed the sins of His people, He showed them the paths of life, giving them the law which He received from His Father. Thou seest,’ saith he, ‘that He is Himself Yahuah (Lord) of the people, having received all power from His Father. But how that the lord took his son and the glorious angels as advisers concerning the inheritance of the servant, listen. The Holy Pre-existent Spirit, Which created the whole creation, Elohim (God) made to dwell in flesh that He desired. ‘This flesh, therefore, in which the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) dwelt, was subject unto the Spirit, walking honourably in holiness and purity, without in any way defiling the Spirit. When then it had lived honour- ably in chastity, and had laboured with the Spirit, and had cooperated with it in everything, behaving itself boldly and bravely, He chose it as a partner with the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit); for the career of this flesh pleased [the Yahuah (Lord)], seeing that, as possessing the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), it was not defiled upon the earth, He therefore took the son as adviser and the glorious angels also, that this flesh too, having served the Spirit un- blameably, might have some place of sojourn, and might not seem to have lost the reward for its service; for all flesh, which is found undefiled and unspotted, wherein the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) dwelt, shall receive a reward. Now thou hast the interpretation of this parable also.’
7.  ‘I was right glad, Sir,’ say I, ‘to hear this interpretation.’ ‘Listen now,’ saith he. ‘Keep this thy flesh pure and undefiled, that the Spirit which dwelleth in it may bear witness to it, and thy flesh may be justified. See that it never enter into thine heart that this flesh of 448 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 5. vil thine is perishable, and so thou abuse it in some defilement. [For] if thou defile thy flesh, thou shalt defile the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) also; but if thou defile tthe flesht, thou shalt not live.’ ‘But if, Sir,’ say I, ‘there has been any ignorance in times past, before these words were heard, how shall a man who has defiled his flesh be saved?’ ‘For the former deeds of ignorance,’ saith he, ‘Elohim (God) alone hath power to give healing ; for all authority is His. [But now keep thyself, and the Yahuah (Lord) Almighty, Who is full of compassion, will give healing for thy former deeds of ignorance, | if henceforth thou defile not thy flesh, neither the Spirit ; for both share in common, and the one cannot be defiled without the other. Therefore keep both pure, and thou shalt live unto Elohim (God).’ [PARABLE THE SIXTH. | 1. As I sat in my house, and glorified the Yahuah (Lord) for all things that I had seen, and was considering concerning the commandments, how that they were beautiful and powerful and gladsome and glorious and able to save a man’s soul, I said within myself; ‘ Blessed shall I be, if I - walk in these commandments; yea, and whosoever shall walk in them shall be blessed.’ As I spake these things within myself, I see him suddenly seated by me, and saying as follows; ‘Why art thou of a doubtful mind concerning the commandments, which I commanded thee? They are beautiful. Doubt not at all; but clothe thyself in the faith of the Yahuah (Lord), and thou shalt walk in them. For I will strengthen thee in them. These commandments are suitable for those who meditate repentance ; for if they walk not in them, their repentance is in vain. Ye then that repent, cast away the evil doings of this world which crush you; and, by putting on every excellence of righteousness, ye shall be able to observe these commandments, and to add no more to your sins. If then ye add no further sin at all, ye will depart from your former sins. Walk then in these my commandments, and ye shall live unto Elohim (God). These things have [all] been told you from me.’ And after he had told these things to me, he saith to me, ‘ Let us go into the country, and I will show thee the shepherds of the sheep.’ ‘Let us go, Sir,’ say I. And we came to a certain plain, and he showeth me a young man, a shepherd, clothed in a light cloak, of saffron colour ; and he was feeding a great number of sheep, and these sheep were, as it were, well fed and very frisky, and were gladsome as they skipped about hither and thither; and the shepherd himself was all gladsome over his flock; and the very visage of the shepherd was exceedingly gladsome ; and he ran about among the sheep.
2.  And he saith to me; ‘Seest thou this shepherd?’ ‘I see him, Sir,’ I say. ‘This,’ saith he, ‘is the angel of self-indulgence and of deceit. He crusheth the souls of the servants of Elohim (God), and perverteth them from the truth, leading them astray with evil desires, wherein they perish. For they forget the commandments of the living Elohim (God), and walk in vain deceits and acts of self-indulgence, and are destroyed by this angel, some of them unto death, and others unto corruption.’ I say to him, ‘Sir, I comprehend not what means ‘‘unto death,” and what “unto corruption”.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘the sheep which thou sawest gladsome and skipping about, these are they who have been turned asunder from Elohim (God) utterly, and have delivered themselves over to the lusts of this world. In these, therefore, there is not repentance unto life. For the Name of Elohim (God) is being blasphemed through them. The life of such persons is death. But the sheep, which thou sawest not skipping about, but feeding in one place, these are they that have delivered themselves over to acts of self-indulgence and deceit, but have not uttered any blasphemy against the Yahuah (Lord). These then have been corrupted from the truth. In these there is hope of repentance, wherein they can live. Corruption then hath hope of a possible renewal, but death hath eternal destruction.’ Again we went forward a little way, and he showeth me a great shepherd like a wild man in appearance, with a white goatskin thrown about him; and he had a kind of wallet on his shoulders, and a staff very hard and with knots in it, and a great whip. And his look was very sour, so that I was afraid of him because of his look. This shepherd then kept receiving from the young man, the shepherd, those sheep that were frisky and well-fed, but not skip- ping about, and putting them in a certain spot, which was precipitous and covered with thorns and briars, so that the sheep could not dis- entangle themselves from the thorns and briars, but [became entangled among the thorns and briars. And so they] pastured entangled in the thorns and briars, and were in great misery with being beaten by him; and he kept driving them about to and fro, and giving them no rest, and altogether those sheep had not a happy time.
3.  When then I saw them so lashed with the whip and vexed, I was sorry for their sakes, because they were so tortured and had no rest at all. I say to the shepherd who was speaking with me; ‘Sir, who is this shepherd, who is [so] hard-hearted and severe, and has no compassion 450 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (S. 6. iii at all for these sheep?’ ‘This,’ saith he, ‘is the angel of punishment, and he is one of the just angels, and presides over punishment. So he receiveth those who wander away from Elohim (God), and walk after the lusts and deceits of this life, and punisheth them, as they deserve, with fearful and various punishments.’ ‘I would fain learn, Sir,’ say I, ‘of what sort are these various punishments.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘the various tortures and punishments are tortures belonging to the present life; for some are punished with losses, and others with want, and others with divers maladies, and others with [every kind] of unsettle- ment, and others with insults from unworthy persons and with suffering in many other respects. For many, being unsettled in their plans, set their hands to many things, and nothing ever goes forward with them. And then they say that they do not prosper in their doings, and it doth not enter into their hearts that they have done evil deeds, but they blame the Yahuah (Lord). When then they are afflicted with every kind of affliction, then they are delivered over to me for good instruction, and are strengthened in the faith of the Yahuah (Lord), and serve the Yahuah (Lord) with a pure heart the remaining days of their life. But, if they repent, the evil works which they have done rise up in their hearts, and then they glorify Elohim (God), saying that He is a just Judge, and that they suffered justly each according to his doings. And they serve the Yahuah (Lord) thenceforward with a pure heart, and are prosperous in all their doings, receiving from the Yahuah (Lord) whatsoever things they may ask; and then they glorify the Yahuah (Lord) because they were delivered over unto me, and they no longer suffer any evil thing.’
4.  I say unto him; ‘Sir, declare unto me this further matter.’ ‘What enquirest thou yet?’ saith he. ‘Whether, Sir,’ say I, ‘they that live in self-indulgence and are deceived undergo torments during the same length of time as they live in self-indulgence and are deceived.’ He saith to me, ‘ They undergo torments for the same length of time.’ ‘Then, Sir,’ say I, ‘they undergo very slight torments; for those who are living thus in self-indulgence and forget Elohim (God) ought to have been tormented sevenfold.’ He saith to me, ‘Thou art foolish, and comprehendest not the power of the torment.’ ‘True,’ say I, ‘for if I had comprehended it, I should not have asked thee to declare it to me.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he, ‘to the power of both, [of the self-indulgence and of the torment]. The time of the self-indulgence and deceit is one hour. But an hour of the torment hath the power of thirty days. If then one live in self- indulgence and be deceived for one day, and be tormented for one day, the day of the torment is equivalent to a whole year. For as many days then as a man lives in self-indulgence, for so many years is he tormented. ‘Thou seest then,’ saith he, ‘that the time of the self- indulgence and deceit is very short, but the time of the punishment and torment is long.’
5.  ‘Inasmuch, Sir,’ say I, ‘as I do not quite comprehend concern- ing the time of the deceit and self-indulgence and torment, show me more clearly.’ He answered and said unto me; ‘Thy stupidity cleaveth to thee; and thou wilt not cleanse thy heart and serve Elohim (God). ‘Take heed,’ [saith he,] ‘lest haply the time be fulfilled, and thou be found in thy foolishness. Listen then,’ [saith he,] ‘even as thou wishest, that thou mayest comprehend the matter. He that liveth in self-indulgence and is deceived for one day, and doeth what he wisheth, is clothed in much folly and comprehendeth not the thing which he doeth; for on the morrow he forgetteth what he did the day before. For self-indulgence and deceit have no memories, by reason of the folly, wherewith each is clothed ; but when punishment and torment cling to a man for a single day, he is punished and tormented for a whole year long; for punishment and torment have long memories. So being tormented and punished for the whole year, the man remembers at length the self- indulgence and deceit, and perceiveth that it is on their account that he is suffering these ills. Every man, therefore, that liveth in self-indulgence and is deceived, is tormented in this way because, though possessing life, they have delivered themselves over unto death.’ ‘What kinds of self-indulgence, Sir,’ say I, ‘are harmful?’ ‘Every action,’ saith he, ‘is self-indulgence to a man, which he does with pleasure ; for the irascible man, when he gives the reins to his passion, is self-indulgent ; and the adulterer and the drunkard and the slanderer and the liar and the miser and the defrauder and he that doeth things akin to these, giveth the reins to his peculiar passion; therefore he is self-indulgent in his action. All these habits of self-indulgence are harmful to the servants of Elohim (God); on account of these deceits therefore they so suffer who are punished and tormented. But there are habits of self-indulgence like- wise which save men; for many are self-indulgent in doing good, being carried away by the pleasure it gives to themselves. This self- indulgence then is expedient for the servants of Elohim (God), and bringeth life to a man of this disposition; but the harmful self-indulgencies afore- mentioned bring to men torments and punishments; and if they continue in them and repent not, they bring death upon themselves.’ 29—2 452 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 7 [PARABLE THE SEVENTH. | After a few days I saw him on the same plain, where also I had seen the shepherds, and he saith to me, ‘What seekest thou?’ ‘I am here, Sir,’ say I, ‘that thou mayest bid the shepherd that punisheth go out of my house; for he afflicteth me much.’ ‘It is necessary for thee,’ saith he, ‘to be afflicted ; for so,’ saith he, ‘the glorious angel ordered as concerning thee, for he wisheth thee to be proved.’ ‘Why, what so evil thing have I done, Sir,’ say I, ‘that I should be delivered over to this angel?’ ‘Listen,’ saith he. ‘Thy sins are many, yet not so many that thou shouldest be delivered over to this angel; but thy house has committed great iniquities and sins, and the glorious angel was em- bittered at their deeds, and for this cause he bade thee be afflicted for a certain time, that they also might repent and cleanse themselves from every lust of this world. When therefore they shall repent and be cleansed, then shall the angel of punishment depart.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, if they perpetrated such deeds that the glorious angel is embittered, what have I done?’ ‘They cannot be afflicted otherwise,’ saith he, ‘unless thou, the head of the [whole] house, be afflicted ; for if thou be afflicted, they also of necessity will be afflicted; but if thou be pros- perous, they can suffer no affliction.’ ‘But behold, Sir,’ say I, ‘they have repented with their whole heart.’ ‘I am quite aware myself,’ saith he, ‘that they have repented with their whole heart; well, thinkest thou that the sins of those who repent are forgiven forthwith? Certainly not; but the person who repents must torture his own soul, and must be thoroughly humble in his every action, and be afflicted with all the ' divers kinds of affliction; and if he endure the afflictions which come upon him, assuredly He Who created all things and endowed them with power will be moved with compassion and will bestow some remedy. And this (will Elohim (God) do), if in any way He perceive the heart of the penitent pure from every evil thing. But it is expedient for thee and for thy house that thou shouldest be afflicted now. But why speak I many words to thee? ‘Thou must be afflicted as the angel of the Yahuah (Lord) commanded, even he that delivered thee unto me; and for this give thanks to the Yahuah (Lord), in that He deemed thee worthy that I should reveal unto thee beforehand the affliction, that foreknowing it thou mightest endure it with fortitude.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, be thou with me, and I shall be able to endure all affliction [easily].’ ‘I will be with thee,’ saith he; ‘and I will ask the angel that punisheth to afflict thee more lightly; but thou shalt be afflicted for a short time, and thou shalt be restored again to thy house. Only continue to be humble and to minister unto the Yahuah (Lord) with a pure heart, thou and thy children and thy house, and walk in my commandments which I command thee, and thus it will be possible for thy repentance to be strong and pure. And if thou keep these commandments with thy household, all affliction shall hold aloof from thee; yea, and affliction,’ saith he, ‘shall hold aloof from all who- soever shall walk in these my commandments.’ [PARABLE THE EIGHTH. |]

# Similitude 6

1.  He showed me a [great] willow, overshadowing plains and mountains, and under the shadow of the willow all have come who are called by the name of the Yahuah (Lord). And by the willow there stood an angel of the Yahuah (Lord), glorious and very tall, having a great sickle, and he was lopping branches from the willow, and giving them to the people that sheltered beneath the willow; and he gave them little rods about a cubit long. And after all had taken the rods, the angel laid aside the sickle, and the tree was sound, just as I had seen it. Then I marvelled within myself, saying, ‘ How is the tree sound after so many branches have been lopped off?’ The shepherd saith to me, ‘ Marvel not that the tree remained sound, after so many branches were lopped off; but wait until thou seest all things, and it shall be shown to thee what it is.’ The angel who gave the rods to the people demanded them back from them again; and according as they had received them, so also they were summoned to him, and each of them returned the several rods. But the angel of the Yahuah (Lord) took them, and examined them. From some he received the rods withered and eaten as it were by grubs: the angel ordered those who gave up rods like these to stand apart. And others gave them up withered, but not grub-eaten; and these again he ordered to stand apart. And others gave them up half- withered; these also stood apart. And others gave up their rods half- withered and with cracks; these also stood apart. And others gave up their rods green and with cracks; these also stood apart. And others gave up their rods one half withered and one half green ; these also stood apart. And others brought their rods two parts of the rod green, and the third part withered ; these also stood apart. And others gave them up two parts withered, and the third part green; these also stood apart. And others gave up their rods nearly all green, but a very small portion of their rods was withered, just the end; but they had cracks in them; these also stood apart. And in those of others there was a very small 454 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. 4 portion green, but the rest of the rods was withered ; these also stood apart. And others came bringing their rods green, as they received them from the angel; and the most part of the multitude gave up their rods in this state; and the angel rejoiced exceedingly at these; these also stood apart. And others gave up their rods green and with shoots ; these also stood apart; and at these again the angel rejoiced ex- ceedingly. And others gave up their rods green and with shoots; and their shoots had, as it were, a kind of fruit. And those men were exceeding gladsome, whose rods were found in this state. And over them the angel exulted, and the shepherd was very gladsome over them.
2.  And the angel of the Yahuah (Lord) commanded crowns to be brought. And crowns were brought, made as it were of palm-branches ; and he crowned the men that had given up the rods which had the shoots and some fruit, and sent them away into the tower. And the others also he sent into the tower, even those who had given up the rods green and with shoots, but the shoots were without fruit; and he set a seal upon them. And all they that went into the tower had the same raiment, white as snow. And those that had given up their rods green as they re- ceived them, he sent away, giving them a [white] robe, and seals. After the angel had finished these things, he saith to the shepherd; ‘I go away ; but these thou shalt send away to (their places within) the walls, according as each deserveth to dwell; but examine their rods carefully, and so send them away. But be careful in examining them. Take heed lest any escape thee,’ saith he. ‘Still if any escape thee, I will test them at the altar.’ When he had thus spoken to the shepherd, he departed. And, after the angel had departed, the shepherd saith to me; ‘Let us take the rods of all and plant them, to see whether any of them shall be able to live.’ I say unto him, ‘Sir, these withered things, how can they live?’ He answered and said unto me; ‘This tree is a willow, and this class of trees clingeth to life. If then the rods shall be planted and get a little moisture, many of them willlive. And afterwards let us try to pour some water also over them. If any of them shall be able to live, I will rejoice with it; but if it live not, I at least shall not be found neglectful.’ So the shepherd bade me call them, just as each one of them was stationed. And they came row after row, and they delivered up the rods to the shepherd. And the shepherd took the rods, and planted them in rows, and after he had planted them, he poured much water over them, so that the rods could not be seen for the water. And after he had watered the rods, he saith to me; ‘Let us go now, and after a few days let us return and inspect all the rods; for He Who created this tree willeth that all those who have received rods from this tree should live. And I myself hope that these little rods, after they have got moisture and been watered, will live the greater part of them.’
3.  I say to him; ‘Sir, inform me what this tree is. For I am perplexed herewith, because, though so many branches were cut off, the tree is sound, and nothing appears to have been cut from it; I am therefore perplexed thereat.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘this great tree which overshadows plains and mountains and all the earth is the law of Elohim (God) which was given to the whole world; and this law is the Son of Elohim (God) preached unto the ends of the earth. But the people that are under the shadow are they that have heard the preaching, and _ be- lieved on Him; but the great and glorious angel is Michael, who hath the power over this people and is their captain. For this is he that putteth the law into the hearts of the believers; therefore he himself inspecteth them to whom he gave it, to see whether they have observed it. But thou seest the rods of every one; for the rods are the law. ‘Thou seest these many rods rendered useless, and thou shalt notice all those that have not observed the law, and shalt see the abode of each severally.’ I say unto him; ‘Sir, wherefore did he send away some into the tower, and leave others for thee?’ ‘As many,’ saith he, ‘as transgressed the law which they received from him, these he left under my authority for repentance; but as many as already satisfied the law and have observed it, these he has under his own authority.’ ‘Who then, Sir,’ say I, ‘are they that have been crowned and go into the tower?’ [‘As many,’ saith he, ‘as wrestled with the devil and overcame him in their wrestling, are crowned:] these are they that suffered for the law. But the others, who likewise gave up their rods green and with shoots, though not with fruit, are they that were persecuted for the law, but did not suffer nor yet deny their law. But they that gave them up green just as they received them, are sober and righteous men, who walked altogether in a pure heart and have kept the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord). But all else thou shalt know, when I have examined these rods that have been planted and watered.’
4.  And after a few days we came to the place, and the shepherd sat down in the place of the angel, while I stood by him. And he saith to me; ‘Gird thyself with a garment of raw flax, and minister to me.’ So I girded myself with a clean garment of raw flax made of coarse material, And when he saw me girded and ready to minister to him, 456 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. iv ‘Call,’ saith he, ‘the men whose rods have been planted, according to the rank as each presented their rods.’ And I went away to the plain, and called them all; and they stood all of them according to their ranks. He saith to them; ‘Let each man pluck out his own rod, and bring it to me.’ Those gave them up first, who had had the withered and chipped rods, and they were found accordingly withered and chipped. He ordered them to stand apart. Then those gave them up, who had the withered but not chipped; and some of them gave up the rods green, and others withered and chipped as by grubs. ‘Those then that gave them up green he ordered to stand apart ; but those that gave them up withered and chipped he ordered to stand with the first. Then those gave them up who had had the half-withered and with cracks; and many of them gave them up green and without cracks ; and some gave them up green and with shoots, and fruits on the shoots, such as those had who went into the tower crowned; and some gave them up withered and eaten, and some withered and uneaten, and some such as they were, half-withered and with cracks. He ordered them to stand each one apart, some in their proper ranks, and others apart.
5.  Then those gave them up who had their rods green, but with cracks. These all gave them up green, and stood in their own company. And the shepherd rejoiced over these, because they all were changed and had put away their cracks. And those gave them up likewise who had the one half green and the other half withered. The rods of some were found entirely green, of some half-withered, of some withered and eaten, and of some green and with shoots. These were all sent away each to his company. Then those gave them up who had two parts green and the third withered; many of them gave them up green, and many half-withered, and others withered and eaten. These all stood in their own company. Then those gave them up who had two parts withered and the third part green. Many of them gave them up half-withered, but some withered and eaten, others half- withered and with cracks, and a few green. These all stood in their own company. Then those gave them up who had had their rods green, but a very small part [withered] and with cracks. Of these some gave them up green, and others green and with shoots. These also went away to their own company. Then those gave them up who had a very small part green and the other parts withered. The rods of these were found for the most part green and with shoots and fruit on the shoots, and others altogether green. At these rods the shepherd rejoiced very [greatly], because they were found so. And these went away each to his own company.
6.  After [the shepherd] had examined the rods of all, he saith to me, ‘I told thee that this tree clingeth to life. Seest thou,’ saith he, ‘how many repented and were saved?’ ‘I see, Sir,’ say I. ‘It is,’ saith he, ‘that thou mayest see the abundant compassion of the Yahuah (Lord), how great and glorious it is, and He hath given (His) Spirit to those that are worthy of repentance.’ ‘Wherefore then, Sir,’ say I, ‘did they not all repent?’ ‘To those, whose heart He saw about to become pure and to serve Him with all the heart, to them He gave repentance ; but those whose craftiness and wickedness He saw, who intend to repent in hypocrisy, to them He gave not repentance, lest haply they should again profane His name.’ I say unto him, ‘Sir, now then show me concerning those that have given up their rods, what manner of man each of them is, and their abode, that when they hear this, they that believed and have received the seal and have broken it and did not keep it sound may fully under- stand what they are doing, and repent, receiving from thee a seal, and may glorify the Yahuah (Lord), that He had compassion upon them and sent thee to renew their spirits.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘those whose rods were found withered and grub-eaten, these are the renegades and traitors to the Church, that blasphemed the Yahuah (Lord) in their sins, and still further were ashamed of the Name of the Yahuah (Lord), which was invoked upon them. ‘These then perished altogether unto Elohim (God). But thou seest how not one of them repented, although they heard the words which thou spakest to them, which I commanded thee. From men of this kind life departed. But those that gave up the green and undecayed (rods), these also are near them; for they were hypocrites, and brought in strange doctrines, and perverted the servants of Elohim (God), especially them that had sinned, not permitting them to repent, but persuading them with their foolish doctrines. ‘These then have hope of repenting. But thou seest that many of them have indeed repented from the time when thou spakest to them my commandments; yea, and (others) still will repent. And as many as shall not repent, have lost their life; but as many of them as repented, became good; and their dwelling was placed within the first walls, and some of them even ascended into the tower. ‘Thou seest then,’ [saith he,] ‘that repentance from sins bringeth life, but not to repent bringeth death.
7.  ‘But as many as gave up (the rods) half-withered,and with cracks in them, hear also concerning these. Those whose rods were half- 458 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. vil withered throughout are the double-minded; for they neither live nor are dead. But those that have them half-withered and cracks in them, these are both double-minded and slanderers, and are never at peace among themselves but always causing dissensions. Yet even to these,’ [saith he,] ‘repentance is given. Thou seest,’ [saith he,] ‘that some of them have repented ; and there is still,’ saith he, ‘hope of repentance among them. And as many of them,’ saith he, ‘as have repented, have their abode within the tower; but as many of them as have repented tardily shall abide within the walls; and as many as repent not, but continue in their doings, shall die the death. But they that have given up their rods green and with cracks, these were found faithful and good at all times, [but] they have a certain emulation one with another about first places and about glory of some kind or other; but all these are foolish in having (emulation) one with another about first places. Yet these also, when they heard my commandments, being good, purified them- selves and repented quickly. They have their habitation, therefore, within the tower. But if any one shall again turn to dissension, he shall be cast out from the tower and shall lose his life. Life is for all those that keep the commandments of the Yahuah (Lord). But in the command- ments there is nothing about first places, or about glory of any kind, | but about long-suffering and humility in man. In such men, therefore, is the life of the Yahuah (Lord), but in factious and lawless men is death.
8.  ‘But they that gave up their rods half green and half withered, these are they that are mixed up in business and cleave not to the saints. ‘Therefore the one half of them liveth, but the other half is dead. Many then when they heard my commandments repented. As many then as repented, have their abode within the tower. But some of them altogether stood aloof. These then have no repentance ; for by reason of their business affairs they blasphemed the Yahuah (Lord) and denied Him. So they lost their life for the wickedness that they com- mitted. But many of them were doubtful-minded. These still have place for repentance, if they repent quickly, and their dwelling shall be within the tower; and if they repent tardily, they shall dwell within the walls ; but if they repent not, they too have lost their life. But they that have given up two parts green and the third part withered, these are they that have denied with manifold denials. Many of them therefore repented, and departed to dwell inside the tower; but many utterly rebelled from Elohim (God); these lost their life finally. And some of them were double-minded and caused dissensions. For these then there is repentance, if they repent speedily and continue not in their pleasures ; but if they continue in their doings, they likewise procure for themselves death.
9.  ‘But they that have given up their rods two thirds withered and one third green, these are men who have been believers, but grew rich and became renowned among the Gentiles. They clothed themselves with great pride and became high-minded, and abandoned the truth and did not cleave to the righteous, but lived together after the manner of the Gentiles, and this path appeared the more pleasant unto them; yet they departed not from Elohim (God), but continued in the faith, though they wrought not the works of the faith. Many of them therefore repented, and they had their habitation within the tower. But others at the last living with the Gentiles, and being corrupted by the vain opin- ions of the Gentiles, departed from Elohim (God), and worked the works of the Gentiles. These therefore were numbered with the Gentiles. But others of them were doubtful-minded, not hoping to be saved by reason of the deeds that they had done; and others were double-minded and made divisions among themselves. For these then that were double-minded by reason of their doings there is still repentance; but their repentance ought to be speedy, that their dwelling may be within the tower; but for those who repent not, but continue in their pleasures, death is nigh.
10.  ‘But they that gave up their rods green, yet with the extreme ends withered and with cracks ; these were found at all times good and faithful and glorious in the sight of Elohim (God), but they sinned to a very slight degree by reason of little desires and because they had somewhat against one another. But, when they heard my words, the greater part quickly repented, and their dwelling was assigned within the tower. But some of them were double-minded, and some being double-minded made a greater dissension. In these then there is still a hope of repentance, because they were found always good; and hardly shall one of them die. But they that gave up their rods withered, yet with a very small part green, these are they that believed, but practised the works of lawlessness. Still they never separated from Elohim (God), but bore the Name gladly, and gladly received into their houses the servants of Elohim (God). So hearing of this repentance they repented without wavering, and they practise all excellence and righteousness. And some of them even suffer persecution willingly, knowing the deeds that they did. All these then shall have their dwelling within the tower.’
11.  And after he had completed the interpretations of all the rods, 460 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 8. xi he saith unto me; ‘Go, and tell all men to repent, and they shall live unto Elohim (God); for the Yahuah (Lord) in His compassion sent me to give repentance to all, though some of them do not deserve it for their deeds ; but being long-suffering the Yahuah (Lord) willeth them that were called through His Son to be saved.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, I hope that all when they hear these words will repent; for I am persuaded that each one, when he fully knows his own deeds and fears Elohim (God), will repent.’ He answered and said unto me; ‘As many,’ [saith he,] ‘as [shall repent] from their whole heart [and] shall cleanse themselves from all the evil deeds afore-men- tioned, and shall add nothing further to their sins, shall receive healing from the Yahuah (Lord) for their former sins, unless they be double-minded concerning these commandments, and they shall live unto Elohim (God). [But as many,’ saith he, ‘as shall add to their sins and walk in the lusts of this world, shall condemn themselves to death.] But do thou walk in my commandments, and live [unto Elohim (God); yea, and as many as shall walk in them and shall do rightly, shall live unto Elohim (God).’] Having shown me all these things [and told me them] he saith to me; ‘ Now the rest will I declare (unto thee) after a few days.’ [PARABLE THE NINTH.] 1. After I had written down the commandments and parables of the shepherd, the angel of repentance, he came to me and saith to me; ‘I wish to show thee all things that the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit), Which spake with thee in the form of the Church, showed unto thee. For that Spirit is the Son of Elohim (God). For when thou wast weaker in the flesh, it was not declared unto thee through an angel; but when thou wast enabled through the Spirit, and didst grow mighty in thy strength so that thou couldest even see an angel, then at length was manifested unto thee, through the Church, the building of the tower. In fair and seemly manner hast thou seen all things, (instructed) as it were by a virgin; but now thou seest (being instructed) by an angel, though by the same Spirit ; yet must thou learn everything more accurately from me. For to this end also was I appointed by the glorious angel to dwell in thy house, that thou mightest see all things mightily, in nothing terrified, even as before.’ And he took me away into Arcadia, to a certain rounded mountain, and set me on the top of the mountain, and showed me a great plain, and round the plain twelve mountains, the mountains having each a different appearance. The first was black as soot; the second was bare, without vegetation ; the third was thorny and full of briars ; the fourth had the vegetation half-withered, the upper part of the grass green, but the part by the roots withered, and some of the grass became withered, whenever the sun had scorched it; the fifth mountain had green grass and was rugged; the sixth mountain was full with clefts throughout, some small and some great, and the clefts had vegetation, but the grass was not very luxuriant, but rather as if it had been withered ; the seventh mountain had smiling vegetation, and the whole mountain was in a thriving condition, and cattle and birds of every kind did feed upon that mountain; and the more the cattle and the birds did feed, so much the more did the herbage of that mountain flourish. The eighth mountain was full of springs, and every kind of creature of the Yahuah (Lord) did drink of the springs on that mountain. The ninth mountain had no water at all, and was entirely desert ; and it had in it wild beasts and deadly reptiles, which destroy mankind. The tenth mountain had very large trees and was umbrageous throughout, and beneath the shade lay sheep resting and feeding. The eleventh mountain was thickly wooded all over, and the trees thereon were very productive, decked with divers kinds of fruits, so that one seeing them would desire to eat of their fruits. The twelfth mountain was altogether white and its aspect was cheerful; and the mountain was most beauteous in itself. 2. And in the middle of the plain he showed me a great white rock, rising up from the plain. The rock was loftier than the mountains, being four-square, so that it could contain the whole world. Now this rock was ancient, and had a gate hewn out of it; but the gate seemed to me to have been hewed out quite recently. And the gate glistened beyond the brightness of the sun, so that I marvelled at the brightness of the gate. And around the gate stood twelve virgins. The four then that stood at the corners seemed to me to be more glorious (than the rest); but the others likewise were glorious; and they stood at the four quarters of the gate, and virgins stood in pairs between them. And they were clothed in linen tunics and girt about in seemly fashion, having their right shoulders free, as if they intended to carry some burden. Thus were they prepared, for they were very cheerful and eager. After I had seen these things, I marvelled in myself at the greatness and the glory of what I was seeing. And again I was perplexed concerning the virgins, that delicate as they were they stood up like men, as if they intended to carry the whole heaven. And the shepherd saith unto me; ‘Why questionest thou within thyself and art perplexed, and bringest sadness on thyself? For whatsoever things thou canst not 462 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. ii comprehend, attempt them not, if thou art prudent; but entreat the Yahuah (Lord), that thou mayest receive understanding to comprehend them. What is behind thee thou canst not see, but what is before thee thou beholdest. ‘The things therefore which thou canst not see, let alone, and trouble not thyself (about them); but the things which thou seest, these master, and be not over curious about the rest ; but I will explain unto thee all things whatsoever I shall show thee. Have an eye there- fore to what remaineth.’ 3. I saw six men come, tall and glorious and alike in appearance ; and they summoned a multitude of men. And the others also which came were tall men and handsome and powerful. And the six men ordered them to build a tower above the gate. And there arose a great noise from those men who had come to build the tower, as they ran hither and thither round the gate. For the virgins standing round the gate told the men to hasten to build the tower. Now the virgins had spread out their hands, as if they would take something from the men. And the six men ordered stones to come up from a certain deep place, and to go to the building of the tower. And there went up ten stones square and polished, [not] hewn from a quarry. And the six men called. to the virgins, and ordered them to carry all the stones which should go unto the building of the tower, and to pass through the gate and to hand them to the men that were about to build the tower. And the virgins laid the first ten stones that rose out of the deep on each other, and they carried them together, stone by stone. 4. And just as they stood together around the gate, in that order they carried them that seemed to be strong enough and had stooped under the corners of the stone, while the others stooped at the sides of the stone. And so they carried all the stones. And they carried them right through the gate, as they were ordered, and handed them to the men for the tower; and these took the stones and builded. Now the building of the tower was upon the great rock and above the gate. Those ten stones then were joined together, and they covered the whole rock. And these formed a foundation for the building of the tower. And [the rock and] the gate supported the whole tower. And, after the ten stones, other twenty-five stones came up from the deep, and these were fitted into the building of the tower, being carried by the virgins, like the former. And after these thirty-five stones came up. And these likewise were fitted into the tower. And after these came up other forty stones, and these all were put into the building of the tower. So - four rows were made in the foundations of the tower. And (the stones) ceased coming up from the deep, and the builders likewise ceased for a little. And again the six men ordered the multitude of the people to bring in stones from the mountains for the building of the tower. They were brought in accordingly from all the mountains, of various colours, shaped by the men, and were handed to the virgins; and the virgins carried them right through the gate, and handed them in for the building of the tower. And when the various stones were placed in the building, they became all alike and white, and they lost their various colours. But some stones were handed in by the men for the building, and these did not become bright; but just as they were placed, such likewise were they found ; for they were not handed in by the virgins, nor had they been carried in through the gate. These stones then were unsightly in the building of the tower. Then the six men, seeing the stones that were unsightly in the building, ordered them to be removed and carried [below] into their own place whence they were brought. And they say to the men who were bringing the stones in; ‘Abstain for your parts altogether from handing in stones for the building; but place them by the tower, that the virgins may carry them through the gate, and hand them in for the building. For if, [say they,] ‘they be not carried in through the gate by the hands of these virgins, they cannot change their colours. Labour not therefore,’ [say they,] ‘in vain.’ 5. And the building was finished on that day, yet was not the tower finally completed, for it was to be carried up [still] higher; and there was a cessation in the building. And the six men ordered the builders to retire for a short time [all of them], and to rest ; but the virgins they ordered not to retire from the tower. And methought the virgins were left to guard the tower. And after all had retired [and rested], I say to the shepherd; ‘How is it, Sir,’ say I, ‘that the building of the tower was not completed?’ ‘The tower,’ he saith, ‘cannot yet be finally completed, until its master come and test this building, that if any stones be found crumbling, he may change them ; for the tower is being built according to His will.’ ‘I would fain know, Sir,’ say I, ‘what is this building of this tower, and concerning the rock and gate, and the mountains, and the virgins, and the stones that came up from the deep, and were not shaped, but went just as they were into the building; and wherefore ten stones were first placed in the foundations, then twenty- five, then thirty-five, then forty, and concerning the stones that had gone to the building and were removed again and put away in their own 464 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. v place—concerning all these things set my soul at rest, Sir, and explain them to me. ‘If,’ saith he, ‘thou be not found possessed of an idle curiosity, thou shalt know all things. For after a few days we shall come here, and thou shalt see the sequel that overtaketh this tower and shalt understand all the parables accurately.’ And after a few days we came to the place where we had sat, and he saith to me, ‘ Let us go to the tower; for the owner of the tower cometh to inspect it.’ And we came to the tower, and there was no one at all by it, save the virgins alone. And the shepherd asked the virgins whether the master of the tower had arrived. And they said that he would be there directly to inspect the building.
6.  And, behold, after a little while is see an array of many men coming, and in the midst a man of such lofty stature that he overtopped the tower. And the six men who superintended the building walked with him on the right hand and on the left, and all they that worked at the building were with him, and many other glorious attendants around him. And the virgins that watched the tower ran up and kissed him, and they began to walk by his side round the tower. And that man inspected the building so carefully, that he felt each single stone ; and he held a rod in his hand and struck each single stone that was built ins And when he smote, some of the stones became black as soot, others mildewed, others cracked, others broke off short, others became neither white nor black, others rough and not fitting in with the other stones, and others with many spots; these were the varied aspects of the stones which were found unsound for the building. So he ordered all these to be removed from the tower, and to be placed by the side of the tower, and other stones to be brought and put into their place. And the builders asked him from what mountain he desired stones to be brought and put into their place. And he would not have them brought from the mountains, but ordered them to be brought from a certain plain that was nigh at hand. And the plain was dug, and stones were found there bright and square, but some of them too were round. And all the stones which there were anywhere in that plain were brought every one of them, and were carried through the gate by the virgins. And the square stones were hewed, and set in the place of those which had been removed ; but the round ones were not placed in the building, because they were too hard to be shaped, and to work on them was slow. So they were placed by the side of the tower, as though they were intended to be shaped and placed in the building ; for they were very bright.
7.  So then, having accomplished these things, the glorious man who was lord of the whole tower called the shepherd to him, and delivered unto him all the stones which lay by the side of the tower, which were cast out from the building, and saith unto him; ‘Clean these stones carefully, and set them in the building of the tower, these, I mean, which can fit with the rest; but those which will not fit, throw far away from the tower.’ Having given these orders to the shepherd, he departed from the tower with all those with whom he had come. And the virgins stood round the tower watching it. I say to the shepherd, ‘How can these stones go again to the building of the tower, seeing that they have been disapproved?’ He saith unto me in answer; ‘Seest thou,’ saith he, ‘these stones?’ ‘I see them, Sir,’ say I. ‘I myself,’ saith he, ‘will shape the greater part of these stones and put them into the building, and they shall fit in with the remaining stones.’ ‘How, Sir,’ say I, ‘can they, when they are chiseled, fill the same space?’ He saith unto me in answer, ‘As many as shall be found small, shall be put into the middle of the building; but as many as are larger, shall be placed nearer the outside, and they will bind them together.’ With these words he saith to me, ‘ Let us go away, and after two days let us come and clean these stones, and put them into the building; for all things round the tower must be made clean, lest haply the master come sud- denly and find the circuit of the tower dirty, and he be wroth, and so these stones shall not go to the building of the tower, and I shall appear to be careless in my master’s sight.’ And after two days we came to the tower, and he saith unto me; ‘Let us inspect all the stones, and see those which can go to the build- ing.’ I say to him, ‘Sir, let us inspect them.’
8.  And so commencing first we began to inspect the black stones ; and just as they were when set aside from the building, such also they were found. And the shepherd ordered them to be removed from the tower and to be put on one side. Then he inspected those that were mildewed, and he took and shaped many of them, and ordered the virgins to take them up and put them into the building. And the virgins took them up and placed them in the building of the tower in a middle position. But the rest he ordered to be placed with the black ones ; for these also were found black. Then he began to inspect those that had the cracks ; and of these he shaped many, and he ordered them to be carried away by the hands of the virgins for the building. And they were placed towards the outside, because they were found to be 466 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. viil sounder. But the rest could not be shaped owing to the number of the cracks. For this reason therefore they were cast aside from the building of the tower. Then he proceeded to inspect the stunted (stones), and many among them were found black, and some had contracted great cracks; and he ordered these also to be placed with those that had been cast aside. But those of them which remained he cleaned and shaped, and ordered to be placed in the building. So the virgins took them up, and fitted them into the middle of the building of the tower; for they were somewhat weak. Then he began to inspect those that were half white and half black, and many of them were (now) found black ; and he ordered these also to be taken up with those that had been cast aside. tBut all the rest were [found white, and were] taken up by the virgins ; for being white they were fitted by [the virgins] them[selves] into the building.| But they were placed towards the outside, because they were found sound, so that they could hold together those that were placed in the middle ; for not a single one of them was too short. Then he began to inspect the hard and rough; and a few of them were cast away, because they could not be shaped; for they were found very hard. But the rest of them were shaped [and taken up by the virgins] and fitted into the middle of the building of the tower; for they were some- what weak. Then he proceeded to inspect those that had the spots, and of these some few had turned black and were cast away among the rest ; but the remainder were found bright and sound, and these were fitted by the virgins into the building; but they were placed towards the outside, owing to their strength. g. Then he came to inspect the white and round stones, and he saith unto me; ‘ What shall we do with these stones?’ ‘How do I know, Sir?’ say I. [And he saith to me,] ‘ Perceivest thou nothing concerning them?’ ‘I, Sir,’ say I, ‘do not possess this art, neither am I a mason, nor can I understand.’ ‘Seest thou not,’ saith he, ‘that they are very round; and if I wish to make them square, very much must needs be chiseled off from them? Yet some of them must of necessity be placed into the building.’ ‘If then, Sir,’ say I, ‘it must needs be so, why distress thyself, and why not choose out for the building those thou willest, and fit them into it?’ He chose out from them the large and the bright ones, and shaped them; and the virgins took them up, and fitted them into the outer parts of the building. But the rest, which remained over, were taken up, and put aside into the plain whence they were brought; they were not however cast away, ‘ Because,’ saith he, ‘there remaineth still a little of the tower to be builded. And the master of the tower is exceedingly anxious that these stones be fitted into the building, for they are very bright.’ So twelve women were called, most beautiful in form, clad in black, [girded about and having the shoulders bare,| with their hair hanging loose. And these women, methought, had a savage look. And the shepherd ordered them to take up the stones which had been cast away from the building, and to carry them off to the same mountains from which also they had been brought; and they took them up joyfully, and carried away all the stones and put them in the place whence they had been taken. And after all the stones had been taken up, and not a single stone still lay round the tower, the shepherd saith unto me; ‘ Let us go round the tower, and see that there is no defect in it.” And I proceeded to go round it with him. And when the shepherd saw that the tower was very comely in the building, he was exceedingly glad; for the tower was so well builded, that when I saw it I coveted the building of it; for it was builded, as it were, of one stone, having one fitting in it. And the stone-work appeared as if hewn out of the rock; for it seemed to me to be all a single stone. ro. And I, as I walked with him, was glad to see so brave a sight. And the shepherd saith to me; ‘Go and bring plaster and fine clay, that I may fill up the shapes of the stones that have been taken up and put into the building; for all the circuit of the tower must be made smooth.’ And I did as he bade, and brought them to him. ‘ Assist me,’ saith he, ‘and the work will speedily be accomplished.’ So he filled in the shapes of the stones which had gone to the building, and ordered the circuit of the tower to be swept and made clean. And the virgins took brooms and swept, and they removed all the rubbish from the tower, and sprinkled water, and the site of the tower was made cheerful and very seemly. The shepherd saith unto me, ‘All,’ saith he, ‘hath now been cleaned. If the lord come to inspect the tower, he hath nothing for which to blame us.’ Saying this, he desired to go away. But I caught hold of his wallet, and began to adjure him by the Yahuah (Lord) that he would explain to me [all] what he had showed me. He saith to me; ‘I am busy for a little while, and then I will explain everything to thee. Await me here till I come.’ I say to him; ‘Sir, when I am here alone what shall I do?’ ‘Thou art not alone,’ saith he ; ‘for these virgins are here with thee.’ ‘Commend me then to them,’ say I. ‘The shepherd calleth them to him and saith to them; ‘I com- mend this man to you till I come,’ and he departed. So I was alone 50-2 468 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. x with the virgins ; and they were most cheerful, and kindly disposed to me, especially the four of them that were the more glorious in appearance.
11.  The virgins say to me; ‘Today the shepherd cometh not here.’ ‘What then shall I do?’ say I. ‘Stay for him,’ say they, ‘till eventide ; and if he come, he will speak with thee ; but if he come not, thou shalt stay here with us till he cometh.’ I say to them; ‘I will await him till evening, and if he come not, I will depart home and return early in the morning.’ But they answered and said unto me; ‘To us thou wast entrusted; thou canst not depart from us.’ ‘Where then,’ say I, ‘shall I remain?’ ‘Thou shalt pass the night with us,’ say they, ‘as a brother, not as a husband; for thou art our brother, and hence- forward we will dwell with thee; for we love thee dearly.’ But I was ashamed to abide with them. And she that seemed to be the chief of them began to kiss and to embrace me; and the others seeing her embrace me, they too began to kiss me, and to lead me round the tower, and to sport with me. And I had become as it were a younger man, and I commenced myself likewise to sport with them. For some of them began to dance, [others to skip,] others to sing. But I kept silence and walked with them round the tower, and was glad with them. But when evening came I wished to go away home; but they would not let me go, but detained me. And I stayed the night with them, and I slept by the side of the tower. For the virgins spread their linen tunics on the ground, and made me lie down in the midst of them, and they did nothing else but pray ; and I prayed with them without ceasing, and not less than they. And the virgins rejoiced that I so prayed. And I stayed there with the virgins until the morning till the second hour. Then came the shepherd, and saith to the virgins ; ‘Have ye done him any injury?’ ‘Ask him,’ say they. I say to him, ‘Sir, I was rejoiced to stay with them.’ ‘On what didst thou sup?’ saith he. ‘I supped, Sir,’ say I, ‘on the words of the Yahuah (Lord) the whole night through.’ ‘Did they treat thee well?’ saith he. ‘Yes, Sir,’ say I. ‘Now,’ saith he, ‘what wouldest thou hear first?’ ‘In the order as thou showedst to me, Sir, from the beginning,’ say I; ‘I request thee, Sir, to explain to me exactly in the order that I shall enquire of thee.’ ‘According as thou desirest,’ saith he, ‘even so will I interpret to thee, and I will conceal nothing whatever from thee.’
12.  ‘First of all, Sir, say I, ‘explain this to me. The rock and the gate, what is it?’ ‘This rock,’ saith he, ‘and gate is the Son of Elohim (God).’ ‘How, Sir,’ say I, ‘is the rock ancient, but the gate recent?’ ‘Listen,’ saith he, ‘and understand, foolish man. The Son of Elohim (God) is older than all His creation, so that He became the Father’s adviser in His creation. Therefore also He is ancient.’ ‘ But the gate, why is it recent, Sir?’ say I. ‘ Because,’ saith he, ‘He was made manifest in the last days of the consummation ; therefore the gate was made recent, that they which are to be saved may enter through it into the kingdom of Elohim (God). Didst thou see,’ saith he, ‘that the stones which came through the gate have gone to the building of the tower, but those which came not through it were cast away again to their own place?’ ‘I saw, Sir,’ say I. ‘Thus,’ saith he, ‘no one shall enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God), except he receive the name of His Son. For if thou wishest to enter into any city, and that city is walled all round and has one gate only, canst thou enter into that city except through the gate which it hath?’ ‘Why, how, Sir,’ say I, ‘is it possible otherwise?’ ‘If then thou canst not enter into the city except through the gate itself, even so,’ saith he, ‘a man cannot enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God) except by the name of His Son that is beloved by Him. Didst thou see,’ saith he, ‘the multitude that is building the tower?’ ‘I saw it, Sir,’ say I. ‘They,’ saith he, ‘are all glorious angels. With these then the Yahuah (Lord) is walled around. But the gate is the Son of Elohim (God); there is this one entrance only to the Yahuah (Lord). Noone then shall enter in unto Him otherwise than through His Son, Didst thou see,’ saith he, ‘the six men, and the glorious and mighty man in the midst of them, him that walked about the tower and rejected the stones from the building?’ ‘I saw him, Sir,’ say I. ‘The glorious man,’ saith he, ‘is the Son of Elohim (God), and those six are the glorious angels who guard Him on the right hand and on the left. Of these glorious angels not one,’ saith he, ‘shall enter in unto Elohim (God) without Him; whosoever shall not receive His name, shall not enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God).’
13.  ‘But the tower,’ say I, ‘what isit?’ ‘The tower,’ saith he, ‘ why, this is the Church. ‘And these virgins, who are they?’ ‘They,’ saith he, ‘are holy spirits; and no man can otherwise be found in the king- dom of Elohim (God), unless these shall clothe him with their garment ; for if thou receive only the name, but receive not the garment from them, thou profitest nothing. For these virgins are powers of the Son of Elohim (God). If [therefore] thou bear the Name, and bear not His power, thou shalt bear His Name to none effect. And the stones,’ saith he, ‘which thou didst see cast away, these bare the Name, but clothed not themselves with the raiment of the virgins.’ ‘Of what sort, Sir,’ say I, ‘is their raiment?’ ‘The names themselves,’ saith he, ‘are their raiment. Who- 470 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (S. 9. xiii soever beareth the Name of the Son of Elohim (God), ought to bear the names of these also; for even the Son Himself beareth the names of these virgins. As many stones,’ saith he, ‘as thou sawest enter into the building of the tower, being given in by their hands and waiting for the building, they have been clothed in the power of these virgins. For this cause thou seest the tower made a single stone with the rock. So also they that have believed in the Yahuah (Lord) through His Son and clothe themselves in these spirits, shall become one spirit and one body, and their garments all of one colour. But such persons as bear the names of the virgins have their dwelling in the tower.’ ‘The stones then, Sir,’ say I, ‘which are cast aside, wherefore were they cast aside? For they passed through the gate and were placed in the building of the tower by the hands of the virgins.’ ‘Since all these things interest thee,’ saith he, ‘and thou enquirest diligently, listen as touching the stones that have been cast aside. These all,’ [saith he,] ‘received the name of the Son of Elohim (God), and received likewise the power of these virgins. When then they received these spirits, they were strengthened, and were with the servants of Elohim (God), and they had one spirit and one body [and one garment]; for they had the same mind, and they wrought righteousness. After a certain time then they were persuaded by the women whom thou sawest clad in black raiment, and having their shoulders bare and their hair loose, and beautiful in form. When they saw them they desired them, and they clothed themselves with their power, but they stripped off from themselves the power of the virgins. They then were cast away from the house of Elohim (God), and delivered to these (women). But they that were not deceived by the beauty of these women remained in the house of Elohim (God). So thou hast,’ saith he, ‘the interpretation of them that were cast aside.’
14.  ‘What then, Sir,’ say I, ‘if these men, being such as they are, should repent and put away their desire for these women, and return unto the virgins, and walk in their power and in their works? Shall they not enter into the house of Elohim (God)?’ ‘They shall enter,’ saith he, ‘if they shall put away the works of these women, and take again the power of the virgins, and walk in their works. For this is the reason why there was also a cessation in the building, that, if these repent, they may go into the building of the tower; but if they repent not, then others will go, and these shall be cast away finally.’ For all these things I gave thanks unto the Yahuah (Lord), because He had compassion on all that called upon His name, and sent forth the angel of repentance to us that had sinned against Him, and refreshed our spirit, and, when we were already ruined and had no hope of life, restored our life. ‘Now, Sir,’ say I, ‘show me why the tower is not built upon the ground, but upon the rock and upon the gate.’ ‘Because thou art senseless,’ saith he, ‘and without understanding [thou askest the question].’ ‘I am obliged, Sir,’ say I, ‘to ask all questions of thee, because I am absolutely unable to comprehend anything at all; for all are great and glorious and difficult for men to understand.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he. ‘The name of the Son of Elohim (God) is great and incomprehensible, and sustaineth the whole world. If then all creation is sustained by the Son [of Elohim (God)], what thinkest thou of those that are called by Him, and bear the name of the Son of Elohim (God), and walk according to His commandments? Seest thou then what manner of men He sustaineth? Even those that bear His name with their whole heart. He Himself then is become their foundation, and He sustaineth them gladly, because they are not ashamed to bear His name.’
15.  ‘Declare to me, Sir,’ say I, ‘the names of the virgins, and of the women that are clothed in the black garments.’ ‘ Hear,’ saith he, ‘the names of the more powerful virgins, those that are stationed at the corners. ‘The first is Faith, and the second, Continence, and the third, Power, and the fourth, Longsuffering. But the others stationed between them have these names—Simplicity, Guilelessness, Purity, Cheerfulness, Truth, Understanding, Concord, Love. He that beareth these names and the name of the Son of Elohim (God) shall be able to enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God). Hear,’ saith he, ‘likewise the names of the women that wear the black garments. Of these also four are more powerful than the rest ; the first is Unbelief; the second, Intemperance ; the third, Disobedience ; the fourth, Deceit; and their followers are called, Sadness, Wickedness, Wantonness, Irascibility, Falsehood, Folly, Slander, Hatred. The servant of Elohim (God) that beareth these names shall see the kingdom of Elohim (God), but shall not enter into it.’ ‘But the stones, Sir,’ say I, ‘that came from the deep, and were fitted into the building, who are they?’ ‘The first,’ saith he, ‘even the ten, that were placed in the foundations, are the first generation ; the twenty-five are the second generation of righteous men; the thirty-five are Elohim's (God’s) prophets and His ministers ; the forty are apostles and teachers of the preaching of the Son of Elohim (God).’ ‘Wherefore then, Sir,’ say I, ‘did the virgins give in these stones also for the building of the tower and carry them through the gate?’ ‘Because these first,’ saith he, ‘bore these spirits, and they 472 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xv never separated the one from the other, neither the spirits from the men nor the men from the spirits, but the spirits abode with them till they fell asleep ; and if they had not had these spirits with them, they would not have been found useful for the building of this tower.’
16.  ‘Show me still further, Sir,’ say I. ‘What desirest thou to know besides?’ saith he. ‘Wherefore, Sir,’ say I, ‘did the stones come up from the deep, and wherefore were they placed into the building, though they bore these spirits?’ ‘It was necessary for them,’ saith he, ‘to rise up through water, that they might be made alive ; for otherwise they could not enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God), except they had put aside the deadness of their [former] life. So these likewise that had fallen asleep received the seal of the Son of Elohim (God) and entered into the kingdom of Elohim (God). For before a man,’ saith he, ‘has borne the name of [the Son of ] Elohim (God), he is dead; but when he has received the seal, he layeth aside his deadness, and resumeth life. The seal then is the water: so they go down into the water dead, and they come up alive. Thus to them also this seal was preached, and they availed themselves of it that they might enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God).’ ‘ Wherefore, Sir,’ say I, ‘did the forty stones also come up with them from the deep, though they had already received the seal?’ ‘ Because,’ saith he, ‘these, the apostles and the teachers who preached the name of the Son of Elohim (God), after they had fallen asleep in the power and faith of the Son of Elohim (God), preached also to them that had fallen asleep before them, and themselves gave unto them the seal of the preaching. Therefore they went down with them into the water, and came up again. But these went down alive [and again came up alive]; whereas the others that had fallen asleep before them went down dead and came up alive. So by their means they were quickened into life, and came to the full knowledge of the name of the Son of Elohim (God). For this cause also they came up with them, and were fitted with them into the building of the tower and were builded with them, without being shaped; for they fell asleep in righteousness and in great purity. Only they had not this seal. Thou hast then the interpretation of these things also.’ ‘TI have, Sir,’ say I.
17.  ‘Now then, Sir, explain to me concerning the mountains. Wherefore are their forms diverse the one from the other, and various ?’ ‘Listen,’ saith he. ‘These twelve mountains are [twelve] tribes that inhabit the whole world. To these (tribes) then the Son of Elohim (God) was preached by the Apostles.’ ‘But explain to me, Sir, why they are various—these mountains—and each has a different appearance.’ ‘Listen,’ saith he. ‘These twelve tribes which inhabit the whole world are twelve nations ; and they are various in understanding and in mind. As various, then, as thou sawest these mountains to be, such also are the varieties in the mind of these nations, and such their understanding. And I will show unto thee the conduct of each.’ ‘First, Sir,’ say I, ‘show me this, why the mountains being so various, yet, when their stones were set into the building, became bright and of one colour, just like the stones that had come up from the deep.’ ‘ Because,’ saith he, ‘all the nations that dwell under heaven, when they heard and believed, were called by the one name of [the Son of] Elohim (God). So having received the seal, they had one under- standing and one mind, and one faith became theirs and [one] love, and they bore the spirits of the virgins along with the Name; therefore the building of the tower became of one colour, even bright as the sun. But after they entered in together, and became one body, some of them defiled themselves, and were cast out from the society of the righteous, and became again such.as they were before, or rather even worse.’
18.  ‘How, Sir,’ say I, ‘did they become worse, after they had fully known Elohim (God)?’ ‘He that knoweth not Elohim (God),’ saith he, ‘and committeth wickedness, hath a certain punishment for his wickedness ; but he that knoweth Elohim (God) fully ought not any longer to commit wickedness, but to do good. If then he that ought to do good committeth wickedness, does he not seem to do greater wickedness than the man that knoweth not Elohim (God)? Therefore they that have not known Elohim (God), and commit wickedness, are condemned to death; but they that have known Elohim (God) and seen His mighty works, and yet commit wickedness, shall receive a double punishment, and shall die eternally. In this way therefore shall the Church of Elohim (God) be purified. And as thou sawest the stones removed from the tower and delivered over to the evil spirits, they too shall be cast out; and there shall be one body of them that are purified, just as the tower, after it had been purified, became made as it were of one stone. Thus shall it be with the Church of Elohim (God) also, after she hath been purified, and the wicked and hypocrites and blasphemers and double-minded and they that commit various kinds of wickedness have been cast out. When these have been cast out, the Church of Elohim (God) shall be one body, one understanding, one mind, one faith, one love. And then the Son of Elohim (God) shall rejoice and be glad in them, for that He hath received back His people pure.’ ‘Great and glorious, Sir,’ say I, ‘are all these things. Once more, Sir,’ [say I,] ‘show me the force and the doings of each one of the mountains, that every soul that 474 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xviii trusteth in the Yahuah (Lord), when it heareth, may glorify His great and marvel- lous and glorious name.’ ‘ Listen,’ saith he, ‘to the variety of the mountains and of the twelve nations,
19.  ‘From the first mountain, which was black, they that have believed are such as these ; rebels and blasphemers against the Yahuah (Lord), and betrayers of the servants of Elohim (God). For these there is no repentance, but there is death. For this cause also they are black ; for their race is lawless. And from the second mountain, the bare one, they that believed are such as these ; hypocrites and teachers of wickedness. And these then are like the former in not having the fruit of righteousness. For, even as their mountain is unfruitful, so likewise such men as these have a name indeed, but they are void of the faith, and there is no fruit of truth in them. For these then repentance is offered, if they repent quickly; but if they delay, they will have their death with the former.’ ‘Wherefore, Sir,’ say I, ‘is repentance possible for them, but not for the former? For their doings are almost the same.’ ‘On this account,’ he saith, ‘is repentance offered for them, because they blasphemed not their Lord, nor became betrayers of the servants of Elohim (God); yet from desire of gain they played the hypocrite, and taught each other [after] the desires of sinful men. But they shall pay a certain penalty; yet repentance is ordained for them, because they are not become Dlas- phemers or betrayers. zo. ‘And from the third mountain, which had thorns and briars, they that believed are such as these; some of them are wealthy and others are entangled in many business affairs. The briars are the wealthy, and the thorns are they that are mixed up in various business affairs. These [then, that are mixed up in many and various business affairs, ] cleave [not] to the servants of Elohim (God), but go astray, being choked by their affairs, but the wealthy unwillingly cleave to the servants of Elohim (God), fearing lest they may be asked for something by them. Such men therefore shall hardly enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God). For as it is diffi- cult to walk on briars with bare feet, so also 7¢ zs difficult for such men to enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God). But for all these repentance is possible, but it must be speedy, that in respect to what they omitted to do in the former times, they may now revert to (past) days, and do some good. If then they shall repent and do some good, they shall live unto Elohim (God) ; but if they continue in their doings, they shall be delivered over to those women, the which shall put them to death.
21.  ‘And from the fourth mountain, which had much vegetation, the upper part of the grass green and the part towards the roots withered, and some of it dried up by the sun, they that believed are such as these ; the double-minded, and they that have the Yahuah (Lord) on their lips, but have Him not in their heart. Therefore their foundations are dry and without power, and their words only live, but their works are dead. Such men are neither alive nor dead. They are, therefore, like unto the double- minded; for the double-minded are neither green nor withered; for they are neither alive nor dead. For as their grass was withered up when it saw the sun, so also the double-minded, when they hear of tribulation, through their cowardice worship idols and are ashamed of the name of their Lord. Such are neither alive nor dead. Yet these also, if they repent quickly, shall be able to live; but if they repent not, they are delivered over already to the women who deprive them of their life.
22.  ‘And from the fifth mountain, which had green grass and was rugged, they that believed are such as these; they are faithful, but slow to learn and stubborn and self-pleasers, desiring to know all things, and yet they know nothing at all. By reason of this their stubbornness, understanding stood aloof from them, and a foolish senselessness entered into them; and they praise themselves as having understanding, and they desire to be self-appointed teachers, senseless though they are. Owing then to this pride of heart many, while they exalted themselves, have been made empty; for a mighty demon is stubbornness and vain confidence. Of these then many were cast away, but some repented and believed, and submitted themselves to those that had understanding, having learnt their own senselessness. Yea, and to the rest that belong to this class repentance is offered; for they did not become wicked, but rather foolish and without understanding. If these then shall repent, they shall live unto Elohim (God); but if they repent not, they shall have their abode with the women who work evil against them.
23.  ‘But they that believed from the sixth mountain, which had clefts great and small, and in the clefts herbage withered, are such as these; they that have the small clefts, these are they that have aught against one another, and from their backbitings they are withered in the faith; but many of these repented. Yea, and the rest shall repent, when they hear my commandments ; for their backbitings are but small, and they shall quickly repent. But they that have great clefts, these are persistent in their backbitings and bear grudges, nursing wrath against one another. These then were thrown right away from the tower and rejected from its building. Such persons therefore shall with difficulty 476 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. (S. 9. xxiii live. If Elohim (God) and our Lord, Who ruleth over all things and hath the authority over all His creation, beareth no grudge against them that confess their sins, but is propitiated, doth man, who is mortal and full of sins, bear a grudge against man, as though he were able to destroy or save him? I say unto you—I, the angel of repentance—unto as many as hold this heresy, put it away from you and repent, and the Yahuah (Lord) shall heal your former sins, if ye shall purify yourselves from this demon ; but if not, ye shall be delivered unto him to be put to death.
24.  ‘And from the seventh mountain, on which was herbage green and smiling, and the whole mountain thriving, and cattle of every kind and the fowls of heaven were feeding on the herbage on that mountain, and the green herbage, on which they fed, only grew the more luxuriant, they that believed are such as these; they were ever simple and guile- less and blessed, having nothing against one another, but rejoicing always in the servants of Elohim (God), and clothed in the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit) of these virgins, and having compassion always on every man, and out of their labours they supplied every man’s need without reproach and without misgiving. The Yahuah (Lord) then seeing their simplicity and entire childliness made them to abound in the labours of their hands, and bestowed favour on them in all their doings. But I say unto you that are such— I, the angel of repentance—remain to the end such as ye are, and your seed shall never be blotted out. For the Yahuah (Lord) hath put you to the proof, and enrolled you among our number, and your whole seed shall dwell with the Son of Elohim (God); for of His Spirit did ye receive.
25.  ‘And from the eighth mountain, where were the many springs, and all the creatures of the Yahuah (Lord) did drink of the springs, they that believed are such as these; apostles and teachers, who preached unto the whole world, and who taught the word of the Yahuah (Lord) in soberness and purity, and kept back no part at all for evil desire, but walked always in righteousness and truth, even as also they received the Ruach HaKodesh (Holy Spirit). Such therefore shall have their entrance with the angels.
26.  ‘And from the ninth mountain, which was desert, which had [the] reptiles and wild beasts in it which destroy mankind, they that believed are such as these; they that have the spots are deacons that exercised their office ill, and plundered the livelihood of widows and orphans, and made gain for themselves from the ministrations which they had re- ceived to perform, If then they abide in the same evil desire, they are dead and there is no hope of life for them; but if they turn again and fulfil their ministrations in purity, it shall be possible for them to live. But they that are mildewed, these are they that denied and turned not again unto their Lord, but having become barren and desert, because they cleave not unto the servants of Elohim (God) but remain alone, they destroy their own souls. For as a vine left alone in a hedge, if it meet with neglect, is destroyed and wasted by the weeds, and in time be- cometh wild and is no longer useful to its owner, so also men of this kind have given themselves up in despair and become useless to their Lord, by growing wild. To these then repentance cometh, unless they be found to have denied from the heart ; but if a man be found to have denied from the heart, I know not whether it is possible for him to live. And this I say not in reference to these days, that a man after denying should receive repentance ; for it is impossible for him to be saved who shall now deny his Lord; but for those who denied Him long ago repentance seemeth to be possible. If a man therefore will repent, let him do so speedily before the tower is completed ; but if not, he shall be destroyed by the women and put to death. And the stunted, these are the treacherous and backbiters; and the wild beasts which thou sawest on the mountain are these. For as wild beasts with their venom poison and kill a man, so also do the words of such men poison and killa man. These then are broken off short from their faith through the conduct which they have in themselves ; but some of them repented and were saved; and the rest that are of this kind can be saved, if they repent ; but if they repent not, they shall meet their death from those women of whose power they are possessed.
24.  ‘And from the tenth mountain, where were trees sheltering certain sheep, they that believed are such as these ; bishops, hospitable persons, who gladly received into their houses at all times the servants of Elohim (God) without hypocrisy. [These bishops] at all times without ceasing sheltered the needy and the widows in their ministration and conducted themselves in purity at all times. These [all] then shall be sheltered by the Yahuah (Lord) for ever. They therefore that have done these things are glorious in the sight of Elohim (God), and their place is even now with the angels, if they shall continue unto the end serving the Yahuah (Lord).
28.  ‘And from the eleventh mountain, where were trees full of fruit, decked with divers kinds of fruits, they that believed are such as these ; they that suffered for the Name [of the Son of Elohim (God)], who also suffered readily with their whole heart, and yielded up their lives.’ ‘ Wherefore then, Sir,’ say I, ‘have all the trees fruits, but some of their fruits are more beautiful than others?’ ‘Listen,’ saith he; ‘all as many as ever suffered 478 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xxviii for the Name’s sake are glorious in the sight of Elohim (God), and the sins of all these were taken away, because they suffered for the name of the Son of Elohim (God). Now hear why their fruits are various, and some sur- passing others. As many,’ saith he, ‘as were tortured and denied not, when brought before the magistracy, but suffered readily, these are the more glorious in the sight of the Yahuah (Lord); their fruit is that which surpass- eth. But as many as became cowards, and were lost in uncertainty, and considered in their hearts whether they should deny or confess, and yet suffered, their fruits are less, because this design entered into their heart ; for this design is evil, that a servant should deny his own lord. See to it, therefore, ye who entertain this idea, lest this design remain in your hearts, and ye die unto Elohim (God). But ye that suffer for the Name’s sake ought to glorify Elohim (God), because Elohim (God) deemed you worthy that ye should bear this name, and that all your sins should be healed. Reckon yourselves blessed therefore ; yea, rather think that ye have donea great work, if any of you shall suffer for Elohim's (God’s) sake. The Yahuah (Lord) bestoweth life upon you, and ye perceive it not; for your sins weighed you down, and if ye had not suffered for the Name [of the Yahuah (Lord)], ye had died unto Elohim (God) by reason of your sins. These things I say unto you that waver as touching denial and confession. Confess that ye have the Yahuah (Lord), lest denying Him ye be delivered into prison. If the Gentiles punish their slaves, if any one deny his lord, what think ye the Yahuah (Lord) will do unto you, He Who hath the authority over all things? Away with these designs from your hearts, that ye may live for ever unto Elohim (God).
29.  ‘And from the twelfth mountain, which was white, they that believed are such as these; they are as very babes, into whose heart no guile entereth, neither learnt they what wickedness is, but they remained as babes for ever. Such as these then dwell without doubt in the king- dom of Elohim (God), because they defiled the commandments of Elohim (God) in nothing, but continued as babes all the days of their life in the same mind. As many of you therefore as shall so continue,’ saith he, ‘and shall be as infants not having guile, shall be more glorious [even] than all them that have been mentioned before ; for all infants are glorious in the sight of Elohim (God), and stand first in His sight. Blessed then are ye, as many as have put away wickedness from you, and have clothed your- selves in guilelessness: ye shall live unto Elohim (God) chiefest of all.’ After he had finished the parables of the mountains, I say unto him, ‘Sir, now explain to me concerning the stones that were taken from the plain and placed in the building in the room of the stones that were taken from the tower, and concerning the round (stones) which were placed in the building, and concerning those that were still round.’
30.  ‘Hear,’ saith he, ‘likewise concerning all these things. The stones which were taken from the plain and placed in the building of the tower in the room of those that were rejected, are the roots of this white mountain. When then they that believed from this mountain were all found guileless, the lord of the tower ordered these from the roots of this mountain to be put into the building of the tower. For He knew that if these stones should go to the building [of the tower], they would remain bright and not one of them would turn black. But if he had added (stones) from the other mountains, he would have been obliged to visit that tower again, and to purify it. Now all these have been found white, who have believed and who shall believe; for they are of the same kind. Blessed is this kind, for it is innocent! Hear now likewise concerning those round and bright stones. All these are from this white mountain. Now hear wherefore they have been found round. Their riches haye darkened and obscured them a little from the truth, yet they never departed from Elohim (God), nor did any evil word proceed from their mouth, but all equity and virtue which comes from the truth. When therefore the Yahuah (Lord) perceived their mind, fthat they could favour the truth,¢ and likewise remain good, He commanded their possessions to be cut from off them, yet not to be taken away alto- gether, so that they might be able to do some good with that which hath been left to them, and might live unto Elohim (God), for that they come of a good kind. So therefore they have been cut away a little, and placed in the building of this tower.
31.  ‘But the other (stones), which have remained round and have not been fitted into the building, because they have not yet received the seal, have been replaced in their own position, for they were found very round. For this world and the vanities of their possessions must be cut from off them, and then they will fit into the kingdom of Elohim (God). For it is necessary that they should enter into the kingdom of Elohim (God); because the Yahuah (Lord) hath blessed this innocent kind. Of this kind then not one shall perish. Yea, even though any one of them being tempted by the most wicked devil have committed any fault, he shall return speedily unto his Lord. Blessed I pronounce you all to be— I, the angel of repentance—whoever of you are guileless as infants, because your part is good and honourable in the sight of Elohim (God). More- over I bid all of you, whoever have received this seal, keep guilelessness, 480 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 9. xxxi and bear no grudge, and continue not in your wickedness nor in the memory of the offences of bitterness; but become of one spirit, and heal these evil clefts and take them away from among you, that the owner of the flocks may rejoice concerning them. For he will rejoice, if he find all things whole. But if he find any part of the flock scattered, woe unto the shepherds. For if the shepherds themselves shall have been found scattered, how will they answer for the flocks? Will they say that they were harassed by the flock? No credence will be given them. For it is an incredible thing that a shepherd should be injured by his flock; and he will be punished the more because of his falsehood. And I am the shepherd, and it behoveth me most strongly to render an account for you.
32.  ‘Amend yourselves therefore, while the tower is still in course of building. The Yahuah (Lord) dwelleth in men that love peace; for to Him peace is dear; but from the contentious and them that are given up to wickedness He keepeth afar off. Restore therefore to Him your spirit whole as ye received it. For suppose thou hast given to a fuller a new garment whole, and desirest to receive it back again whole, but the fuller give it back to thee torn, wilt thou receive it thus? Wilt thou not at once blaze out and attack him with reproaches, saying; “The garment which I gave thee was whole; wherefore hast thou rent it and made it useless? See, by reason of the rent, which thou hast made in it, it cannot be of use.” Wilt thou not then say all this to a fuller even about a rent which he has made in thy garment? If therefore thou art thus vexed in the matter of thy garment, and complainest because thou receivest it not back whole, what thinkest thou the Yahuah (Lord) will do to thee, He, Who gave thee the spirit whole, and thou hast made it absolutely useless, so that it cannot be of any use at all to its Yahuah (Lord)? For its use began to be useless, when it was corrupted by thee. Will not therefore the Yahuah (Lord) of this spirit for this thy deed punish [thee with death]?’ ‘Certainly,’ I said, ‘all those, whomsoever He shall find continuing to bear malice, He will punish.’ ‘Trample not,’ said he, ‘upon His mercy, but rather glorify Him, because He is so long-suffering with your sins, and is not like unto you. Practise then repentance which is expedient for you.
33.  ‘All these things which are written above I, the shepherd, the angel of repentance, have declared and spoken to the servants of Elohim (God). If thea ye shall believe and hear my words, and walk in them, and amend your ways, ye shall be able to live. But if ye continue in wicked- ness and in bearing malice, no one of this kind shall live unto Elohim (God). S. 10, ii] THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. 481 All things which were to be spoken by me have (now) been spoken to you.’ The shepherd said to me, ‘Hast thou asked me all thy questions?’ And I said, ‘Yes, Sir.’ ‘Why then hast thou not enquired of me con- cerning the shape of the stones placed in the building, in that we filled up their shapes?’ And I said, ‘I forgot, Sir.’ ‘Listen now,’ said he, ‘concerning them. These are they that have heard my commandments now, and have practised repentance with their whole heart. So when the Yahuah (Lord) saw that their repentance was good and pure, and that they could continue therein, he ordered their former sins to be blotted out. These shapes then were their former sins, and they have been chiseled away that they might not appear.’

# Similitude 10

1.  After I had written out this book completely, the angel who had delivered me to the shepherd came to the house where I was, and sat upon a couch, and the shepherd stood at his right hand. Then he called me, and spake thus unto me; ‘I delivered thee,’ said he, ‘and thy house to this shepherd, that thou mightest be protected by him.’ ‘True, Sir,’ I said. ‘If therefore,’ said he, ‘thou desirest to be protected from all annoyance and all cruelty, to have also success in every good work and word, and all the power of righteousness, walk in his command- ments, which I have given thee, and thou shalt be able to get the mastery over all wickedness. For if thou keep his commandments, all evil desire and the sweetness of this world shall be subject unto thee ; moreover success shall attend thee in every good undertaking. Embrace his gravity and self-restraint, and tell it out unto all men that he is held in great honour and dignity with the Yahuah (Lord), and is a ruler of great authority, and powerful in his office. To him alone in the whole world hath authority over repentance been assigned. Seemeth he to thee to be powerful? Yet ye despise the gravity and moderation which he useth towards you.’
2.  I say unto him; ‘Ask him, Sir, himself, whether from the time that he hath been in my house, I have done ought out of order, whereby I have offended him.’ ‘I myself know,’ said he, ‘that thou hast done nothing out of order, nor art about to do so. And so I speak these things unto thee, that thou mayest persevere. For he hath given a good account of thee unto me. Thou therefore shalt speak these words to others, that they too who have practised or shall practise repentance may be of the same mind as thou art; and he may give a good report of 482 THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS. [S. 10. ii them to me, and I unto the Yahuah (Lord).’ ‘I too, Sir,’ I say, ‘declare to every man the mighty works of the Yahuah (Lord); for I hope that all who have sinned in the past, if they hear these things, will gladly repent and recover life.’ ‘Continue therefore,’ said he, ‘in this ministry, and complete it unto the end. For whosoever fulfil his commandments shall have life ; yea such a man (shall have) great honour with the Yahuah (Lord). But whoso- ever keep not his commandments, fly from their life, and oppose him, and follow not his commandments, but deliver themselves over to death ; and each one becometh guilty of his own blood. But I bid thee obey these commandments, and thou shalt have a remedy for thy sins.
3.  ‘Moreover, I have sent these virgins unto thee, that they may dwell with thee; for I have seen that they are friendly towards thee. Thou hast them therefore as helpers, that thou mayest be the better able to keep his commandments ; for it is impossible that these commandments be kept without the help of these virgins. I see too that they are glad to be with thee. But I will charge them that they depart not at all from thy house. Only do thou purify thy house; for in a clean house they will gladly dwell. For they are clean and chaste and industrious, and all have favour in the sight of the Yahuah (Lord). If, therefore, they shall find thy house pure, they will continue with thee; but if the slightest pollution arise, they will depart from thy house at once. For these virgins love not pollution in any form.’ I say unto him, ‘I hope, Sir, that I shall please them, so that they may gladly dwell in my house for ever ; and just as he to whom thou didst deliver me maketh no complaint against me, so they likewise shall make no complaint.’ He saith unto the shepherd, ‘I perceive,’ saith he, ‘that he wishes to live as the servant of Elohim (God), and that he will keep these commandments, and will place these virgins in a clean habitation.’ With these words he again delivered me over to the shepherd, and called the virgins, and said to them ; ‘Inasmuch as I see that ye are glad to dwell in this man’s house, I commend to you him and his house, that ye depart not at all from his house.’ But they heard these words gladly.
4.  He said then to me, ‘Quit you like a man in this ministry ; declare to every man the mighty works of the Yahuah (Lord), and thou shalt have favour in this ministry. Whosoever therefore shall walk in these com- mandments, shall live and be happy in his life; but whosoever shall neglect them, shall not live, and shall be unhappy in his life. Charge all men who are able to do nght, that they cease not to practise good works; for it is useful for them. I say moreover that every man ought to be rescued from misfortune; for he that hath need, and suffereth misfortune in his daily life, is in great torment and want. Whosoever therefore rescueth from penury a life of this kind, winneth great joy for himself. For he who is harassed by misfortune of this sort is afflicted and tortured with equal torment as one who is in chains. For many men on account of calamities of this kind, because they can bear them no longer, lay violent hands on themselves. He then who knows the calamity of a man of this kind and rescueth him not, com- mitteth great sin, and becometh guilty of the man’s blood. Do there- fore good works, whoever of you have received (benefits) from the Yahuah (Lord), lest, while ye delay to do them, the building of the tower be completed. For it is on your account that the work of the building has been interrupted. Unless then ye hasten to do right, the tower will be completed, and ye shut out.’ When then he had finished speaking with me, he rose from the couch and departed, taking with him the shepherd and the virgins. He said however unto me, that he would send the shepherd and the virgins back again to my house. 31—2 Shih 4 Senet fe van a i i yi y ti os Hehe Mt ? L " ih ey WAeetnibartt cy eS) URS ink Oa ons “ aie Lit RE Pave ie Cp Tae Ait: LP Cr TL, i). ir Apa ¢ Marina ve tie > LSE ER Wee Pe ghice TY iS pe ae? “Hee Ps ay Me walt tind eye APA id free Fe Made gu ae ie. 3 . Way tone wale Hind Gene tay, hl ta A Reta ed a ; AP StL aie ani yey oa ea Oat ie a in tte elect Cindi pgs G08} Pen) > ' SMe Se "LDA 5 Ade we Mie ; wii f ‘ : Ais! 7 Cetin ne fue ill Pate Pratt, ee RT ny ; vol ; yy Teh ; a eS ee aL. ean aT ; oO F ac wae) sh . } | y Fw Pe Tha | ns ( Fi } ‘ i ’ fe NY . nts yes i ; fr ’ j ’ « Wy x -~ Zz ‘ i ‘ is ; A of : 1 + % q 4 t : - ; fii (2 PIS Tie DICGNE TUS: fee oli. TO -DIOGNETUS. I E owe the text of this work to a single Ms of the thirteenth or possibly the fourteenth century, now no longer extant. This Ms had originally belonged to Joann. Reuchlin (+ 1522), and ultimately found a home in the Strassburg Library, where it perished by fire during the Franco-German war in 1870 together with the other manuscript treasures contained therein. ‘Two transcripts however had been made at the close of the sixteenth century, one by H. Stephens (in 1586), who first edited the Epistle to Diognetus (Paris, 1592), and another by Beurer (1587—1591), who however did not publish it. Stephens’ copy is now at Leyden; that of Beurer is lost, but some of its readings are preserved by Stephens and by Sylburg (1593). Happily the portion of the Strassburg Ms containing this Epistle was carefully collated by E. Cunitz in 1842 for Otto’s first edition of Justin Martyr (1843), and again by E. Reuss still more accurately in 1861 for the same editor’s third edition (1879). The Strassburg Ms contained several spurious or doubtful writings of Justin Martyr, at the close of which was the Epistle to Diognetus, like- wise ascribed to him, tod adrod [’lovativoy ditocddov kal paptupos]| pcs Avyvyrov, besides other works following—some of them in a later hand— with which we are not concerned. Hence subsequent writers ascribed it unhesitatingly to Justin. Tillemont was the first (1691) who threw any doubt on this ascription. More recently critics, one and all, have agreed to assign it to some other author. It is not mentioned by Eusebius, or in any other ancient account of Justin’s works; and its style is wholly different from that of Justin. The most diverse opinions have been held respecting its date. Almost every epoch from the middle of the second century to the reign 488 THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. of Constantine in the beginning of the fourth has been assigned to it ; nor indeed is apy certainty possible. On the whole, however, the earlier date (¢. A.D. 1 50) seems the more probable, Its ascription to Justin Martyr and its companionship with early writings in the Ms suggest an epoch not later than the first half of the second century. The person meant by Diognetus is not improbably the tutor of Marcus Aurelius, here addressed as an enquirer after truth, The reference to the emperor commissioning his son (c. 7 Ws Racers réprwv viov Baovréa), as illustrating the great truth of Christian theology, may not improbably have been suggested by such events as the adoption of M. Aurelius by Antoninus Pius into the tribunician power (A.D. 147), or the association of his adopted son L. Aelius (a.p. 161) or of his own son Commodus (A.D. 176, 177) in the empire by M. Aurelius himself. The simplicity in the mode of stating theological truths, and the absence of all refe- rence to the manifold heresies of later times, both point to a somewhat early date. Whenever it was written, it is one of the noblest and most impressive of early Christian apologies in style and treatment. The dream of some very recent writers who suppose it to have been written, or rather forged, at the revival of learning in the sixteenth century may be dismissed at once as inconsistent alike with its style and contents, and with the history of the documents as given above. The Epistle to Diognetus, however, does not reach beyond the tenth chapter, where it ends abruptly. The two remaining chapters belong to some different work, which has been accidentally attached to it, just as in most of the extant mss the latter part of the Epistle of Polycarp is attached to the former part of the Epistle of Barnabas (see above, pp. 166 sq, 242), so as to form in appearance one work. Probably in this case also an archetypal Ms had lost some leaves. Of this there seems to have been some indication in the Strassburg ms itself. Who then was the author of this latter work? May we not hazard a conjecture which may be taken for what it is worth? The writer was Pantzenus, the master of Clement (c. A.D. 180—210). Clearly it is Alexandrian, as its phraseology and its sentiments alike show. More especially he treats the account of the creation and the garden of Eden THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. 489 (c. 12 mapadewros tpudys k.7.A.) spiritually of the Church of Messiah (Christ) ; and Pantzenus is singled out with two or three other early fathers by Anasta- sius of Sinai in two passages as exhibiting this mode of treatment (ed. Migne, p. 860, p. 962). Nor indeed could any one more appropriately use the words (c. 11) arocrdAwy yevouevos pabytis yivopa didacKados eOvav of himself than Panteznus the Apostle of the Indies. The first part of the sentence, drocréAwv p.abytys, wrongly understood, has given a place to the Epistle to Diognetus as a whole among the Apostoli- cal Fathers, though (as we have shown) the last two chapters form no part of that Epistle. It is perhaps this very sentence also, or similar language of Pantznus elsewhere, which has led to the impossible state- ment in Photius (4707. 118) that Pantzenus himself had listened to the preaching of the apostles. cf. Eph. iv. 22—24. TPOS AIOFNHTON. A / f I. ’ETIEIAH 6pa, cpatiore Avoyvnrte, brrepermovbakoTa \ / Lal rn n \ ’ na oe THY OeocéBeray TOV Xpictiavev pabety Kal Tavy capes Kal émripero@s TuvOavopevov Trepl avtav, Tivt Te Oew TeTrot- al \ lel Oores kat as OpnoKevovtes avTOY Tov TE KOTMOV VTTEpopaot mavtes Kal Oavatov Katadpovovar, Kal oVTE TOS vopLCopevous nr \ bro Tév “EAAjnvev Oeodrs AoyifovTat ote THY lovdaiwy Sevct- p>) / U \ / \ / ww ayoviay pudaccovet, Kal Tiva THY PiiocTopyiay Exouact \ b) / \ / / \ a / aA >? mpos adAnAous, Kal TL OnToTE KaLVOY TOUTO YEevOS 7 ETI- / > n > \ / La! x ’ / e > Tnoeuvpa elanrOev eis Tov Biov viv Kai ov mTpoTepov' arro- , a a a déyouwal ye THs TpoOvpias ce Ta’TNS Kal Tapa Tod Oeod, an \ VA a fa la Tov Kal TO Aéyew Kal TO aKovELY uly YopnyodVTOS, altTodmaL a a y doOjvat éuol pev elrreiy ovTwS WS padicTA ay aKOVCaYTa GE / / "4 e/ > a € % lal Bertio yevécOat, coi te oTwS aKodcaL ws pn AUTNOHVAL Tov elTrovTa. Bf \ A II. “Aye 62) xaOapas ceavtov aro TavTwyv TOY TpoKaTeE- XOvT@Y ToU THY Sidvolay NoyloM@Y, Kal THY GTaT@odY GE cuvnOevay aTooKevacdpevos, Kal yevouevos BaoTrep €& apyns \ ” ¢ ba \ / a f \ , \ xatvos avOpwTros, ws av Kal NOyou KaLvov, KaBaTrep Kal avTOS ¢ ! > NSE? - a Nae a3 A moroynoas, GkpoaTns écomevos* ide 7) wovoy Tots opOadpots > x \ fal Ud / ¢ / x / v Gra Kal TH hpovnce Tivos VToTTacEews 7 Tivos Eldous ‘\ tal Tuyxavouow ods épeite Kal vowifere Oeovs. 2. ovx 0 we / > \ oe tad , ¢ 2) 38 \ \ > Tis AiOos eatlv Gpovos TS TaTovpevo, 0 & éatl yadKos ov , a > \ us A tal Kpelacwv Tov els TY YpHoW nuiv KeyadKeupev@OY TKEVOD, i. avroy Tov te] conj. Lachmann; avrdv Te MS. axovcavTa] conj. Stephens; dxodcoa: MS. u] THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. AQI ¢ \ / v \ A ov 6 dé EvAov 75n Kai ceonrds, 6 5é apyupos ypnfwv avOpwrov lj A Tov dvAdkavros iva pn KAaTH, 6 Sé aidnpos vir tod Sue- / e POappévos, 0 5é daTpaxov, ovdév TOD KaTEcKEVacpévoU TpOS \ > f ¢ ? A THY aTimoTaTHY UTnpEetiay evTrpeTrécTepoy ; 3. ov POapTis cr A / ? e A , \ ) vAns TavTa TavTa; ovyx vd aLdnpov Kal Tupos KEeyad- V4 ? ‘\ +s Te) Kevpéva; ovxy 0 pev avt@v ALOoEdos 0 Sé yarkeds 0 68 b) , \ ” b) al apyupoKotros 0 Sé Kepapmevs Erracev; ov Tply 7) Tals Téyvats , > A UJ A TOUT@Y els THY popdny TavTnY éexTUT@OnVaL Hv ExacToOV >’ ,’ A avTav éxaotw eixalew peTapenoppwpévov; ov Ta viv éx A > f ef Ww / 4 3) os > , A ’ A THS avTns Uns ovta oKEe’yn yévOLT ay, Ei TUXOL TOY aUTOV A ¢ , > fe) / \ A ey? TEXVITOV, Bpuota TowuvTOUS; 4. OU TavTa TaAW Ta VOY Vp UL@V TpockuvoUpEva SuVaiT av Urr0 avOpwoTaV cKEUN OuoLa yevéoOat toils Roltrois; ov Koda tavta, ov Tudra, ovK v >’ 3 / ] I] / ’ / , ’ ayuya, ovK avaicOnra, ovK axivnta; ov TavTa onTopeva, ov / Ud A \ an , mavTa PUerpoueva; 5. TavTa Oeovs Kareite, TovTos Sov- / / tal a } > ’ A b] a AevETE, TOVTOLS TpoaKuVErTe’ TéXEov O avTois éEopotodabe. fal A 7 lal
6.  Sud TovTo pucetre Xpiatiavovs, OTL TovTOVs ovy HryodvTas Qeovs. 7. vpels yap of vov vowifovtes Kat oeBopevor, ov ToAv TA€ov avTaV KaTadppovelTe; OV TOAD pAaAXOV avTOUS \ yrevatete Kat UBpifere, Tods pév ALOivous Kal doTpaKivous / > / \ be > , \ a > , aéBovtes advAaKTas, Tos dé apyupéous Kal ypucovs éyKel- / \ aA e J / ovtes Tails vvEi, Kal Tais nuépats PUAaKas TapaKxafioTarTes, lal \ a a va py KrNarraow; 8. als b€ Soxeire Tywais tpocdépery, ei pev aic@avovtat, KoNaleTe adrov avTovs’ ef Sé avaicOn- A , ToUcLW, ENyYovTES aiwaTt Kal Kvicats avTovs OpnoKevere. A A e lal A
9.  Tav? vpov TLS UTOmEWaTO, TadTa avacyécOw Ts EavTO yevérOat. adda avOpwros pév ovd€ els Ta’TNS THS KONdTEwS éxav avéEetar, alcOnow yap éyet Kal Noytopov' 6 Sé AiBos an ’ lal A avéxeTat, avaraOntei yap. ovKody THY alcOnaw avTod édéy- xeTe. 10. Tmepl pev ovv Tod pr) SedovrAdabat Xpiotiavovrs ii. 3 tavrnv] conj. Bohl; rovrwy Ms. éxaorov] conj. S. Maur; ékaoros MS. elkagew] conj. Lachmann; ért kal viv MS. 4 vuav] nuav MS. 7 geBbpuevor] conj. Lachmann; olduevor MS. mwapakatordvres] conj. Krenkel ; mapakadloayres MS. cf. Acts XVii. 24,25. 492 THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. [11 a x a rovovTo.s Oeois moda ev [av] Kal adda elmeiv Exoups’ eb O€ \ lal tive py) Soxoin Kav TadTa ixava, Tepiacdv nyodmat Kal TO mrelw NéyeLv. lal a \ III. ‘E&js 8& wept Tod py Kata ta avra "lovdalois OeoceBeiv avtovs olwai ce pariota Tobey aKodoa. 2. rad ’ / tal "TovdSaiou Tolvuy et mev améyovrat TavTns THS Mpoeipnuevns / lal \ a Lal U / \ / NaTpelas, Kaas Oedv Eva tév Travtwv céBew Kai Seororny an rn a “s ‘ d£Evodat dpovelvy’ ef 5é Trois mpoepnuévors omotoTpoTr@s TV lel , Opnoxelay Tpocayovaw av’T@® TavTnv, Siapaptavovew. 3. & yap Tois avaicOnrous Kal Kwpois mpoadépovtes ot “EXAnves nr lal = / adpoovyns Setypa trapéxovat, TadO odto. Kabarrep Tpocdeo- / a a / / / > \ a pévoe T@ Oe@ RoytGomevoe Tapeyery pwpiay eikos paddov ¢ a -) 4 ’ / ¢ \ f \ , A nyowT av, ov OeoogBevav. 4. 6 yap Toinocas Tov ovpavoy a U lal a an fal Kal THY YyHV Kal TayTa Ta év avTols Kal Tdow nuiv Yopnyav 2 ! ’ en aah , ’ 2 a ay mpoadeoucba, ovdevos av avTos mpoadéotTo TOUT@Y BY Tots > VA Ld / DAS, e , / sie olopévots Sidovar trapéyet avtos. 5. of 5€ ye Ovoias avT@ 80 aipatos Kal Kvions Kal ONoKavT@pAaTwY ériTEEly OLOMEVOL Kal TavTals Tals Tysais avTov yepalpew, ovdév pot SoKodat l4 al ] \ \ \ ’ \ > / Svadépew Ta eis TA Koha THY avTHY evdetkvUpEvaVv pido- / “\ nr \ \ / a “ , tiniav’ tov [per] on Svvapévors THS TLYuAS weTaapPavew, a , \ rav S& SoxovvTav Tapéxery TH uNdevos Trpotdeomévy. > A \ \ \ / ’ IV. ’AdXa pny To ye wept Tas Bpdcets avtav Wododeés, \ \ \ \ , p>) Py is \ \ A kal thy Tept Ta caBBata Sevordaimoviay, Kal THY THS Tept- A A A Touns aralovetav, Kal THY THS vnoTelas Kal vouunvias \ ’ \ Y , b) elpwvelay, Katayéhacta Kal ovdevds afta Royou [ov] vopita , 3 b A a / \ a ¢ + fa) ce ypntew tap éuod pabelv, 2. TO Te yap Tov VIO TOD nr / > An > / \ \ cS A Ocod Kxticbévtav eis yphow avOpeTav & pEev ws Kadds Oé bé @ a\ 8 ¢ v \ A xticbevta TrapadéyecOat, a ws adypnota Kal repicoa mapaiteiobat, Tas ovK abéuictov; 3. TO dé KataryrevdecOar ii. 10 dv] ins. Lachmann. iii. 2 xad@s] conj. Hilgenfeld; xat els Ms. 5 évdeckvunévwv] conj. Stephens; évdeckydpevoe MS. pev] ins. Gebhardt. Svvauévas] conj. Gebhardt; dvvayévwv Ms. Tay dé Soxotvrwv] conj. Lachmann; 70 dé doxeiy Twa MS. iv. 1 ov] ins. Stephens. 2 OUK d0éu.crov] conj. Gebhardt; ov Oéus éori MS. v] ‘THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. 493 a U Cre / cod ws KadvovTos ev TH THY caBBaTtov nuépa Kadov TL a A > >’ / \ \ \ \ ih A mouclv, TOS ovUK aceBés; 4. TO O€ Kal THY pElwoWw THS \ vA 3 a > / ¢ Py \ A capkos paptipioy éxroyns araloveverOat ws Sia TodTO > / > / e \ A A > / y éEalpeTws nyatrnuévovs v0 Ocov, wwHs ov yrevns akvov; Vv \ /
5.  TO O€ Tapedpevovtas avTovs aotpois Kal cEAnVN THY A tal ¢ tal A \ TapaTnpnow Tov pnvev Kal TOY nuepav TrovetoOaL, Kal \ bd / a \ \ Cad A b) \ Tas olKoVomias Oeov Kat Tas TOY KaLp@V adraYas KaTa- A ’ A / \ ’ e / \ \ > dvatpety pds Tas avTav Oppas, as pév eis Eoptas, as Sé els ? , \ mévOn* tis av OcoceBelas Kal ovK adpooivns ToAv Téov € , A al \ Zs lal bd , ‘ nynoaito Selywa; 6. THS péev ovY KoOLVAS eEiKaLoTNHTOS Kab ’ / \ a ’ / / \ > / aratns Kat THs “lovdaiwy trodkurpaypocurns Kal addalovelas ¢ > A b / Len , / [ws] opOads améyovtas Xpiotiavoi, apKovytws ce vowitw pe- / . \ \ A +07 b] A / / \ paOnévar’ TO S€é THS idias avTdY DeocEBeias pwuaTHpLoV [1 } / Py / fa} \ ’ a ' A) a mpocooknans dvvacbat Tapa avOporrov palety. \ \ ” n v lal Ww 4 V. Xpiotiavoi yap ovte yn ovTe havyn ovre EOecr Sua- A a / KEKpLMEVOL TOV NowTa@V eicly avOpeTrwy. 2. oVTE yap Tov ‘ 297 a vy / \ / TONES LOlas KaTOLKODELY oUTE SvadéKT@ TW TrapnAXaYyLEVN xXpavrat ovte Biov Tapacnmov acKodaw. 3. ov pny ériwola \ / / ’ , if a: Tw Kal ppovTid: ToAuTpaypovev avOpoTrav uaOnua ToLoOvT b) lal > avtois éotiv evpnuévoy, ovdé Soypatos avOpwrivov tpoec- Taow WoTEp EviolL. 4. KaTOLKODVTES Sé TONELS ‘EAAnViSdas TE \ / ¢€ ied ’ 90: \ Lal > , kat BapBdapovs ws exactos éxdnpweOn, Kal Tols éeyywpious ” > A ” > lal \ / s\ A fal EDecw axodovOodvres év te €oOjTt Kai Siairyn Kal TO oO Biw, 0 ) L duoroyoupévws trapadotov évdel. io, Oavpactny Kai omoroyoupevws Trapadokoy évoetxvuvTat THY KaTaoTacly THS EavTOY TodTElas. 5. TaTpidas oiKodaL 27 Om uk) eel? , : , , ¢ a \ dias, GAN ws Tapoikoe’ petéyovat TaVT@Y ws TOTAL, Kab Tav@ vrouevovaw ws Eévor’ waca Eévyn Tatpls éoTw avTor, \ fal e kal Taca Tratplis Eévn. 6. yapodow ws TavTes, TeKVOYo- lal A > ’ 2 OS \ / / is\ vovow* GX ov plrtovet Ta yevyOpeva. 7. TpaTrebav KoLwnY / > 5) > , > \ / mapatiVevtat, aXX’ ov KotH. 8. év capkl Tuvyyavovcw, iv. 5 Karad.atpeiy] xarad....eiy MS. qynoaro] conj. Lachmann; NYNTETAL TO MS. 6 ws] ins. Bunsen. v. 3 ud@nua Tovodr’] conj. van Hengel; padjuart ror’ Ms. evpnuévov] conj. Stephens; elpyuévoy MS. 4 kai sec.] conj. Otto; é& Ms. 7 Kowrnv] conj. S. Maur; xow7v Ms. cf. Phil. lili. 20. cf. 2 Cor. vi. g, 10. 494 THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. (v GX’ ov Kata capa Caow. 9. érl ys SiatpiBovew, adn > , aA , A a , év ovpav@ modiTevovtat. 10. melOovtat Tois wpiopévots vopols, Kal Tots idiow Pious viK@at Tors vowous. II. aya- lol € \ fol Tool TavTas, Kal UTO TavTwy SudKovTal. 12. ayvoodvTat, / la) lal kal xataxpwovta’ Oavarotyta, Kai fCworrowdvTat. 13. I \ / U fol TT@XEVOUVGL, Kal TROUVTLCoVaL TOANOUS* TavTwY DaTEpOUYTAL, Kal €v Taol Tepiccevovalw. 14. aTiwovyTal, Kal év Tais atyiats So€alovtar: Bracdnpodvtat, kal SixavovvTar. 15. lal ’ lal lal cf. 1 Cor. NowdopodvTat, Kal evroyotow' UBpifovtar, Kal Tiwdow. 16. iv. 12. , lal € \ / e f / ayalorrovobvTes Ws KaKol KoNafovTaL’ Koralopevor yalpovow ws Cwotrotovpevor. 17. U0 lovdaiwy ws addoduAot Tode- la \ MovvTat Kal ¢ Ws / / \ ye vo “EXAnvev di@KovTat, Kal Thy aitiay THs a e fa) J éxOpas eireiv of puicobvTes ovK Exovow. VI. ‘AmAds & eireiv, bmep éotly ev copate uyn, TOOT See > / 1 / v \ / fol €lLolY EV KOO L® Xpiotiavol. 2. EOTAPTAL KATA TTAVTMV TWV nr / el € / \ \ \ \ Lal TOU gwpatos mehOv 1 Wuyn, Kal Xpictiavol Kata Tas TOU / / > lal A , lal / 4 , b KOT{LOU TOKELS. 3. OLKEL ev EV TO TMpmaTL WuYN, OVK ETTL \ b] a ' A \ \ > t ? a cf. S. John 8€ €« Tov TWMATOS* KAL Xpioriavol €V KOTL@ OLKOUCLY, XVile RNs Keto as ae, \ b] le) / WP 4 € \ bd id A ovx elol O€ €x TOU KOcMOV. 4. aopaTos 7 Wyn ev OpaT@ r A / \ \ , \ ppoupettat TO TWLMATL’ Kal Xpictiavol YlLYUMOKOVTAL [MEV Nv > lal / 7 \ ’ al c / / ovTes ev TO KOTHM, GOpaTos dé a’TaY 7 OGeocéBeva péevel. a \ \ c \ \ cal \ b] /
5.  puuced THY Aruxny 7 capE Kal trodewet pondcy adixovpéern, duote Tals Ndovais KwAVeTaL ypHncOa.’ picet Kal Xprotiavovs > if tad ¢c a ’ U 0 KOT mos pNdev adixoUpevos, OTL Tals NOovais avT’TAaTCOVTAL. 6 € \ \ a b) a f \ \ ay ‘ \ o) a) abuxn THY Plaoovcgav ayaTa DAaPKa KAaL TA LEAH Kab r lol > A / \ Xpictiavoi Tovs pucovvTas ayaT@ow. 7. &yKEKNELTTAL MEV ¢ \ tal / / \ aeoN \ a = \ \ n UX TO TO"ATL, TVVEXEL dé avtT7 TO cepa’ Kal Xpicttavoi e A al / > \ / KaTéXovTaL pev ws ev Hpovpa TS KOcue, avToi Sé cvvéyouvat \ y. TOV KOOMOD.
8.  adavatos n Wuyn ev OvnTe cKnvepate KaTouel’ Kal Xpictiavol tapoiuodow év Oaprois, THv > tal €v ovpavots / CLTLOLS Kal KoNalomevot apGapciav tpocdexyopwevot. 9. Kakoupyoupévn motois 9 wWwuyn BerTiodTaL’ Kal Xpictiavol ka? nuépav mreovafovct paddov. 10. els vi. 4 mév Ovres] conj. Stephens; pévovres MS. 0 ie ~~ © ee fae a ee An a teh LS Ad Dna Dts Waa on PRD aa — a o ee nt ee vu] THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. 495 U , \ / v ¢ « 3 \ ’ a TocavTny avtovs Taki eto 6 Oeos, Hv ov Oepitov avtois Tapaitnoac bac. > \ / e x” Ul aA A VII. Ov yap érriyeov, ws Epnv, etpnua rovT avrtois U A TapedoOn, ovdé Ovntny érivotay gurdaccewv ovtws a€.odow 3 A ION 3 / > / / fd ETLEAWS, OVOE aVOpwTivwY oiKkovomiay puoTnpioY TeTic- > ’ pee > n ¢€ , A TevvTal. 2. adr avTos adnOas 0 TayToKpaTtwp Kal TrayTo- 4 % Or / , \ ; ? ’ Lal \ > / Ktiotns Kal dopatos Beds, avTos adm ovpavay Tv adnOevav \ A / \ a \ ’ / : >’ 4 by 4 Kal Tov NOyov Tov GyLov Kal aTrepwwontov avOpdtros évidpuceE ral / , “ > Kal éyxateotnpite Tals Kapdiais avT@y, ov KaOaTrep av Tis > / wv ¢€ / \ 4, a ” a eixaceey avOpwrros, UrnpéTny Twa Téurvas 7) ayyedov 1 lal / lal apxovta 7} Twa Tov SueTovTwv Ta ériyeta 7} TWa TOV TeTIC- v4 \ > ,’ Lal / , ’ ’ \ \ / TEVLEV@V TAS EV OUpaVois StoLKno ELS, GNX AUTOV TOV TEXVLTNV \ \ an 2 \ > Cas e \ kal Snutoupyov TaV Odwv, @ TOs ovpavods ExTiCEV, O TrV / > i gd ay 4 i \ f; lal Oaraccay idious bpois évéxNetcev, OD TA pvoTHpLA TLICTaS a , 2 A A TavTa pur\aooEeL TA TTOLYELA, Tap ov Ta wéTPA TOY THs Npué- / 2 a pas Spopwy [HrLos] elAnde hrdraccew, 6 TeOapyel ceAnvy \ / / - tal \ / a A vuxtl paivew xKéedevovtt, @ Teapyel Ta aoTpa TO THs , > a , 2 , L \ ceEdAnVYNS akodovOodyTa Spoyo, © TavTa Svatétaxtar Kal ¢ \ an Sidpictat Kal viroTéTaKTal, ovpavot Kal Ta év ovpavois, yA \ OY nr an / \ > A / a IW kai Ta év TH YI, Oadacoa Kal Ta év TH Oaddoon, Tip, arp, ” ae) A Ae SD / Ny 3 n Lae a aBuocos, Ta év tvect, Ta év Babeot, Ta év TO petakv’ TodTOV \ > ‘ > / = / ¢ > / ” Mpos avtTovs améareurev. 3. apa ye, ws avOperv av Tis Noyicatto, él tupavvids cal doBo Kal KataTwAnke; 4. ? er a 3 b / \ AA c \ / ovpevody* adr ev errietkela [Kat] mpaitnte ws Bacidevds Téu- € \ 4 mov viov Baciréa éreurvev, OS Oedv Erreurvev, bs [avOpwror] \ > / »” € / ” ¢ / > mpos avOperrovs éEremev, Os cobfwv Erreurrev, s TreiOwy, ov / - / \ 3 / n a yy ¢ Buafopevos* Bia yap ov mpocectt TO Dew. 5. Emreurpey ws a ’ / a A ¢ > tal > / ff KAA@D, OV OLwWK@V* Ereurpey ws ayaTOY, ov Kpivav. 6. Téu- \ > ’ A apes yap avTov Kpivoyta, Kal Tis avTov THY Tapovaiay vTo- otnoetat;.... 7. [Ovx opds] mapaBardopévovs Onpioss, Vii. 2 dv@pwiros] conj. Bunsen; dvOpwros MS. j\os] ins. Hefele. 4 kal] ins. Stephens. dv Opwrrov] ins. Bunsen. 6 broorjcera] Here the MS marks a lacuna and adds in marg. olrws kal €v Tq dvTiypddw etpov éyKo- wiv, wadaordrov ovTos. 7 ovx 6pgs] ins. Stephens. cf. S. John ili. 17. 496 THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. [vir vA ‘ \ , \ \ / ’ € rn iva apynowvtat Tov Kuptov, cai pn vikwpévous; 8, ovxy opas / bam mreloves Koralovtar, Tooo’T@ Teovatovtas dAdous; a ,’ al \
9.  tadta avOpwrov ov Soxet ta épya, tabra Sivapls éore lal , @cod* tadta Tis wapovclas avTod Selypara. , VIII. Tis yap dAws avOperwv nriotatro ti tot éoti tal \ \ Qcds, mpiv avrov édXOeiv; 2. Tors Kevods Kal Anpwders U , lal ‘ e €xelvov NOyous atrobéyn Tav akorictay piiocopav; av ob , an ” * ‘ ' * , ’ pév Tives Tip Epacay elvas Tov Bedv (ob péAXOVEL YwpnoE 4 J Y Led avTol, ToUTO Kadovat Oedy), of 5é Vdwp, of O° Addo TL TOV Cal lal , aTovyelwy TOY exTicpéevwv UTO Oeod. 3. KaiTo ye el TIS / Lal / , / / , / , 7 \ “ TOUTW@Y TOY OywY aTrodexTOs éeoTl, SUvaiT dv Kal TOV Nourav KTicuatev ev Exactov dpolws atrodaiverOar Pedy. ’ \ a \ , \ ! a / ’ ee
4.  adda TavUTa pev TEpaTeia Kal TKAYN TMY YyonTwY EoTiV ’ / \ ’ \ wv ° wv > , BI] \ \
5.  avOparrav dé ovdels obre eldev ote eyvwpicev, avTos OE éautov éeméderEev. 6, éréderEe 5é did trictews, 7 wovn Oeov cal ¢ isety cuyKxeydpntar. 7. 6 yap Seororns Kal Snuroupyos a o t € , \ \ \ / tov bdwv O¢eds, 6 Toicas Ta Tavta Kal Kata takéw S1a- Kpivas, ov povov piravOpwros éyévero adda Kai paxpdOupos. , “
8.  adX odtos Hv pev ael ToLovTos, Kal Eat, Kal Eorat’ \ \ , fa) \ \ et \ > 6 / \ / xpnotos Kal ayalos Kai dopyntos Kai adnOns, Kal povos ’ ' , e > , A Ul wv y” ayabos éotw' 9. évvonaas Oé weyadnv Kal adpacTor évyovay a , 2 a avexowwoaTo move TO Tadi. 10. €v bow pev ody KaTELyeV \ / \ \ a A év pvotnpio Kal dSuetnper THY copnv avtod BovdAnv, auereiy nav Kal adppovioteiv éddKer* II. émet S€ atrexaduwe ua a ) “ \ \ > , \ b) > a ¢ Tod ayarntod maidos Kal épavépwoe ta €& apyns 7ToL- / > 7 " ere! cal pacpéva, Trav? aya rapécyev nulv, Kal petacyely Tov A ’ a A 9 a \ a a evepyeci@yv avTod Kal ideiy Kai vonoa a Tis av TwTOTE ¢ TPOTEOOKNTEY NOV ; A 3 > v a Se al » rn \ , IX. ILdvr’ otv 75n wap éavte avy TO tradi oiKovopn- a / / a KwS, MéeXpL “eV TOD Tpoabev yYpovou Elacev Huds ws éBov- vii. g delyuara] conj. Stephens; déyuara Ms. viii. 5 elev] conj. Stephens; elev Ms. 6 uévy] conj. Stephens; xévoy Ms. 9 avexowa- caro] conj. Stephens; 7” éxowdcaro MS. II vofjoa a rts) conj. Lachmann; monoa TIS MS. ix. I dy, olkovounkws, méxpt wev] conj. Lachmanns poet, olkovomceis, méxpt wer ovv MS. x] THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. 497 U A A AoweOa ataxrois opais PéperOar, HOovais Kal emiOvpiacs c arrayouevous, ov mavTas epndomevos Tols auapTnuacwy mor, > > > “ baND! a / A > lA A an GAN avexopevos, oVSéE TS TOTE THS abdikias KaLpO ovVEVdSoKa?, Gara Tov viv THs Sixacociyns Snutoupyav, iva év T@ TOT 7 ns Snutoupyar, 3 Tore / / b] lal Lod v ’ tf a fa! xpove éheyxGévtes ex TaV idiwv Epywv avaEiot Cons viv c \ al lol a / b) a \ \ 2 \ bTO THS TOV Oeod ypnoTtoTHTOs aEiwOapyev Kal TO KaP éEavTovs havepdcartes advyatov eiceNOely eis THY Bacirelav TOD Ocod TH Svvawet TOV Oeod Svvatol yevnOdpmev. 2. érrel dé TweTdy- ¢ \ ane , > , \ , , o p@To pev 7 NpueTépa adiKia, Kal TEedElws TrehavépwTo STL O pucbos a’tis Kodkacts Kal Oavatos tpocedoxato, HrAOE SE 6 a \ a A eee Katpos Ov Beds mpoébeto Rowrov davepdoat THY EéavTod cf. Tit. iii. xpnotoTyta Kal Siva (@ THis vTepBadrdroveons didravOpw- * / \ ’ ~ fal r 5 / € an ON , / mTias Kal ayatns Tov Mecod), ovK euicnoev Nuas ovSE aTrdcaTo ed tal ovde euvnoikaknoev, AXA EvaxpoOpnocer, nvéaxeTo, ENEOV ’ \ \ if / ¢ / ’ / > tee. >, »” autos Tas npuetépas apaptias avedéEato, avTos Tov td.ov e\ > / / e \ ¢ a \ ¢ ¢ \ See \ vioy amédoTo AUTpoV UITép Nuav, TOV dyLov UTrép avopwr, TOV akakov UTép TOV KAK@Y, TON AIKAION YTIEP TON AAIKWN, TCV x Pet. a aA > a me NG ese apOaptov vrép tév Plaptar, Tov aBavatoy vrép THY Ovntayr. " '
3.  Tl yap ado Tds auaptias nuadyv jndvynOn Kardr~at 7) Kel. 8 j y tiv 8 07 8 ) ) éxeivou Sixatocvvn; 4. év tive SixatwOnvat dvvatov Tovs = , c nr \ ’ fal A > / n en lol an avopmovs nuds Kal aceBeis 7 ev povm TO Vio TOD Oecod ; nx a / 3 a x tal b] /
5.  @ THS YAuKElas avTaddayhs, @ THS aveEVyviaoTov Sn- puoupyias, ® Tav ampocboKnTwy evepyeriov' wa avopuia pev TodA@V ev Sixaiw évi KpuBy, duxacoc’yny bé évds TrodAdOdS > / / s Pb] \ al / avopous Sikaidon. 6. €déyEas ody ev pev TO TpocOer / \ > fal lal A Xpovm TO advvaTov THs nueTépas PUcews eis TO TUYXEiVv Cwrs, vov d€ Tov cwthpa SeiEas Suvatov cwlew Kal Ta advvara, é& ? Lé > / Uy e a a , > lal appotépwv €BovrAnOn mictevew nds TH xpnoTOTHTL avTod, avtov nyetc0ar tpodéa, tratépa, SidadcKadov, ocvpPovropr, > / lo) bel la f > / / latpov, voor, das, Tiunv, doEav, iaydy, Conv. x Th, Ul \ \ \ Ly SN fa} / / : QUTHV Kal OV THY TiaTLY Eay TOOnoNS, KaTAaNaBeE ix. 1 vv pri.] conj. Hefele; vofv ms. 2 &] conj. Otto; ws MS. kal dyamns| conj. Stephens; pla d-yarn MS. éXeGv] conj. Lachmann; déywy MS. 6 why] add rept évdvcews kal Tpopijs uh mepiuvay MS, x. I kard\aBe] conj. Gebhardt; kal \dBys MS. S. Joh iii. 16. 1 John iv. 9. cf. x John iv. 19. 498 THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. [x an / , ‘ mMp@Tov pev eriyvwow Tatpos. 2. 0 rdp Oedc Tors avOpa- \ qrous fiPATIHCe, Os ods éerrolnoe TOV KOopor, ols brérake TavTa 4 3 a a Ka / ra) t fal 1 / v \ Ta €v TH yf, ols Noyov Edwxerv, ols vodv, ols povois advw TpOs ’ \ A) > / \ > lal O77 oY, 4 ovpavoyv opay émrétpelrev, ois x THS iias ElKovos EmdaceE, mpos os AtTécTeIAe TON YION AYTOY TON MONOreENH, ols THY €v ’ a / > / A / a , , ovpav@ Bacirelay érnyyethato Kal ddoe Tos ayaTnoacw , , ’ \ / / v / “ avTov. 3. émuyvovds é, Tivos ole TANP@OncETOaL yapas ; i TOS ayaTnoELs TOY OUTwWS TpoayaTncaVTa oe; 4. aya- > a lel ‘ mnoas O€ piuntys eon avTov THS ypnoTOTHTOS. Kal 1) Oavpaocns ef Svvatat pipntns avOpwtros yevérOar Ocod' ’ na ,’ dvvatat OéXovTos avTov. 5. ov yap TO KaTadvvacTevew Tov TAnclov ovdé TO TAEOV Exe BolNecOar TAY acbevec- Tépwy ovdé TO TovuTELV kat BialecOar tovs virodeeatépous ,’ lal , EO. > / / / / evdatpovely éotiv, ovde ev TovTois dvvaTai Tis piyunoacbaL Ocov, dda Tadta éxTos THS ExEelvou peyareroTnTos 6. GAN , \ a > , t Ai ae / Satis TO TOD TAncloy avadéyeTat Bapos, ds ev © Kpelacwv > \ oe \ Ud ? a 2D/ a A ~ A éotly Erepov Tov €XaTTOUpevoy evepyeTety EOEéNEL, OS A Tapa a fal \ v n o > / al \ Tod Ocod AaBwv Eyer, TadTa Tols erideopéevors yopnyav Oeos / a / 2 , > a / yiverat TOV NauBavovTwr, ovTOS pinTHs é€cTL Beovd. 7. TOTE rf / ’ lal deaon Tuyxavev él yns OTL Beds ev ovpavois TroduTEvETaL, a a bu ToTe pvotnpia Oeod Aarelv ApEn, TOTe Tovs KoAalopévous ért to pn OérXew apvncacbat Oeov Kal ayarnoes Kal Oe) pyn yarn A ‘ fa lal Oavpacets, TéTE THS ATaTNs ToD KOoTpoU Kal THS TAaVNS peer a 2 a a a lo] KaTayvoon, OTav TO adnOas ev ovpave Civ émiyve@s, OTav Tod a) > / / Ld ¢ \ v doxovvtos évOade Gavatov Katadpovncys, bTav Tov dvTwS a \ / fr Gavatov poBnOys, os pudaccetat Tois KaTaKpLOncopévors eis \ aA \ shld a \ 5 0é = Jens a) / } TO TUp TO aiw@viov, 0 Tos TapabobévTas avT@ péxpL TéAOUS Ud f \ € / CU AN Uy KoNace. 8. TOTE TOUS UVIOpMévovTas Umrép Sixavocuvns Oav- \ \ 4 tal paces TO TUP TO TpocKatpov, Kal paKapices, bTav éxeivo TO TUp ETLYVOS... ~ . * * + x. 2 é€v Ty yp] conj. Stephens; év... MS. dyw] a.. MS (so Cunitz and. Stephens, but Beurer dvw). ovpavov] conj. Lachmann; avrdv MS. 6 ds a] conj. van Hengel ; éca MS. 7 émvyvgs] conj. Lachmann; émiyrdoy MS. 8 mpécKxatpov] conj. Sylburg; pos... app. MS. émvyvgs] The Ms marks a lacuna and adds xal Ode éyxoriw elxe 70 dytlypador. x1] THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. 499 ¢ lol ’ / A XI. Ov Eéva ouir@ ovd5éE Taparoyws Entra, GANA arro- / o \ / / > A \ oTOA@Y yevouevos pabntns yiwouat SidacKaros Over, Ta / > / id lal / > , a mapadobévta akiws UmnpeTav ywomevols adnOeias pabnrais. / > lal \ Xi , \ b
2.  Tis yap opOds SidayOeis Kai Aoyw mpoodirns yevnOels ovK A fal A \ } a éerutntet cadas pabeiv Ta Sia Adyou Saybévta pavepads wabn- a / tais ; ols €pavépwcev 6 Adyos paves, Tappnoia NadO@y, Vtr0 a a aTioTwV p17 voovpevos, UaOnTtais Sé Sinyovpevos, of micToOl do- ’ fal U ylaBévtes UT avTOD éyvwoay TaTpos pvoTnpta. 3. ov yapL > / 9 Aé A / a ww ¢ \ 0% fo} ’ 6 / atréateire Aoyov, va Koopw avy, 0s VT aod atipacbeis, \ ’ , / ¢e Ay Us fal > / ka dua atootokwy Knpuxeis, Urd EOvav ériatevOn. 4. ovTOS ee J D3) n £: \ \ x \ ¢ \ \ / 0 aT apxns, 6 Kalvos havels Kal TaNaLos evpeOels Kal TavTOTE , a. Se of / t Z 2 @ 3 ¢ l véos év ayiwy Kapdlais yevvw@pevos* 5. odTos 6 adel, [6] onwepov vids NoytaGeis, dc’ oF mrovTiferar n exKAnola Kal yapis aTrAoupevyn év ayious TANOUVETAL, Tapéxouvca voov, pavEepotca pevoTnpia, Siayyé\Novca Katpovs, yalpovoa él TuoTois, > a , ¢ , 5) l IO\ emitntovat Swpovpévy, ols Spxia trictews ov Opaveras ovdé ¢ / / s / f v \ dpia Tratépwv Tapopiverar. 6. elta PdPBos vouou adetar Kal A / TpopynTav Xapls yiwwoKeTal Kal evaryyediwy Triatis iSpuTat 8 / / r No) / \ Kat aTrooTOA@y Tapadoats pvAacoeTat Kal ExKANCLAS yapa _ A / \ A 3 / \ Ud c a oKipTa. 7. nv yap pn AUT@YV erriyvwon a Aoyos ominrel 5: dv Bovrerar, OTe Oéder. 8. boa yap OeAnpate Tod , / > / b] a \ , b] > / Kerevovtos Adyou éxwwynOnpev éEevtrety peta trovou, ¢& ayarns rn , / ¢ rn / ¢€ lal / Tov aTroKadudévtwy nuiv yivopeOa vuly KoLVwvVoL. XII. Ols évtvyovtes Kal axovcavtes peta orovdns ¥ ed / ¢ \ A > an ’ fal e / eloec Oe boa Trapéexet 0 Meds Tots ayaTracwy OpOas, ot yevowevor fo) ’ A mapasetaos Tpudys, TayKaprrov Evrov, evOarodv, dvateiNavtes €v éavTois, Towinows Kaptrols KeKoopnuévot. 2. év yap UJ / / A Ud TOUT@ TO Ywplo EVrov yvdaoews Kal EVAov Swons wepvTevTar ’ > ’ \ a , ’ a ’ >, ¢ uss A aXX& ov TO THS YYwWoEws avatpEel, GAN 1 Tapakon avaipel. > \ \ v \ / ¢€ \ 2 > 3 na /
3.  ovde yap donpua Ta yeypaypéva, bs Beds am’ apyjs Evrov xi. 1 délws] conj. Hollenberg; délous Ms. 2 mporpid7s] conj. S. Maur; mpooptiret app. MS. yevnGels] conj. Bunsen; yevynOels MS. 5 6sec.] ins. Lachmann. dpkia] conj. Lachmann; épia Ms. 6 xapa] conj. Lachmann; ydpis MS. 32—2 cfat Lim. iii. 16. cf. S. John
1.  I. 1 Cor. Vili. 1. 500 THE EPISTLE TO DIOGNETUS. [x1 a Ul | yvwoews kai EvAov | Cons ev péow tapaceicov epvtevoe, U e a Sua yvooews Cony eridecxvus. 7 wn KaSapads ypnodpevot ot bl] > , lol / lol v U ON \ am apxns wavy Tov dhews yeyiuvovTar. 4. ovdée yap fw) dvev yvooens, ovdé yvaots achadns avev Cons adrnOois’ \ / e / ‘ a t b] \ c 816 WAnolov ExaTepoyv TedvTevTal. 5. iv Svvauw évidov 6 ’ / / A b / i -} \ amdatoNos Thy Te dvev adnOelas mpooTaypatos els Conv ,’ / nr / 4 c knd ~ c 4 adoKoupevny yvaow pmeudhopevos réyet “H rNacic ycioi, H AE &ramtH oikoAomel. 6. 6 yap vopilwy eidévat TL avev yvooews adnOovs Kat papTupovpévns vio THS CwHs, ovK eyv@" vIr9d a a , a Tov ddews TAAaVAaTAaL, py ayaTnoas TO Civ. Oo 5é weTa PoBov 3 sh A \ 3 Led > > / ‘ \ Emiyvors Kal Conv émitntav én érrridu putever, Kaptrov mpocookav. 7. Tw cor Kapdia yvadats, Far dé Royos / adrnOns, xopovpevos. 8. ob Evrov hépwv Kai KapTrov aipay , aia \ \ lol Ud Lg yv 7 a Tpuynoess adel Ta Tapa Oe@ Trodovpeva, dv dus ovy amrerat ovdée TAaVN cvyyxpwTiveTar’ ovde Eva POeipetat, adda Trap- Oévos micteveTar 9. Kal cwTnplov SeixvuTal, Kal aTOcTONOL \ eae cuvetifovtat, Kal TO Kupiou tracya mpoépyeTat, Kal KARpoL ovvayovtat kat [1wavta] weTa Koopmou appoterat, Kal SidacKwv ¢ / >’ ayious o Adyos evdpaiverat, 80 ob Latnp S0&aberar’ & 7 d0&a eis Tovs aidvas. anv. xii. 3 yvdoews kal EVNov] ins. Bunsen; om. Ms by homeeot. 8 alpav] conj. Otto; ...pav MS. Q kAjpor] conj. Bunsen; xnpol MS. mayTa] ins. Bunsen. TRANSLATION OF THE Peiotke TO DIOGNETUS.



